
CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF
YPSILANTI, MICHIGAN
_____________________________
Published in 1995 by Order of the Township Board 
_____________________________
 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF 
YPSILANTI, MICHIGAN 
_____________________________
Brenda L. Stumbo 
Township Supervisor
_____________________________
Stan Eldridge, Trustee 
Heather Jarrell Roe, Trustee 
Monica Ross Williams, Trustee 
Jimmie Wilson, Jr., Trustee 
Township Board
_____________________________
Larry Doe 
Township Treasurer
_____________________________
Karen Lovejoy Roe 
Township Clerk
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Charter Township of Ypsilanti, Michigan. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1975 Code, as supplemented through 1993, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of trustees. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1975 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLES 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 

Index
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments
This publication was under the direct supervision of Allen Z. Paul, Supervising Editor, and Robert McNaughton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Brenda Stumbo, Township Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the township readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the township's affairs. 
Copyright
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Charter Township of Ypsilanti, Michigan. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Charter Township of Ypsilanti, Michigan. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Charter Township of Ypsilanti, Michigan. 1995. 

ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 99-218 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the Charter Township of Ypsilanti, Michigan; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective.
The Charter Township of Ypsilanti ordains:
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, Charter Township of Ypsilanti" published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 66, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before April 21, 1998, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed; provided, however, that no ordinance granting a franchise is repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been or is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Such limitation on fine and imprisonment shall change as the maximum allowed by state law is changed. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the township may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the township to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after April 21, 1998, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This Ordinance and the various parts, sections and clauses thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any part, section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, it is hereby provided that the remainder of the ordinances shall not be effected thereby. 
Section 8. This ordinance shall become effective after publication in the manner prescribed by law. 
 
Chapter 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
 
Sec. 1-1. Designation and citation of Code.
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, Charter Township of Ypsilanti, Michigan," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Ypsilanti Charter Township Code." 
State law reference(s)—Codification authority, MCL 41.186, MSA 5.45(6). 
 
Sec. 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction.
It is the legislative intent of the township board, in adopting this Code, that all provisions and sections of this Code be liberally construed to protect and preserve the peace, health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the township. In the construction of this Code and any amendment thereto, the following rules shall be observed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Code. The term "this Code" or "Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, Charter Township of Ypsilanti, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done, as provided in this Code or in any order issued pursuant to this Code, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday it shall be excluded; and when the time is expressed in hours, the whole of a Sunday or a legal holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded. 
County. The term "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Washtenaw in the State of Michigan. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
MCL, MSA. The abbreviations "MCL" and "MSA" refer to the Michigan Compiled Laws and Michigan Statutes Annotated, respectively, as amended. 
Month. The word "month" shall be construed to mean a calendar month. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath, affirmation, sworn, affirmed. The word "oath" shall be construed to include the word "affirmation" in all cases where by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in like cases the word "sworn" shall be construed to include the word "affirmed." 
Officer, department, etc. Whenever any officer, department or other agency is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the Charter Township of Ypsilanti, Michigan." Whenever, by the provisions of this Code, any officer of the township is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty, reference to such officer shall mean and include such officer or his deputy or authorized subordinate. Whenever in accordance with the provisions of this Code or any ordinance of the township, any specific act is required to be done by any designated officer or official of the township, such act may be performed by any township employee duly authorized to perform that act by such officer or official. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Person. The word "person" includes firms, joint ventures, partnerships, corporations, clubs and all associations or organizations of natural persons, either incorporated or unincorporated, howsoever operating or named, and whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or fiduciary, and includes all legal representatives, heirs, successors and assignees thereof. 
Police officer or police department. The term "police officer" or "police department" means any person or agency authorized by state or federal law to provide police services. 
Shall/may. The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
State. The term "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Michigan. 
Tense. Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present and past. 
Township. The word "township" shall mean Charter Township of Ypsilanti in Washtenaw County, Michigan. 
Township board or board. The term "township board," "board of trustees" or "board" shall mean the township board of Ypsilanti Township, Michigan. 
Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven days. 
Written, in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" may include any form of reproduction or expression of language. 
Year. The word "year" shall be construed to mean a calendar year. 
 
Sec. 1-3. Section catchlines and other headings.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. No provision of this Code shall be held invalid by reason of deficiency in any such catchline or in any heading or title to any chapter, article or division. 
 
Sec. 1-4. References and notes.
Cross references, state law references, editor's notes and history notes are by way of explanation only and should not be deemed a part of the text of any section. 
 
Sec. 1-5. Certain ordinances not affected by Code.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance, when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)	Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the township, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the township or any evidence of the township's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the township. 
(2)	Containing any administrative provisions of the township board. 
(3)	Granting any right or franchise. 
(4)	Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the township. 
(5)	Making any appropriation. 
(6)	Levying or imposing annual taxes. 
(7)	Establishing or prescribing grades in the township. 
(8)	Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(9)	Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the township. 
(10)	Prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any township officers or employees. 
(11)	Prescribing specific parking restrictions, no parking zones, specific speed zones, parking meter zones, and specific stop or yield intersections or other traffic ordinances pertaining to specific streets. 
(12)	Pertaining to zoning; Ordinance No. 74, and amendments to it, as set out in Appendix A of this Code. 
(13)	Ordinance No. 44 and amendments to it, which pertain to subdivision control. 
(14)	Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the township clerk's office. 
 
Sec. 1-6. Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc.
(a)	Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)	The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance in the township in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
 
Sec. 1-7. Amendments to Code.
(a)	Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, Charter Township of Ypsilanti, Michigan (or Ypsilanti Charter Township Code), is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(b)	If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Charter Township of Ypsilanti, Michigan (or Ypsilanti Charter Township Code), is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which such section reads as follows: …." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)	If a section is to be repealed, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Charter Township of Ypsilanti, Michigan (or Ypsilanti Charter Township Code), is hereby amended by deleting section _____." 
 
Sec. 1-8. Effect of repeal of ordinances.
The repeal of any prior ordinance of the township by any subsequent ordinance shall not operate to revive the provisions of any ordinance which may have been repealed by such prior ordinance, unless such revival shall be expressly provided for. Ordinances repealed remain in force for the trial and punishment of all past violations of them, and for the recovery of penalties and forfeitures already incurred, and for the preservation of all rights and remedies existing by them and so far as they apply, to any office, trust, proceeding, right, contract or event, already affected by them. 
 
Sec. 1-9. Supplementation of Code.
(a)	By contract or by township personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the township board. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly in the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of this Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)	Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
 
Sec. 1-10. Severability.
Should any provision or section of this Code be held unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of any of the remaining provisions or sections, it being the intent of the township board that this Code shall stand, notwithstanding the invalidity of any provision or section thereof. The provisions of this section shall apply to the amendment of any section of this Code, whether or not the wording of this section is set forth in the amendatory ordinance. 
 
Sec. 1-11. Fees and charges.
All fees and charges provided for in this Code may be changed by resolution of the township board. Such resolutions shall be on file in the office of the township clerk. 
 
Sec. 1-12. General penalty for violation of Code; continuing violations.
(a)	Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code for any particular provision or section, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Code, or any rule or regulation adopted or issued pursuant thereto, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Such limitation on fine and imprisonment shall change as the maximum allowed by state law is changed. Each act of violation and every day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)	In addition to the penalties provided in subsection (a) of this section, the township may enjoin or abate any violation of this Code by appropriate action or revoke any permit or license. 
State law reference(s)—Limitation on penalties, MCL 42.21, MSA 5.46(21). 
 
Sec. 1-13. Altering Code.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the township to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Charter Township of Ypsilanti, Michigan, to be misrepresented thereby. 
 
Chapter 2 ADMINISTRATION 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Secs. 2-1—2-25. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. TOWNSHIP BOARD
 
Secs. 2-26—2-45. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
 
Secs. 2-46—2-65. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Secs. 2-66—2-75. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. HOUSING COMMISSION
 
Sec. 2-76. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commission means the township housing commission. 
(Code 1975, § 2-36)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 2-77. Created.
Pursuant to the provisions of Act No. 18 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933, Extra Session (MCL 125.651 et seq., MSA 5.3011 et seq.), as amended, the township housing commission is hereby created. 
(Code 1975, § 2-37)
 
Sec. 2-78. Membership; appointment; term of office; vacancies.
(a)	The commission shall consist of five members. 
(b)	The members of the commission shall be appointed by the township supervisor. 
(c)	The term of office of members of the commission shall be for five years. Members of the first commission existing under this division shall be appointed for the terms of one year, two years, three years, four years and five years, respectively, and, annually thereafter, one member shall be appointed for the term of five years. 
(d)	Compensation for the members of the commission and all of it's officers and employees shall be fixed by the commission, subject to the approval of the township board. 
(e)	Any vacancy in the office of a member of the commission shall be filled by the township supervisor for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(f)	Members of the commission may be removed from office by the township supervisor for good and just cause. 
(Code 1975, § 2-38)
 
Sec. 2-79. Powers and duties.
The commission shall have all the powers and duties vested in or permitted to be vested in the housing commission by Act No. 18 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933, Extra Session (MCL 125.651 et seq., MSA 5.3011 et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1975, § 2-39)
 
Sec. 2-80. Residency requirement.
All members of the commission shall be residents of the township. 
(Code 1975, § 2-40)
 
Sec. 2-81. Meetings; rules; record; forum; officers and employees.
(a)	The commission shall meet at regular intervals, and such meeting shall be open to the public. 
(b)	The commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure. 
(c)	The commission shall keep a record of its proceedings. 
(d)	Three members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(e)	The commission shall elect a president and vice-president. The commission may further appoint a director who may also serve as secretary and may appoint such other employees or officers as shall be necessary. 
(f)	The commission may from time to time, as is necessary, employ engineers, architects and consultants. 
(Code 1975, § 2-41)
 
Sec. 2-82. Funds for operation.
Funds for the operation of the commission may be provided by the township board, provided that the commission shall, as soon as possible, reimburse the township for all moneys expended by the township for the commission from revenues received from the sale of bonds. 
(Code 1975, § 2-42)
 
Sec. 2-83. Reports to township board.
The commission shall make an annual report of its activities to the township board and shall make such other reports to the township board as the township board may from time to time require. 
(Code 1975, § 2-43)
 
Sec. 2-84. Conflict of interest.
No member of the housing commission or any of its officers or employees shall have any interest directly or indirectly in any contract for property, materials or services to be acquired by the commission. 
(Code 1975, § 2-44)
 
Secs. 2-85—2-95. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION
 
Sec. 2-96. Established.
A beautification commission is hereby established which shall serve in an advisory capacity to the township board and shall be known as the township beautification commission. 
(Code 1975, § 2-56)
 
Sec. 2-97. Composition; appointment of members.
(a)	The beautification commission shall consist of 18 members to be appointed by the majority vote of the members of the board of trustees. 
(b)	The commission shall consist of the following ex officio members who shall have no voting powers on such commission: One representative from the parks commission, one representative from the planning commission, one representative from the board of trustees and one resident student representative from each senior high school whose school district or part thereof is within the township. 
(Code 1975, § 2-57)
 
Sec. 2-98. Terms of members; election of officers; filling of vacancies.
Members of the beautification commission shall hold office for terms of three years; except that, six members shall hold office for a term to expire December 31, 1992; six members shall hold office for a term to expire December 31, 1993; and six members shall hold office for a term to expire December 31, 1994. Thereafter, each member shall hold office for a full three-year term. The commission shall, each year, elect one of its members as chairperson and shall elect such other officers as it may deem necessary. Any appointment vacancy in the commission shall be filled by the board of trustees for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Code 1975, § 2-58)
 
Sec. 2-99. Duties, objectives and purposes.
The beautification commission shall have the following duties, objectives and purposes: 
(1)	Promote public education against the discarding of litter in township streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks and recreation areas and other public places. 
(2)	Encourage all residents and owners of property within the township to accept basic responsibilities of preserving and enhancing the beauty of public and private properties. 
(3)	Encourage and recommend the placing, planting and preservation of trees, flowers, plants, shrubbery and other objects of ornamentation in the township. 
(4)	Sponsor, plan, promote, coordinate and carry out activities for the restoration, preservation and enhancement of the beauty of the township. 
(5)	Otherwise promote public interest in the general improvement of the appearance of the township; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge, invade, supplant or change the powers and duties of the other commissions, departments, boards and agencies of the township. 
(Code 1975, § 2-59)
 
Secs. 2-100—2-120. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Secs. 2-121—2-130. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. PENSION PLAN
 
Sec. 2-131. Created; contracts authorized.
Pursuant to Act No. 77 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1989 (MCL 41.110b, MSA 5.159(2)), as amended, the township hereby creates and establishes an annuity or pension plan and program for the pensioning of its officers and, for such purposes, also hereby authorizes the township supervisor and the township clerk to contract, in the name of the township board, with any company authorized to transact such business within the state for annuities or pensions. 
(Code 1975, § 2-17)
 
Sec. 2-132. Persons covered.
The annuity or pension plans created, established and contracted for under this division shall cover each person within the following classes of officers: Supervisor, clerk and treasurer. 
(Code 1975, § 2-18; Ord. No. 2009-400, 12-15-09)
 
Sec. 2-133. Premium contributions; date of eligibility; rejection of coverage.
(a)	The township's annual contribution for the supervisor, clerk and treasurer's pension benefits shall be the same percentage contributed for full-time township employees under the Michigan Employment Retirement System. Such contributions shall be secured from the general fund of the township. Each person within such class of officers shall be responsible for the remainder of the premium or charges, and the township treasurer is hereby authorized to deduct the same from each person's pay, salary or compensation and to apply the same to such person's responsibility. 
(b)	Each holding office as covered in section 2-132, on the effective date of the annuity or pension plan shall be eligible for coverage on that day, provided he then meets the following requirements, otherwise to be eligible on the first policy anniversary on which he meets them: He has completed at least 100 percent immediately. 
(c)	Any person desiring not to be so covered shall give written notice to the township clerk that he desires not to be covered, and, if the notice is received before the person has become covered under the contract, he shall not be covered thereunder. If the notice is received after the individual has become covered, his coverage under the contract shall cease as provided for in the contract. 
(Code 1975, § 2-19; Ord. No. 2009-400, 12-15-09)
 
Sec. 2-134. Interest vested when plan becomes effective.
Each person so covered under the annuity or pension plan shall have a vested right or interest in such plan immediately from the date the plan becomes effective for such person. 
(Code 1975, § 2-20)
 
Sec. 2-135. Preexistent plans ratified.
The township hereby ratifies and confirms the validity of any annuity or pension plan in existence on February 24, 1975. 
(Code 1975, § 2-21)
 
Secs. 2-136—2-155. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VI. FINANCE
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Secs. 2-156—2-165. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. PURCHASING; SALE OF PROPERTY
 
Sec. 2-166. Designation of purchasing/leasing agent; approval of purchase orders; rules with respect to requisitions and purchase orders.
The supervisor shall act as a purchasing/leasing agent of the township unless he shall designate another officer employed by the township to act in this capacity, or delegate part of this responsibility to other employees of the township; provided further, that such delegation shall not relieve him of this responsibility as set forth in this article. Every purchase order and/or lease shall be approved by the supervisor (agent) before being issued. The township supervisor (agent) shall adopt any necessary rules respecting requisitions and purchase orders. 
(Code 1975, § 7½-30)
 
Sec. 2-167. Purchases or contracts for construction, improvement or repair of public property or lease of personal property.
(a)	Expenses under $2,000.00. Whenever the expense of construction, improving or repairing any public work or leasing of any personal or real property does not exceed the sum of $2,000.00, the work or lease shall be done in accordance with the rules and regulations adopted by the township supervisor (agent). 
(b)	Expenses exceeding $2,000.00. Whenever the expense shall exceed the sum of $2,000.00, such expenditure shall first be approved by the township board and shall be governed by the following provisions: 
(1)	Bid notices. The purchasing agent shall solicit bids from a reasonable number of such qualified prospective bidders as are known to him by sending each a copy of the notice requesting bids. Bid notices shall also be solicited by newspaper advertisement. 
(2)	Bidder's statement of qualifications. Pursuant to Act No. 170 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (MCL 123.501 et seq., MSA 5.2311 et seq.), as amended, the agent may require that any person proposing to bid on any such work submit a sworn statement at least ten days before bids are opened on such standard form, in such detail and at such time as may be deemed necessary by the township board, setting forth the bidder's qualifications to satisfactorily carry out the work to be performed within the time specified for such performance. The qualifications may be judged by the township board upon the basis of the proposed bidder's past performance on work of a similar nature, his financial resources and his construction equipment and facilities which he proposes to use on the work advertised for construction, as disclosed by such sworn statement and any other available information, and a determination made whether or not the proposed bidder is a suitable person to bid on the work. Any person determined not to be a suitable person to bid on any proposed work shall be notified in writing five days before bids are opened of such determination. 
(3)	Failure of bidder to file statement or to prove qualification; rejection. Should the prospective bidder fail to file the statement as required by the township board within the time specified, or should he, in the judgment of the board, not be qualified to bid on the duly advertised proposed work, such board may refuse to furnish such person with plans, specifications and proposals and may reject any bid made by him. 
(4)	Rating of bidders according to experience. It is further provided that when, in the judgment of the township board, the volume of work regularly advertised for construction would justify such course, bidders on a public work may be rated according to their experience, equipment and resources and may be furnished with proposals, plansand specifications for only such type and quantity of work as their qualifications as outlined in subsection (b)(2) of this section would warrant. 
(5)	Confidentiality of questionnaire and statement. Such questionnaire and statement filed with the township board shall be deemed to be confidential and shall not be imparted to any other person without the written consent of the bidder. 
(6)	Actions or proceedings against township officers. No action or proceeding of any nature or description in any court, except as stated in this section, shall lie against any officer of the township government because of his refusal to furnish plans, specifications or proposals or to award to any person a contract for the construction of a public work, maintenance or repair thereof for the satisfactorily performance of which such person is not, in the opinion of the officer, fully qualified, or who has failed to comply with the provisions of this division. 
(7)	Appeals by bidders. Any person feeling himself aggrieved at the determination of any such officer, board, commission, committee or department shall have the right of appeal by mandamus, certiorari or other proper remedy to the state supreme court, or in any proper case to any circuit court having jurisdiction. 
(8)	Fraudulent statements. Any person who willfully makes, or causes to be made, any false, deceptive or fraudulent statement in any questionnaire or statement required to be submitted under this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100.00, or more than $1,000.00, or to imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding 90 days. 
(9)	Security deposit. Unless required by the township board, the agent shall prescribe the amount of any security to be deposited with any bid, which deposit shall be in the form of cash, certified check, cashier's check or bond written by a surety company authorized to do business in the state. The amount of such security shall be expressed in terms of percentage of the bids as required by Act No. 213 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1963 (MCL 129.201 et seq., MSA 5.2321(1) et seq.). Unless fixed by the township board, the agent shall fix the amount of the performance bond and the amount of the labor and material bond to be required by the successful bidder. 
(10)	Bids opened in public; recording. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place designated in the notice requesting bids in the presence of only the agent, one of the township board members (if available) and at least one other township official, preferably the head of the department most closely concerned with the subject of the contract. The bid shall thereupon be carefully recorded. Upon careful examination and tabulation they shall be reported to the township board with the recommendation of the agent and department head. 
(11)	Right of township to reject. The township board reserves the right to reject any or all of the bids submitted under this section for any reason or for no reason at all. 
(12)	Filing of bond and evidence of insurance. At the time the contract is executed by him, the contractor shall file a bond, executed by a security company authorized to do business in the state, to the township, conditioned to pay all laborers, mechanics, subcontractors and material suppliers, as well as all just debts, dues and demands incurred in the performance of such work and shall file a performance bond when one is required. The contractor shall also file evidence of public liability insurance in an amount satisfactory to the agent and agree to save the township harmless from any loss or damage caused to any person or property by reason of the contractors negligence. 
(13)	Failure or refusal to enter into contract. All bids and deposits of certified or cashier's checks may be retained until the contract is awarded and signed. If any successful bidder fails or refuses to enter into the contract awarded to him within five days after same has been awarded, or file any bond required within the same time, the deposit accompanying his bid shall be forfeited to the township and the board may, in its discretion, award the contract to the next lowest qualified bidder or readvertise the contract. 
(14)	Person defined. The word "person," as used in this section, shall mean and include any individual, corporation, copartnership, association or their lessees, trustees or receivers. 
(c)	Inspection of materials. The responsibility for the inspection and acceptance of all materials, supplies and equipment shall rest with the ordering department. 
(d)	Purchase orders and contracts in which agent or other township employee is financially interested. Any purchase order or contract within the purview of this section in which the agent or any officer or employee of the township is financially interested shall be governed by the terms of state law. 
(e)	Signing of statements, checks and warrants. All statements, checks and warrants shall be signed as authorized by the resolution of the township board. 
(Code 1975, § 7½-31; Ord. No. 95-141, 12-19-95)
 
Sec. 2-168. Purchases, expenditures or contracts of every kind, nature and description other than for the construction, repair or improvement of a public work—Under $2,000.00.
Purchases, expenditures or contracts of every kind, nature and description other than for the construction, repair or improvement of a public work, the cost of which does not exceed the sum of $2,000.00, may be made in the open market in accordance with the rules and regulations adopted by the township supervisor (agent) and without prior approval of the township board. Such purchases, expenditures or contracts shall, where practicable, be based on at least three competitive bids and shall be awarded to the lowest qualified bidder. The purchasing agent may solicit bids pursuant to this section verbally, by telephone or by contacting prospective bidders by written communication. The records shall be kept for six months of all open market orders and the bids submitted thereon, which records shall be available for public inspection. Any and all bids may be rejected or irregularities in bidding may be waived, and a bid which does not conform in every respect to the bidding requirements may be accepted. The township supervisor (agent) shall exercise such discretion as is authorized by the township board on bids under the amount specified in this section. 
(Code 1975, § 7½-32; Ord. No. 95-141, 12-19-95)
 
Sec. 2-169. Same—Over $2,000.00.
Purchases, expenditures or contracts of every kind, nature and description other than for the construction, repair or improvement of a public work, the cost of which exceeds the sum of $2,000.00, shall be first approved by the township board and shall be governed by the provisions in section 2-167(b)—(d). 
(Code 1975, § 7½-33; Ord. No. 95-141, 12-19-95)
 
Sec. 2-170. Execution of purchase, expenditure or contract without competitive bidding.
Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 2-168 and 2-169, whenever the township board, upon written recommendation of the township supervisor (agent), in good faith deems that no advantage to the township would result from requiring competitive bidding, or that competitive bidding is otherwise not within the best interests of the township with respect to the subject of a particular purchase, expenditure or contract, the township board may authorize execution of such purchase, expenditure or contract without competitive bidding. 
(Code 1975, § 7½-34)
 
Sec. 2-171. Exceptions to bidding requirements for purchases or contracts exceeding $2,000.00.
Exceptions to competitive bidding requirement for purchases or contracts for the construction, repair or improvement of a public work where the costs exceeds the sum of $2,000.00 are as follows: 
(1)	In the employment of professional services, in which case the township shall have discretion as to his qualifications. 
(2)	Where the township board shall determine that a public interest would best be served by purchase from or joint purchase with another unit of government. 
(3)	In the case of an emergency, where it is essential to the health, safety or welfare of the people that immediate good faith action be taken. The word "emergency," as used in this subsection, is defined as a condition which is present, immediate and existing, and not one which may or may not arise in the future, or one which reasonably may be foreseen in time to advertise for bids. 
(4)	Where the township elects to undertake the work itself. 
(Code 1975, § 7½-35; Ord. No. 95-141, 12-19-95)
 
Sec. 2-172. Sale of property.
Whenever any township property, either real or personal, is no longer needed for public purposes, the same may be offered for sale. Personal property not exceeding $500.00 in value may be sold for cash by the township supervisor (agent) after receiving quotations or competitive bids therefor for the best price attainable. Personal or real property with a value in excess of $500.00 may be sold after advertising and receiving competitive bids as provided in subsection 2-167(b)(1), and after approval of the sale has been given by the township board. 
(Code 1975, § 7½-36)
 
Sec. 2-173. Audit of all accounts.
An independent audit shall be made of all accounts of the township at least annually and more frequently as deemed necessary by the township board. Such audit shall be made by a certified public accountant, experienced in municipal accounting, selected by the township board. The auditor's report shall be on file for public inspection in the township clerk's office during the regular office hours. Copies of the audit shall be sent to the township board. 
(Code 1975, § 7½-37)
 
Secs. 2-174—2-185. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. TAX EXEMPTIONS
 
Sec. 2-186. Service charge in lieu of taxes for a proposed multiple family dwelling project for persons of low income to be financed or assisted pursuant to the provisions of the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966.
(a)	Title. This section shall hereafter be known and cited as the "Township Tax Exemption Ordinance." 
(b)	Preamble. It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the state and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of low income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for payment of an annual service charge in lieu of property taxes and in accordance with the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (The Act). The township is authorized by said act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under the act at any amount it chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for the act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for persons of low income is a public necessity, and as the township will be benefitted and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing certain real estate tax exemption therefore is a valid public purpose. Further, it is acknowledged that the continuance of the provisions of this section for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the periods hereinafter contemplated are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and financed in reliance thereon by HUD, the construction lender and the sponsors. 
The township acknowledges that the sponsor has offered to continue to own and operate a housing development identified as Clark East Towers on certain property located at Ford Boulevard, south of Clark and north of Holmes in the township, to serve elderly and handicapped persons of low income. The sponsor has offered to pay the township on account of said development a payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes. 
(c)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act being Act No. 346 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1966 (MCL 125.1401 et seq., MSA 16.114(1) et seq.), as amended. 
Authority means the state housing development authority. 
Contract rents are as defined by HUD in regulations promulgated pursuant to the United States Housing Act of 1937, as amended. 
Elderly means a family where the head of the household is 62 years of age or older, or a single person who is 62 years of age or older, or who is physically handicapped. 
Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low income and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal, and educational facilities as the authority determines improve the quality of the development as it relates to housing for persons of low income. 
HUD means the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
Sponsor means persons or entities who have undertaken to own, operate and manage a low income housing development with section 8 rent subsidies obtained through a HUD housing assistance payment contract. 
Utilities means fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service which are paid by the development. 
(d)	Class of housing developments. It is hereby determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes shall be elderly or handicapped, which are financed or assisted pursuant to the act. It is further determined that Clark East Towers is of this class. 
(e)	Establishment of annual service charge. The housing development identified as Clark East Towers and the property on which it is located shall be exempt from all property taxes. The township, acknowledging that the sponsor has established the economic feasibility of the housing development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this section and the qualification of the housing development for exemption from all property taxes and an annual payment in lieu of taxes as established herein, and in consideration of the sponsor's offer to own, operate and manage said housing development, hereby agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes. The payment of the annual service charge shall be equal to four percent of the difference between contract rents actually collected and utilities paid by tenants and/or the housing development. 
(f)	Contractual effect of section. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 15(a)(5) of the act to the contrary, a contract between the township and the sponsor to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu thereof as previously described, is effected by enactment of this ordinance. 
(g)	Payment of service charge. The service charge in lieu of taxes, as determined under this section, shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the township except that the annual payment shall be due on or before December 1, of each year and payable without penalty through February 15. Such taxes shall be for the 12-month period prior to the due date. 
(h)	Duration. Subject to the limitation below, the contractual effect of this section shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as Clark East Towers is covered by a federally assisted mortgage, receiving benefits under federal law designated specifically for low and moderate income housing, consistent with the act. In no event, however, shall the contractual effect of this section extend beyond the date of February 28, 2028. 
(Code 1975, § 7½-16; Ord. No. 2000-246, 4-18-00)
 
Sec. 2-187. Tax exemption for housing projects.
(a)	The tax exemption established by section 15a(1) (MCL 125.1415a, MSA 16.114(15a)(1)), of Act No. 346 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1966 (MCL 125.1401 et seq., MSA 16.114(1) et seq.), as amended, shall not apply to any class of housing projects within the boundaries of the township. 
(b)	This section shall be effective with respect to housing projects for which a notification of exemption has been filed during 1985, and with respect to housing projects to which section 15a(1) (MCL 125.1415a, MSA 16.114(15a)(1)), of Act No. 346 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1966 (MCL 125.1401 et seq., MSA 16.114(1) et seq.) would otherwise become applicable after 1985. This section shall not affect exemptions granted pursuant to this Act prior to 1985. 
(Code 1975, § 7½-17)
 
Secs. 2-188—2-200. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 4. WAGES
 
Sec. 2-201. Living wage.
(a)	Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
Contractor/vendor is a person or entity that has a contract with the township primarily for the furnishing of services (as opposed to the purchasing or leasing of goods or property) where the total amount of the contract or contracts exceeds $10,000 for any 12-month period, including any subcontractors of such contractor: 
Grantee is the recipient of any financial assistance from the township in the form of any federal or state grant program administered by the township, revenue bond financing, tax increment financing, tax abatement, tax credit, director grant, or any other form of financial assistance, including any contractors, subcontractors, or leaseholders of the grantee at the subsidized site(s), that exceeds $20,000 for any 12-month period. 
Beneficiary means any person or entity that is a recipient of a contract or financial assistance. 
Covered employer means a beneficiary of a service contract or a grantee for financial assistance that has not been granted an exemption from this section pursuant to subsection (f) of this section. 
Covered employee means a person employed by a covered employer receiving assistance; provided, however, that persons who are employed pursuant to federal, state or local laws relating to prevailing wages shall be exempt from this section. 
Employee means a person within the meaning of Section 161 of the Worker's Disability Compensation Act of 1969, being Section 418.161 of the Compiled Laws of 1979. 
Living wage has the meaning stated in subsection (c). 
Person means one or more of the following or their agents, employees, servants, representatives, and legal representatives; individuals, corporations, partnerships, joint ventures, associations, labor organizations, educational institutions, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated associations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, fiduciaries, and all other entities recognized at law by this State. 
(b)	Applicability. This section shall apply to any "person" as defined herein that employs or contracts with five or more individuals. Provided, however, that a nonprofit contractor or grantee shall have at least ten or more employees and a contract or grant that exceeds $20,000 in any 12-month period in order for this section to apply to it. 
This section shall apply to any grant, contract or subcontract awarded or entered into after the effective date of the section. After the effective date of the section, entering into an agreement for an extension or renewal of any contract or grant as defined herein shall be conditioned upon compliance with this section. 
(c)	Living wages required.
(1)	Every contractor or grantee, as defined in subsection (a), shall pay its covered employees a living wage as established in this section. 
a.	For an entity that provides employee health care to its employees, the living wage shall be $8.50 an hour. 
b.	For an entity that does not provide health care to its employees, the living wage shall be $10.00 an hour. 
(2)	In order to qualify to pay the living wage rate for entities providing employee health care under subsection (c)(1)a, the entity shall furnish proof of said coverage to the township human resources department. 
(3)	The living wage established in this section shall be reviewed by the township no later than March 1, 2001 and every two years thereafter. 
(d)	Employees covered.
(1)	Any entity receiving a contract, as defined in subsection (a), shall pay those employees performing work on the contract a living wage as defined herein. 
(2)	Any entity receiving a grant, as defined in subsection (a), shall pay all employees (or persons contracted for employment) working in (or whose base of employment is in) the work place that is receiving or benefiting from such grant a living wage as defined herein. 
(e)	Enforcement.
(1)	The township shall require, as a condition of any contract or grant covered by this section, that the affected entity agree to the payment of a living wage as a condition of entering into or renewal of said contract or grant. The affected entity shall agree to post a notice regarding the applicability of this section in any work place or other location in which employees or other persons contracted for employment are working. The affected entity shall agree to provide payroll records or other documentation, as deemed necessary by the township, to the township's human resource department within ten business days from receipt of the township's request. 
(2)	Any employee or person contracted for employment by an affected entity who is denied payment of the applicable living wage shall have the right to file a claim for relief to enforce any rights granted under this section in a court of law. The court shall award wage restitution, interest, attorneys fees and costs, in the event the employee prevails in the action. 
(3)	The township board shall have the right to modify, terminate, and/or seek specific performance of any contract or grant with an affected entity from any court of competent jurisdiction, if it is determined after a public hearing, that based upon the preponderance of evidence, the affected entity has not complied with this section. 
(f)	Exemptions.
(1)	The township board, after conducting a public hearing, may grant a partial or complete exemption from the requirements of this section, if it determines one of the following: 
a.	The application of the section would violate federal, state or local law(s); 
b.	The application of the section would cause economic harm to a nonprofit contractor or grantee in a fashion that would result in the harm created by the application of the section outweighing the benefits of applying the section. 
(g)	Other provisions.
(1)	No affected entity shall reduce the compensation, wages, fringe benefits, or leave available to any covered employee or person contracted for employment in order to pay the living wage required by this section. 
(2)	Nothing in this section shall be construed to conflict with, interfere with, and/or supersede any provision of a collective bargaining agreement with any union representing covered employees. This section shall not be applicable to any "seasonal employee" who is hired pursuant to a provision of a collective bargaining agreement between an employer and any union. 
(3)	No employee covered by a federal, state, or local law requiring the payment of prevailing wages shall be covered by this section. 
(4)	This ordinance shall not be applicable to the establishment and/or continuation of the following if developed specifically for high school and/or college students: 
a.	A bona fide training program; 
b.	A youth employment program; 
c.	A work study program. 
(Code 1975, § 13-1; Ord. No. 99-213, §§ 2—8, 5-4-99)
 
Chapter 14 ANIMALS 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 14-1. [Pit bulls.]
(a)	Pit bull means a Staffordshire Bull Terrier, American Pit Bull Terrier, American Staffordshire Terrier or any mixed breed dog displaying five out of the following eight distinguishing characteristics: 
(1)	Head is medium length, with a broad skull and very pronounced cheek muscles, a wide, deep muzzle, a well-defined, moderately deep stop, and strong under jaw. Viewed from the front the head is shaped like a broad, blunt wedge. 
(2)	Eyes are round to almond shaped, are low in the skull and set far apart. 
(3)	Ears are set high. Un-cropped ears are short and usually held rose or half prick, though some hold them at full prick. 
(4)	Neck is heavy and muscular, attached to strong, muscular shoulders. 
(5)	Body is muscular, with a deep, broad chest, a wide front, deep brisket, well-sprung ribs, and slightly tucked loins. 
(6)	Tail is medium length and set low, thick at the base, tapering to a point. 
(7)	Hindquarters are well muscled, with hocks, set low on the legs. 
(8)	Coat is a singled coat, smooth, short and close to the skin. 
(b)	No person may own, keep, reside with or harbor a pit bull within the township that is not spayed or not neutered. 
(c)	Subsection (b) does not apply to: 
(1)	Pit bull puppies 16 weeks or younger; 
(2)	Any dog examined by a licensed Humane Society of Huron Valley veterinarian, which is certified as having less than five of the characteristics set forth in subsection (a); 
(3)	A pit bull which is registered with the American Kennel Club or United Kennel Club and participates at least once a year in a dog show sponsored by the American Kennel Club or United Kennel Club. A dog owner who presents proof of AKC or UKC registration and participation on an annual basis in an AKC or UKC dog show is exempt from the neutering and spaying requirements of this section. 
(4)	A pit bull with a chronic or debilitating disease or medical condition whose health will be seriously, permanently and detrimentally affected if it is spayed or neutered. 
(Ord. No. 2010-409, 10-19-10; Ord. No. 2012-427, 1-14-13 )
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2010-409, adopted Oct. 19, 2010, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 14-1 was at the direction of the city. 
 
Secs. 14-2—14-25. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. ANIMAL CONTROL 
 
Sec. 14-26. Purpose.
The Charter Township of Ypsilanti Board of Trustees finds and determines that there has been a substantial increase in the number of citizen complaints concerning the number of dogs in the township that are running at large, causing physical injury to persons, damage to property, creating a nuisance and preventing the full enjoyment by citizens of their property; and that as a result of the foregoing, there is a condition that is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of citizens residing in such areas. This article is enacted to provide for animal control within the boundaries of the township. 
(Ord. No. 2009-397, § 1, 9-15-09)
 
Sec. 14-27. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings described in this section: 
Animal control officer: Any person employed by the county for the purpose of enforcing this article or state statutes pertaining to dogs or other animals. 
At large: Refers to a dog that is not in an enclosure, or is otherwise not under physical control, or is not under the control of the owner or other responsible person by means of a leash, cord, chain or other means of physical restraint. 
Cat: A feral or domestic feline, including a stray. 
Dog: A domestic canine including a stray. 
Microchip identification: A passive electronic device that is injected into an animal by means of a hypodermic syringe device. Each microchip shall contain a unique and original number that is read by an electronic scanning device for purposes of animal identification and recovery by the animal's owner. 
Nuisance: An animal shall be considered a nuisance if any of the following occurs: 
(1)	By the frequent barking, howling, yelping, growling or making other noises shall unreasonably interfere with the quiet enjoyment of persons in the vicinity. 
(2)	Chases or snaps at a pedestrian, bicyclist or vehicle. 
(3)	Defecates on private or public property, other than its owner's, and the animal owner fails to remove the feces deposited by the animal. 
(4)	Attacks or bites a person. The person must be lawfully on the property where the attack or bite occurs. This subsection does not apply to an animal tormented or provoked by the person. 
(5)	Attacks or bites a domesticated animal while the domesticated animal is on its owner's property or under the lawful control of its owner. 
(6)	Charges a person in a manner that restricts the person's freedom of movement by placing the person in reasonable fear of an imminent attack. The person must be lawfully on the property where the charge occurs. This subsection does not apply to an animal tormented by the person. 
(7)	Molests passers-by or persons on adjoining property by viciously, continuously, and aggressively barking or growling unless the dog is securely confined in a manner which ensures that the dog cannot escape the premises. 
(8)	Causes an offensive stench, odor or smell which extends into the property of another. This provision shall not apply to farm animals (horses, cattle, sheep and chickens). 
Owner: The term "owner" when applied to the proprietorship of an animal means: every person having a right of property in the animal, an authorized agent of the owner, every person who keeps or harbors an animal or has it in their care, custody or control, and every person who permits the animal to remain on the premises occupied, owned or controlled by such person. 
Premises: That portion of land owned or occupied by an owner not including any portion of such land that is accessible to the public as a right-of-way. 
Provoked: A willful act or omission that an ordinary and reasonable person would conclude is likely to precipitate a bite or attack by an ordinary dog or animal. 
Rabies suspect animal: The term "rabies suspect animal" shall mean any animal which has been determined by the Michigan Department of Public Health to be a potential rabies carrier and which has bitten a human, or any animal which has been in contact with or been bitten by another animal which is a potential rabies carrier, or any animal which is a potential rabies carrier which shows symptoms suggestive of rabies. 
Tormented: An act or omission that causes unjustifiable pain, suffering and distress to an animal, or causes mental and emotional anguish in the animal as evidenced by its altered behavior, for a purpose such as sadistic pleasure, coercion or punishment that an ordinary and reasonable person would conclude is likely to precipitate a bite, attack or charge. 
(Ord. No. 2009-397, § 2, 9-15-09)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 14-28. Nuisance animals prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to be the owner of an animal which is a nuisance as defined in section 14-27. 
(Ord. No. 2009-397, § 3, 9-15-09)
 
Sec. 14-29. Dog tethering to stationary object.
It shall be unlawful for a person to tether, fasten, chain, tie or restrain a dog or cause such restraining of a dog, to a tree, fence, post, dog house or other stationary object on a tethering device which is less than three times the length of the dog. The length of the dog shall be measured from the tip of its nose to the end of its tail. The weight of the collar shall not exceed more than one-eighth of the dog's body weight and shall not, due to weight, inhibit the free movement of the dog. The tethering shall not cause injury to the dog or entanglement with fixed objects such as fences, trees, or other manmade or natural obstacles. 
(Ord. No. 2009-397, § 4, 9-15-09)
 
Sec. 14-30. Dog at large prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to be the owner of a dog which is at large as defined in section 14-27. 
(Ord. No. 2009-397, § 5, 9-15-09)
 
Sec. 14-31. Impoundment of dogs running at large.
(a)	Any dog found or kept in violation of this chapter, may be impounded by an animal control officer, law enforcement officer or humane society animal cruelty investigator. If entry is required to a structure or premises, permission to enter must, prior to entry, be obtained from the owner or occupant. If entry is refused, the township attorney may institute the appropriate legal proceeding to authorize entry to the structure or premises and impoundment of dog(s) found or kept in violation of this chapter. 
(b)	It shall be lawful for any person to seize any dog running at large in violation of this article and to turn said dog over to the animal control officer or law enforcement officer. 
(c)	When a dog is found running at large, and its ownership is known or is readily determined by the animal control officer or other law enforcement officer, a citation may be issued to the dog owner in lieu of impoundment. 
(d)	Immediately upon impounding a dog, the animal control officer shall make every reasonable effort to notify the owner of such dog so impounded and inform such owner of the conditions whereby custody of such dog may be regained pursuant to the regulations for the operation of the humane society. 
(e)	An owner may redeem a dog from the humane society by executing a sworn statement of ownership, furnishing a license and tag as required by this article and state law, and paying the following fees: 
(1)	A boarding fee as established by the humane society. 
(2)	Proof of a current license, a valid certificate of rabies vaccination, and microchip identification. 
(3)	If a dog owner is unable to prove that the dog has a current license and a valid certificate of rabies vaccination, the owner shall in addition to the fees set forth above, pay the fees established for licensing and rabies vaccination. 
(4)	If microchip identification is not present, a microchip with the owner's name, address and dog identification code shall be imbedded by the humane society. The owner is responsible to pay the fee as established by the humane society for imbedding the microchip. 
(Ord. No. 2009-397, § 6, 9-15-09; Ord. No. 2010-410, 10-19-10)
 
Sec. 14-32. Animal control officer; law enforcement officer; authority; violations.
An animal control officer or a deputized law enforcement officer may issue appearance tickets, citations, or summons to persons owning, keeping, caring for, or permitting a dog to remain on the premises occupied by him in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-397, § 7, 9-15-09)
 
Sec. 14-33. Confinement for rabies observation.
(a)	Any person who shall have in his possession or control an animal which has contracted rabies or has been subjected to the same, or which is suspected of having rabies, or which has bitten any person or other animal, shall, upon demand of the animal control officer or any law enforcement officer of the township, produce and surrender up such animal to such officer to be held for observation as provided in this section. It shall be the duty of any person owning a animal which has been attacked or bitten by another animal showing symptoms of rabies, or which has bitten any person or any other animal suspected of having rabies, to immediately notify the animal control officer or a local law enforcement officer that such person has such an animal in his possession. 
(b)	Whenever a dog is reported to have bitten any person, it shall thereupon be the duty of the animal control officer to seize such animal and confine the animal in one of the veterinarian hospitals in the township or the vicinity thereof, or with the Huron Valley Humane Society, for a period of at least ten days for the purpose of ascertaining whether such animal is afflicted with rabies. The animal control officer may notify, in writing, the person owning or possessing such dog, to confine the dog in one of the veterinarian hospitals of the township or the vicinity thereof, or with the Huron Valley Humane Society, for a period of at least ten days for the purpose of ascertaining whether such dog is afflicted with rabies. It shall thereupon be the duty of such owner to accomplish the confinement of such dog within 12 hours after receiving such notice from the animal control officer in any one of the places above indicated for such period of ten days, for the purpose of ascertaining whether such dog is afflicted with rabies. If such dog is not afflicted, it may be returned to its owner. 
(c)	If any dog is confined under the provisions of this section, the owner thereof shall be liable for any fees and costs which accrue because of the detention of such dog. 
(d)	Whenever a dog confined under this section is suspected of having rabies, it shall be the duty of its owner or the animal control officer to arrange for the delivery of such dog to the state department of health for a laboratory diagnosis of the presence or absence of rabies. 
(Ord. No. 2009-397, § 8, 9-15-09)
 
Sec. 14-34. Penalty for violation of article.
Any person violating a provision of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by not more than a $500.00 fine and/or imprisonment for not more than 90 days. 
(Ord. No. 2009-397, § 9, 9-15-09)
 
Secs. 14-35—14-65. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. DOG LICENSING AND VACCINATION 
 
Sec. 14-66. Licensing and vaccination.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to own any dog four months old or over, unless the dog is licensed as hereinafter provided, or to own any dog four months old or over that does not at all times wear a collar with a tag approved by the director of the Michigan Department of Agriculture, attached, as hereinafter provided, except when engaged in lawful hunting accompanied by its owner; or for any person except the owner, to remove any collar and/or license tag from a dog. 
(b)	The owner of any dog four months or over, shall apply to the township treasurer for a dog license. Such application shall be in writing and state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the dog, and the name and address of the current owner. The application for a license shall be accompanied by a valid certificate of a current vaccination for rabies, with a vaccine licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture, signed by an accredited veterinarian. The rabies vaccination certificate shall state the month and year the rabies vaccination expires. A dog license issued by the township shall be valid for: 
(1)	One year or until the rabies vaccination expires, whichever date occurs first; or 
(2)	Three years or until the rabies vaccination expires, whichever date occurs first. 
(c)	A dog may be exempt from the rabies vaccination requirements as herein set forth if in the written opinion of a licensed veterinarian, administration of the rabies vaccine will result in the death of the dog due to a preexisting disease or terminal illness. 
(Ord. No. 2009-397, § (1), 9-15-09; Ord. No. 2012-424, §§ 1, 2, 6-25-12)
 
Sec. 14-67. Fees.
(a)	The fee for dog licenses under this article shall be established by resolution of the township board. 
(b)	For dogs reaching the age of four months, the owner thereof shall obtain a license within 30 days of the date in which a dog reaches four months of age at the rate set forth in subsection (a). 
(c)	A dog which is used as a guide or leader dog for a blind person, a hearing dog for a deaf or audibly impaired person, or a service dog for a physically limited person is not subject to any fee for licensing, as provided in MCL 287.291. 
(d)	Whenever a dog has been licensed for the current year elsewhere in the state and the owner thereof becomes a resident of the township, the owner shall register such dog with the treasurer and otherwise comply with all of the provisions of subsection (a). 
(e)	No license or license tag issued for one dog shall be transferable to another dog. Whenever the ownership or possession of any dog is permanently transferred from one person to another within the township, the license of such dog may likewise be transferred, upon proper notice, in writing by the last registered owner, given to the treasurer who shall note such transfer upon his/her records. This article does not require the procurement of a new license, or the transfer of a license already secured, when the possession of a dog is temporarily transferred for the purpose of boarding, hunting game, breeding, trial or show. 
(f)	A dog owner who is issued a dog license, shall file an application for a change of residence with the township treasurer within 30 days of changing the address where the licensed dog resides. This provision applies to licensed dog owners who change residence within Ypsilanti Township. The application for a change of address shall include the name of the owner and the current address where the dog resides. No fee shall be charged to dog owners filing a change of residence application. 
(Ord. No. 2009-397, § (2), 9-15-09; Ord. No. 2009-401, § (2), 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2012-424, §§ 3—5, 6-25-12)
 
Sec. 14-68. Records kept by animal control officer.
The Washtenaw County Animal Control Officer shall keep a record of the breed, sex, age, color and markings of every dog impounded, together with the date, hour and location of such impounding and the name of its owner, if known. 
(Ord. No. 2009-397, § (3), 9-15-09)
 
Sec. 14-69. Penalty.
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be responsible for a civil infraction and subject to a fine as follows: 
(1)	The maximum fine for any first violation of this article shall be $100.00; 
(2)	The maximum fine for any violation of this article which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of once before, shall be $250.00; 
(3)	The maximum fine for any violation of this article which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of twice before, shall be $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2009-397, § (4), 9-15-09)
 
Chapter 18 BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 18-1. Reserved.
 
Sec. 18-2. Barriers, barricades or guardrails for open manholes.
Barriers, barricades or standard guard railings shall be provided for guarding open manholes. Visual warning devices shall be provided for such barriers, barricades and guard railings. 
(Code 1975, § 5-2)
 
Sec. 18-3. Protection of workers in manholes—Generally.
(a)	Whenever any work necessitates entering any manhole in a public right-of-way, the employer or other person in charge of or responsible for the work shall comply with the following: 
(1)	Testing equipment, approved by U.S. Bureau of Mines, shall be provided and a standard procedure established by the employer to determine the presence of air contaminants or a deficiency of oxygen. 
(2)	Air contaminants or oxygen deficiency shall be controlled, minimized or purged by one or more of the following methods: Removed at the source by local exhaust ventilation; removed by general ventilation; removed by dilution ventilation; or by respiratory equipment furnished by the employer which provides protection which is equal to or greater than that approved by the U.S. Bureau of Mines, where there are contaminants or where there is a deficiency of oxygen in the air. The air or oxygen supplied to a supplied air helmet shall be of the positive pressure type. The air supplied to a supplied air helmet or to other supplied air-breathing apparatus shall be filtered. 
(3)	Ladders shall be provided for entering or leaving the manhole. 
(4)	The fixture to which lamp socket and plugs are attached shall, in all cases, be explosionproof, vaporproof, moistureproof and dustproof. All extension cords shall be made of heavy duty grounded cord. All lamps shall be guarded. 
(b)	Where the safety equipment is provided, as outlined in subsection (a) of this section, it shall be the responsibility of the employee working at or in the manhole to use such equipment. 
(Code 1975, § 5-3)
 
Sec. 18-4. Same—Additional worker required on surface; exception.
(a)	No person shall enter a manhole in a public right-of-way or remain inside thereof unless a person is constructing or repairing underground utilities or unless the person is providing alert surveillance. 
(b)	A person authorized or permitted to construct or repair underground facilities by access through a manhole shall provide alert surveillance until the manhole is in place and no person remains in the underground facility. 
(c)	In providing alert surveillance under subsection (b) of this section, no person shall direct, permit or allow another in his employ or under his supervision to enter a manhole or remain inside thereof without having another employee on the surface at or near the entrance to the manhole. The second employee shall be trained in safety and first aid practices and shall be responsible for alert surveillance of the occupied manhole to afford immediate action in emergencies. The second employee may perform other duties either above grade or in the manhole, provided that the duties do not interfere with the employee's surveillance duties. 
(d)	The provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall not preclude an employee trained in safety practices, in the absence of a second employee, from entering a manhole for a brief period of time not to exceed 20 minutes for purposes such as inspections, housekeeping, taking readings or similar work, provided adequate steps have been taken to ensure safe working conditions. 
(Code 1975, § 5-4)
 
Sec. 18-5. Liveline tools for work on high voltage.
(a)	Any person who shall work on voltage in excess of 5,000 volts to ground, or who shall cause any other person to work on voltage in excess of 5,000 volts to ground, shall be required to use, or cause such other person instructed by him to use, liveline tools meeting the minimum test requirements set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)	The minimum test requirements for liveline tools shall be: 
(1)	Fiberglass liveline tools of a six-foot minimum length certified to withstand 100,000 volts for a period of five minutes per foot. 
(2)	Wood liveline tools of six-foot minimum length certified to withstand 75,000 volts for a period of three minutes per foot. 
(Code 1975, § 5-5)
 
Sec. 18-6. [Bidding procedures and contracting for construction and/or remodeling of any building—Davis-Bacon Act.]
(a)	This section is ordained for the purpose of establishing a procedure to insure that contractors performing services on Ypsilanti Township buildings, parks and/or water and sewer lines shall pay employees in accordance with the prevailing wage rates. 
(b)	No contract, agreement, understanding or other arrangement, whether oral or written for the construction and/or substantial remodeling of any building or part thereof, for or on the behalf of or owned by the Township of Ypsilanti, involving craftsmen, mechanics and laborers employed directly upon the site of work shall be entered into, approved or executed unless such contract, agreement, understanding or arrangement shall provide and require that all craftsmen, mechanics and laborers so employed shall receive at least the prevailing wages and fringe benefits of the building trades department for corresponding classes of craftsmen, mechanics and laborers as determined and published by the Davis-Bacon Division of the United States Department of Labor for the Washtenaw County area. 
(c)	Such contract, agreement, understanding or arrangements shall provide that all subcontracts entered into by the contractor shall contain the provisions set forth above with respect to the contractor and all such contracts, agreements, understandings or arrangements shall provide that all contractors and subcontractors engaged in the performances of service or work for the township to which this subsection of this section applies, shall at the request of the township, furnish proof satisfactory to the township that the foregoing provisions of such contract or subcontract are being complied with. It shall be the responsibility of the township clerk to, on demand, post at an appropriate place in the township, clerk's office, prevailing wages and fringe benefits that may be, in effect in accordance with the foregoing, and the township clerk is directed to see that the requirements of this paragraph of this section are contained in and complied with in all contracts, agreements, understandings or arrangements for work or services to be performed for the township in accordance herewith. 
(d)	Should any section, clause or phase of this ordinance [from which this section derives] be declared by the courts to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid. 
( Ord. No. 69 , §§ 1—4, 3-5-74)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 69 , §§ 1—4, adopted March 5, 1974, has been included in the Code of Ordinances at the request of the township. Said provisions did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 18-6 was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Secs. 18-7—18-25. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. STATE CONSTRUCTION CODE ACT 
 
Sec. 18-26. Administration and enforcement of state construction code by the township.
The township hereby assures responsibility for the administration and enforcement within the township of the State Construction Code Act, Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972 (MCL 125.1501, et seq., MSA 5.2949(1), et seq.) as amended, and the building, plumbing, mechanical, and electrical codes promulgated thereunder, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2001-267, § 1, 5-15-01)
 
Sec. 18-27. Enforcing agency designated.
Pursuant to Section 9 of the State Construction Code, Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972 (MCL 125.1509; MSA 5.2949(9)), as amended, the township hereby designates the community development director and such building inspectors, plumbing inspectors, mechanical inspectors and other officers and employees as shall be designated by the community development director as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibilities of the township under the State Construction Code Act, as amended, and the building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical codes promulgated thereunder, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2001-267, § 2, 5-15-01)
 
Sec. 18-28. Electrical licensing.
Pursuant to the State Construction Code Act, Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972 (MCL 125.1501, et seq., MSA 5.2949(1), et seq.), as amended, authority for electrical licensing is hereby transferred to the electrical administrative board. 
(Ord. No. 2001-267, § 2, 5-15-01)
 
ARTICLES III—VI. RESERVED
 
Secs. 18-29—18-245. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VII. PENALTIES
 
Sec. 18-246. Violations, civil infractions.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any section of this chapter shall be responsible for a civil infraction, and shall be subject to a fine as follows: 
(1)	The fine for any first violation shall be $100.00; 
(2)	The fine for any violation which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of once before, shall be $250.00; 
(3)	The fine for any violation which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of twice before, shall be $500.00. 
(Ord.No. 96-151, 6-18-96)
 
Sec. 18-247. Each day a separate civil infraction.
A separate civil infraction shall be deemed committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 96-151, 6-18-96)
 
Sec. 18-248. Public nuisance per se.
Any building or structure which is erected, altered or converted in violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 96-151, 6-18-96)
 
Sec. 18-249. Rights and remedies are cumulative.
The rights and remedies provided herein are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 96-151, 6-18-96)
 
Chapter 22 BUSINESSES 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 22-1. Prohibition of marihuana establishments.
(a)	Definitions. Words used herein shall have the definitions as provided for in Initiated Law 1 of 2018, MCL 333.27951 et seq., as may be amended. 
(b)	No marihuana establishments. The Charter Township of Ypsilanti hereby prohibits all marihuana establishments within the boundaries of the township pursuant to Initiated Law 1 of 2018, MCL 333.27951 et seq., as may be amended. 
(c)	Violations and penalties.
(1)	Any person who disobeys, neglects or refuses to comply with any provision of this section or who causes, allows or consents to any of the same shall be deemed to be responsible for the violation of this section. A violation of this section is deemed to be a nuisance per se. 
(2)	A violation of this section is a municipal civil infraction, for which the fines shall not be less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00, in the discretion of the court. The foregoing sanctions shall be in addition to the rights of the township to proceed at law or equity with other appropriate and proper remedies. Additionally, the violator shall pay costs which may include all expenses, direct and indirect, which the township incurs in connection with the municipal civil infraction. 
(3)	Each day during which any violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(4)	In addition, the township may seek injunctive relief against persons alleged to be in violation of this section, and such other relief as may be provided by law. 
(5)	This section shall be administered and enforced by the ordinance enforcement officer of the township or such other person(s) as designated by the township board from time to time. 
( Ord. No. 2019-484 , §§ I—IV, 5-7-19)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2019-484 , §§ I—IV, adopted May 7, 2019, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 22-1 was at the discretion of the editor. It should be noted, this section shall cease effect on June 30, 2020. 
 
Secs. 22-2—22-25. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. MASSAGE
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 22-26. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Massage means a method of treating external parts of the body for remedial or hygienic purposes, consisting of rubbing, stroking, kneading, adjusting or tapping with the hand or any instrument, electric, magnetic or otherwise, with or without supplementary aids. 
Massage parlor means any Turkish bath parlor, steam bath, sauna bath, magnetic healing institute, or any room, place, establishment or institution where treatment of any nature for the human body is given by means of massage, and where a massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, bath, physiotherapy, manipulation of the body or similar treatment is given. 
Massage school means a school which is recognized by the state board of massage, which requires for admission students with a tenth grade education or its equivalent, which employs one or more competent licensed massagists as instructors, and which has minimum requirements of a continuous course of study and training and consisting of study in physiology, anatomy, massage theory, hydrotherapy, hygiene, ethics and practical massage. For the purposes of this article, a correspondence school shall not be construed to be a recognized school. 
Massagist means any person, male or female, who administers to another person, for any form of consideration, a massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, bath, electric or magnetic massage procedure, manipulation of the body or other similar procedure. 
Student means any person who, under the guidance of an instructor in a massage school, is being trained or instructed in the theory, method or practice of massage. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-27)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 22-27. Reserved.
 
Sec. 22-28. Operator's responsibility with regards to employee's permit.
It shall be the responsibility of an owner, operator, manager or permittee in charge of or in control of a massage parlor, massage school or similar business to ensure that each person employed or engaged by him in such business as a massagist shall have first obtained a valid massagist permit required by this article. Any owner, operator, manager or permittee in charge of or in control of a massage parlor, massage school or similar business, who employs a person performing as a massagist who is not in possession of a valid massagist permit, or allows such an employee to perform, operate or practice within a massage parlor shall be in violation of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-28)
 
Sec. 22-29. Required facilities.
No permit to conduct a massage parlor, massage school or similar business shall be issued unless an inspection by the township reveals that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
(1)	A recognizable and readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage parlor or massage school, provided that all such signs shall comply with the sign requirements of the township. 
(2)	Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the state construction code and, in addition, at least one artificial light of not less than 60 watts shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth where massage services are being performed on a patron. 
(3)	Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the state construction code. 
(4)	Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in performing the acts of massage shall be provided. 
(5)	Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times. 
(6)	Closed cabinets shall be provided, which cabinets shall be utilized for the storage of clean linen. 
(7)	Adequate bathing, dressing, locker and toilet facilities shall be provided for patrons. A minimum of one tub or shower, one dressing room containing a separate locker with lock for each patron to be served, as well as a minimum of one toilet and one washbasin shall be provided by every massage parlor; provided, however, that if male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously at the establishment, separate bathing, a separate massage room, separate dressing and separate toilet facilities shall be provided for male and female patrons. 
(8)	All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all other physical facilities for the establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs and/or showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. 
(9)	Clean and sanitary towels and linens shall be provided for each patron of the establishment or each patron receiving massage services. No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted. 
(10)	A minimum of one separate washbasin shall be provided in each massage parlor for the use of employees of any such establishment. The basin shall provide soap or detergent and hot and cold running water at all times and shall be located within or as close as practicable to the area devoted to the performing of massage services. In addition, there shall be provided at each washbasin sanitary towels placed in permanently installed dispensers. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-29)
 
Sec. 22-30. Inspections.
(a)	Every establishment ostensibly being operated as a massage parlor or massage school shall be open for inspection by duly authorized representatives of any township department concerned with the licensing and supervision of such establishment during operating hours for the purpose of enforcing any of the provisions of this article or other ordinances or regulations of the township relating to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse entry to premises in which a massage parlor or massage school is ostensibly being operated by township representatives for the purpose of making lawful inspections. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-30)
 
Sec. 22-31. Change of location.
A change of location of any of the aforementioned and described premises may be approved by the county sheriff and community development coordinator, provided the requirements set forth in this article as well as all other ordinances and regulations of the township and state law are complied with and a change of location fee, in the amount of $125.00, is deposited with the township. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-31)
 
Sec. 22-32. Unlawful activities.
It shall be unlawful for any person to massage any other person, or give or administer any bath, or to give or administer any of the other things mentioned in this article for illegal purposes or, for monetary gain or profit, have any contact with a person's breasts, genital area or buttocks in a manner intended to arouse, appeal to or gratify a person's lust, passions or sexual desire. Any violation of this provision shall be deemed grounds for the revocation of the license. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-32)
 
Sec. 22-33. Emergency employee.
If the holder of a permit to operate a massage parlor is required to use an emergency employee because of illness or incapacity of a regular licensed employee, the same shall be permitted, provided that such emergency employee shall be required to make application for a valid permit as required in this article within three days from date of beginning work. The expression "emergency employee" shall be defined to mean an individual who possesses a valid medical certificate (as described in section 22-53(11)) and works not more than three days per year in the township, and does not possess a valid township permit. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-33)
 
Sec. 22-34. Wearing apparel.
Uniforms or garments covering the torso shall be worn by massagist or employees while attending patrons. Such uniforms or garments shall be washable material and shall be kept in a clean condition. The sleeves of the uniform or garment shall not reach below the elbow. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-34)
 
Sec. 22-35. Patronage of massage business by minors.
No person licensed as a massagist shall massage or treat any person under the age 18 upon the licensed premises, except upon written order by a licensed medical doctor, doctor of osteopathic medicine, or physical therapist, such order being dated and in the possession of the massagist giving the massage or treatment. If the person under the age of 18 is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian during the massage or treatment, this provision shall not apply. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-35)
 
Sec. 22-36. Name of business.
No person licensed under this article shall operate under any name or conduct his business under any designation not specified in the permit. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-36)
 
Sec. 22-37. Hours of operation.
No massage parlor or massage school shall be open to the public for business between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 9:00 a.m. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-37)
 
Sec. 22-38. Exemptions.
This article shall not apply to: 
(1)	Medical doctors (physicians and surgeons), doctors of osteopathic medicine, doctors of chiropractic medicine, physical therapists, psychiatrists, psychologists, clinical social workers, and family counselors who are licensed to practice their respective professions in the state, or who are permitted to practice temporarily under the auspices of an associate or establishment duly licensed in the state. 
(2)	Nurses who are registered under the laws of this state and who administer a massage in the normal course of nursing duties. 
(3)	A trainer of any duly constituted athletic team who administers a massage in the normal course of training duties. 
(4)	Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of this state and who administer a massage in the normal course of their duties. 
(5)	Participants in growth seminars or sensitivity sessions, provided such seminars or sessions are conducted by a member of one of the exempted professions defined in subsection (1) of this section. 
(6)	Any duly licensed establishment in which the persons described in subsection (1) of this section only and exclusively practice their respective professions. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-39)
 
Secs. 22-39—22-50. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. PERMITS
 
Sec. 22-51. Required.
No person shall practice, engage in, carry on or operate the business of a massagist or conduct, operate and carry on a massage parlor, massage school or similar business within the township without first having applied for and obtained the required permit, and complying with all requirements of this article. Nor shall any person employ as a massagist any person who does not hold a current unrevoked permit as required by this article. No person shall practice massage for compensation without obtaining and maintaining in effect a permit as a massagist as required by this article. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-51)
 
Sec. 22-52. Application; investigation fee.
(a)	Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate a massage parlor, massage school or similar business, or to perform massage services shall make application to the township clerk, who shall refer all such applications to the county sheriff for an investigation. An application to obtain a license to operate a massage parlor, massage school or similar business shall be accompanied by an investigation fee in an amount established by resolution of the township board, no part of which shall be refundable. 
(b)	Each applicant for a permit to allow an individual to perform massage services shall be accompanied by an investigation fee in an amount established by resolution of the township board, no part of which shall be refundable. 
(c)	This application fee shall be payable to the township treasurer at the time the application is filed, and this fee shall be in addition to any other license, permit or fee required under this article or any other township ordinance. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-52)
 
Sec. 22-53. Contents of application.
Any applicant for permits required in this article shall submit the following information: 
(1)	The full name, including aliases used by applicant within the past ten years, and present address of the applicant. 
(2)	The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of applicant and dates of residence. 
(3)	A description of service to be provided. 
(4)	The location and mailing address of the proposed establishment. 
(5)	If applicant is a corporation, the names and residence addresses of each of the officers and directors of the corporation, and of each stockholder owning more than ten percent of the corporation. 
(6)	If the applicant is a partnership, the names and residence addresses of each of the partners including limited partners. 
(7)	Written proof (birth certificate or sworn affidavits) that the applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(8)	Individual applicant's height, weight, sex, color of eyes and hair. 
(9)	A complete set of the applicant's fingerprints, which shall be taken by the county sheriff or his agent. 
(10)	Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(11)	A certificate from a medical or osteopathic doctor stating that the applicant has, within 30 days immediately prior thereto, been examined and found to be free of any contagious or communicable disease. 
(12)	The history of an applicant in the operation of a massage parlor or similar business or occupation including, but not limited to, whether or not such person, in previously operating in this or another municipality or state under permit or license, has had such permit or license revoked or suspended and the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(13)	All criminal convictions other than traffic violations and the reasons therefor. 
(14)	The application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant. 
(15)	Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application. 
(16)	The following additional information shall be contained in an application for a license to conduct a massage parlor: The number of employees and names and qualifications of all persons who are intended to give massages in the proposed parlor. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-53)
 
Sec. 22-54. Procedures.
(a)	Investigation and recommendation. Any applicant for a permit pursuant to this article shall present to the township clerk the application containing the required information. The application shall be referred to the county sheriff who shall have 30 days from the date of receipt of the application in which to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Based on such investigation, the county sheriff, or his representative, shall render a recommendation as to the approval or denial of the permit to the township clerk. 
(b)	Recommendation of denial. The county sheriff shall recommend denial of an application for a permit if the character, physical or mental condition of the applicant or his employees is found to be inimical to the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. The county sheriff's recommendation shall be based in appropriate and competent evidence available to him. In making his determination, the sheriff shall consider: 
(1)	Penal history. All the applicant's convictions, the reasons therefor, and the criminal history of the applicant subsequent to his release, if the applicant was ever incarcerated or jailed. 
(2)	License and permit history. The license and permit history of the applicant shall explain whether such person in previously operating in this township or state or in another municipality or state under a license or permit has had such license or permit revoked or suspended, the reasons therefor, and the license and permit history of the applicant subsequent to such action. 
(c)	Inspection of premises by township departments. The township's community development department, fire department and the county health department shall inspect the premises proposed to be devoted to the massage parlor, massage school or similar business, and shall make within 30 days from the receipt of the application separate recommendations to the township clerk concerning compliance with the requirements of this article and all other applicable township ordinances and regulations. 
(d)	Grant. The township board, after receiving these recommendations, shall grant a permit to the establishment if all requirements for a massage parlor, massage school or similar business are met, and shall issue a permit to all persons who have applied to perform massage services, unless it appears that any person has deliberately falsified the application or unless it appears that the record of any person reveals a conviction of a felony or a crime of moral turpitude. 
(e)	Reserved.
(f)	Nontransferable. All permits issued under this article are nontransferable; provided, however, that a change of location of a massage parlor or similar business may be permitted pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-54)
 
Sec. 22-55. Fees.
(a)	Generally. Any person granted a permit by the township board to operate a massage parlor, massage school or similar business, or to administer massages, shall pay to the township treasurer an annual fee in an amount as established by resolution of the township board. The permit year shall be the period from the date of permit issuance to December 31 next, inclusive, unless otherwise provided. All permits issued for the permit year shall expire on December 31 unless suspended or revoked. 
(b)	Specific fees. The following fees are hereby established for the implementation of this article: 
(1)	Application investigation fees are as follows: 
a.	Premises, $250.00. 
b.	Individual, $50.00. 
(2)	Annual permit fees are as follows: 
a.	Per establishment, $100.00. 
b.	Per massagist, $25.00. 
(3)	Reserved. 
(4)	Expansion of existing facility, $125.00. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-55)
 
Sec. 22-56. Renewal.
The permit to operate a massage parlor, massage school or similar business, as well as massagist's permit, shall be renewed at least 15 days prior to the date of expiration. The permit shall be renewed if the applicant submits a sworn affidavit that the matters contained in the original application are correct and indicates any changes necessary. In addition to the affidavit, a signed statement from a doctor stating that the applicant for a massagist's permit has been examined within the prior 90 days and found to be free from any contagious or communicable disease which is likely to be communicated during the administration of a massage. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-56)
 
Sec. 22-57. Display.
Every person to whom or for which a permit shall have been granted shall display the permit in a conspicuous place so that it may be readily seen by persons entering the premises where the massage, bath or treatment is given. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-57)
 
Sec. 22-58. Revocation and suspension.
(a)	No permit shall be revoked until after a hearing before the township board to determine just cause for such revocation. The township clerk may order any permits suspended pending such hearing, and it shall be unlawful for any person to carry on the business of a massagist or to operate as a massage parlor, massage school or similar business, depending upon the particular type of permit which has been suspended, until the suspended permit has been reinstated by the township board. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and served at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice shall state the grounds of the complaint against the holder of the permit, or against the business carried on by the permittee at the establishment, and shall state the time and place where the hearing shall be held. 
(b)	The notice shall be served upon the permit holder by delivering it to the person or by leaving the notice at the place of business or residence of the permittee in the custody of a person of suitable age and discretion. If the permittee cannot be found, and the service of the notice cannot be made in this manner, a copy of the notice shall be mailed, postage fully prepaid, addressed to the permittee at his place of business or residence and posted conspicuously on the premises at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-58)
 
Sec. 22-59. Sale or transfer of interest in establishment.
(a)	Upon the sale or transfer of any interest in a massage parlor, massage school or similar business, the permit shall be null and void. A new application shall be made by any person desiring to own or operate the massage parlor, massage school or similar business. The provisions of sections 22-52 and 22-53 shall apply to any person for a massage establishment permit for premises previously used as such establishment. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-59)
 
Sec. 22-60. Employees.
It shall be the responsibility of the holder of the permit for the massage parlor, or the employer of any persons purporting to act as massagist, to ensure that each person employed as a massagist shall first have obtained a valid permit pursuant to the provisions of this article. All other employees who work closely with the massage activities shall provide annually the medical certificate required under section 22-53(11). 
(Code 1975, § 11½-60)
 
Sec. 22-61. Penalty for violation of article.
Any person violating, or neglecting or refusing to comply with any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by imposition of a fine not to exceed $500.00, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or by imposition of both fine and imprisonment within the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-40)
 
Secs. 22-62—22-80. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. PAWNBROKERS, JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 22-81. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Pawnbroker means any person, corporation, or member of a copartnership or firm who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal property, or other valuable thing, other than securities or printed evidence of indebtedness, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other valuable thing on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price. 
Secondhand dealer or junk dealer means any person, corporation, or member of a copartnership or firm whose principal business is that of purchasing, storing, selling, exchanging and receiving secondhand personal property of any kind or description. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-72)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 22-82. Reserved.
 
Sec. 22-83. Action on pawnbroker's bond.
If any person shall be aggrieved by the conduct of any licensed pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer, and shall recover judgment against such pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer, such aggrieved person may, after the return unsatisfied, either in whole or in part, of any execution issued upon the judgment, maintain an action in his own name upon the bond of the pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer in any court having jurisdiction of the amount of the judgment remaining unsatisfied. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-73)
 
Sec. 22-84. Inapplicability of article.
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to apply to any secondhand dealer or junk dealer purchasing scrap iron or metal. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-75)
 
Sec. 22-85. Statement to commissioner of state police.
Each pawnbroker, secondhand dealer and junk dealer under this article shall send to the commissioner of the state police and the county sheriff's department a statement, in writing, containing the name or title under which such business is operated, the owners thereof and the street address at which such business is located. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-76)
 
Secs. 22-86—22-95. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. LICENSES AND PERMITS
 
Sec. 22-96. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, or member of a copartnership or firm to engage in the business of a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer, whether as an owner, employee or otherwise, within the boundaries of the township without first obtaining a license therefor issued in accord with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-88)
 
Sec. 22-97. License application.
An application for a license authorizing a person, corporation, member of a copartnership, or firm to carry on the business of a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer shall be submitted to the township clerk on forms available from the township clerk's office. Such application shall be transmitted to the township board for approval. Such application shall designate the particular place in the township where the applicant shall carry on the business. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-89)
 
Sec. 22-98. Application investigation fee.
(a)	Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate the business of a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, and/or junk dealer, shall make application to the township clerk, who shall refer all such applications to the county sheriff for an investigation. 
(b)	If the applicant does not possess a current pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, and/or junk dealer license for the preceding year, issued by the township clerk, the application shall be considered as a new application. The application fee for a new pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, and/or junk dealer license shall be $250.00. 
(c)	If the applicant possesses a current pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, and/or junk dealer license for the preceding year, issued by the township clerk, the application shall be considered as a renewal. The application fee for a renewal pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, and/or junk dealer license shall be $50.00 
(d)	The application fee for new or renewal pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, and/or junk dealer licenses shall be payable to the township treasurer at the time the application is filed. This fee shall be in addition to any other license, permit or fee required under this or any other township ordinances. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-90; Amd. of 2-7-95)
 
Sec. 22-99. Application; contents.
Any applicant for licenses required by this article shall submit the following information: 
(1)	The full name, including aliases, used by the applicant within the past ten years, and the present address of the applicant. 
(2)	The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant and dates of residence. 
(3)	A description of service to be provided. 
(4)	The location and mailing address of the proposed establishment. 
(5)	If the applicant is a corporation, the names and residence addresses of each of the officers and directors of the corporation, and of each stockholder owning more than ten percent of the corporation. 
(6)	If the applicant is a partnership, the names and residence addresses of each of the partners, including limited partners. 
(7)	Written proof (birth certificate or sworn affidavits) that the applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(8)	Individual applicant's height, weight, sex, color of eyes and hair. 
(9)	A complete set of the applicant's fingerprints, which shall be taken by the county sheriff or his agent. 
(10)	Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(11)	All criminal convictions other than traffic violations and the reasons therefor. 
(12)	The application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant. 
(13)	Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-91)
 
Sec. 22-100. Permit procedures.
(a)	Any applicant for a license pursuant to these provisions shall present to the township clerk the application containing the required information. The application shall then be referred to the county sheriff who shall have 30 days from the date of receipt of the application in which to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Based on such investigation, the county sheriff, or his representative, shall render a recommendation as to the approval or denial of the permit to the township clerk. 
(b)	In making his determination, the county sheriff shall consider: 
(1)	Penal history. All the applicant's convictions, the reasons therefor, and the criminal history of the applicant subsequent to his release if the applicant was ever incarcerated or jailed. 
(2)	License and permit history. The license and permit history of the applicant shall explain whether such person is previously operating in this township or state or in another municipality or state under a license or permit has had such license or permit revoked or suspended, the reasons therefor, and the license and permit history of the applicant subsequent to such action. 
(3)	Inspection of premises by township departments. The township's building department and fire department shall inspect the premises proposed to be devoted to the business of a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer and/or junk dealer and shall make, within 30 days from receipt of the application, separate recommendations to the township clerk concerning compliance with the requirements of this article and all other applicable township ordinances and regulations. 
(4)	Grant of permit. The township board, after receiving these recommendations, shall grant a license to the establishment if all requirements for the business of a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer and/or junk dealer are met. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-92)
 
Sec. 22-101. Bond.
(a)	Required. Before any license shall be issued, the applicant shall give a bond to the township, in its corporate name, in the penal sum of $3,000.00, with at least two sureties, to be approved by the township board, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties and obligations pertaining to the business and for the payment of all costs and damages incurred by any violations of this article. 
(b)	Exception. This section shall not apply to secondhand dealers and junk dealers who do not engage in the activities of a pawnbroker as described in section 22-81. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-93)
 
Sec. 22-102. Expiration of license; nontransferable.
(a)	The license shall be for the period of one year from the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked for cause. No person, corporation, member of a copartnership, or firm shall operate upon an expired or transferred pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer's license. 
(b)	Pawnbrokers', secondhand dealers' and junkyard dealers' licenses issued under this article are nontransferable. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-94)
 
Sec. 22-103. Revocation and suspension of license.
(a)	No license shall be revoked until after a hearing before the township board to determine just cause for such revocation. The township clerk may order any permits suspended pending such hearing, and it shall be unlawful for any person to carry on the business of a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer and/or junk dealer until the suspended license has been reinstated by the township board. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and served at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice shall state the grounds of the complaint against the holder of the license and shall state the time and place where the hearing shall be held. 
(b)	The notice shall be served upon the license holder by delivering it to the person or by leaving the notice at the place of business or residence of the licensee in the custody of a person of suitable age and discretion. If the licensee cannot be found, and the service of the notice cannot be made in this manner, a copy of the notice shall be mailed, postage fully prepaid, addressed to the licensee at the place of business or residence and posted conspicuously on the premises at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-95)
 
Secs. 22-104—22-115. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. OPERATIONS
 
Sec. 22-116. Limited to business address on application.
No person, corporation, member of a copartnership or firm shall operate as a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer other than at the business address set down in the license issued by the township board. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-106)
 
Sec. 22-117. Recordkeeping required.
At the same time any pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer in this township shall receive any article of personal property or other valuable thing by way of pledge or pawn or shall acquire or purchase any article of personal property or other valuable thing, except new articles, wares or merchandise purchased at wholesale from manufacturers, wholesale distributors or jobbers for retail sale to customers, except also motor vehicles, old rags, wastepaper, books or magazines, he shall make a record of the transaction, which includes a description of the article, including serial number if such number appears on the article or model number or any identifying marks; the amount of money loaned or paid for the article; the rate of interest to be paid if any; the name, address and date of birth and driver's license number or state personal identification card number of the person pledging, pawning or selling the article; and the day and hour when such property was received. The record of property received shall be available for examination without prior notice by the township attorney and any law enforcement officer. The form of the record of transaction shall have an 8½-inch × 11-inch size. The record of each transaction shall be numbered consecutively, commencing with the number one and the calendar year. The person making such record shall be identified by his signature thereon. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-107)
 
Sec. 22-118. Fingerprints of seller; copies to county sheriff's department and state police; exception.
At the same time any pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer in this township shall receive any article of personal property or other valuable thing by way of pledge or pawn, or shall acquire or purchase any article of personal property or other valuable thing, except new articles, wares or merchandise purchased at wholesale from manufacturers, wholesale distributors or jobbers for retail sale to customers, except also motor vehicles, old rags, wastepaper, books, magazines, tapestries, antiques and household furniture, he shall take, in duplicate, the legible imprint of the right thumb of the person from whom such property was received, or if that is not possible, the left thumb or some other finger of such person. Such fingerprint shall be taken under such rules and regulations as prescribed by the commissioner of the state police. One copy shall be forwarded within 48 hours, together with a statement of the nature of the property received, including make, model and serial number if such appears on the article, to the county sheriff's department. The second copy shall be forwarded within 48 hours, together with a statement of the property received, to the commissioner of the state police in East Lansing. This section shall not apply to pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers and junk dealers who purchase articles of personal property or other valuable things from federal, state or local government agencies, from licensed state corporations and from publicly advertised auctions. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-108)
 
Sec. 22-119. Purchaser's memorandum of pawn; contents; interest on certain loans; exception.
(a)	A pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer, at the time of such loan, shall deliver to the person pawning or pledging any goods, article or thing a memorandum or note, signed by him, containing the substance of the entry required to be made by him in the record made pursuant to section 22-117. No charge shall be made or received by any pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer for any such entry, memorandum or note. The memorandum or note shall be consecutively numbered and upon its back shall be printed in English, in bold type, the following words: 
"If interest or charges in excess of three percent per month, plus storage charges hereinafter provided, are asked or received, this loan is void and of no effect; and the borrower cannot be made to pay back the money loaned or any interest, or any charges or any part thereof, and the pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer loses all right to the possession of the goods, article or thing pawned, and shall surrender the same to the borrower or pawner upon due demand therefor." 
(b)	This section shall not apply to secondhand dealers and junk dealers who do not engage in the activities of a pawnbroker as described in section 22-81. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-109)
 
Sec. 22-120. Interest on loans; rate, storage charge, time of payment, computation; exception.
(a)	A licensed pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer may charge upon any loan a rate of interest not to exceed three percent per month; except that such dealer is not required to accept any interest less than $0.50 on a single loan. A pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer may also charge $0.50 per month or fraction thereof for the storage of property, except jewelry, after 30 days but for not more than four months under any single pledge or pawn. No pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer, or agent or employee thereof, shall make loan upon any deposit, pawn or pledge at a rate of interest and charge or receive therefor in excess of the amount provided for in this article. Interest on any loan shall not be payable in advance and shall be computed on unpaid monthly balances only, but without compounding. A pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer is not entitled to any examination fee or to make any charge in excess of the amounts provided for in this article. 
(b)	This section shall not apply to secondhand dealers and junk dealers who do not engage in the activities of a pawnbroker as described in section 22-81. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-110)
 
Sec. 22-121. Sale of pawned property at public auction; time, place, notice, affidavit of publication of notice.
No pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer shall sell any pawn or pledge until the same shall have remained six months in his possession, and all such sales shall be at public auction to the highest bidder, and not otherwise. Such sale shall be held under the direction and control of the pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer and in the dealer's regularly established place of business. Notice of such sale shall be published for at least six days previous thereto in the newspaper of general circulation within the township. Such notice shall specify the time and place at which such sale is to take place and by whom it is to be conducted, and shall contain the same description of the articles or goods to be sold as was given in the memorandum or note delivered to the pawner under section 22-119 and shall give the number of such memorandum or note. An affidavit of the printer of such paper or of his foreman, or his principal clerk, annexed to a printed copy of such notice taken from the paper in which it was published and specifying the times when and papers in which it was published, shall be filed after the last day of such publication and before the day fixed for such sale with the township clerk. Such affidavit shall be kept in the office of the township clerk as a public document and open to the inspection of any person. A fee of $0.50 shall be paid by the party filing such affidavit to the township clerk for the filing of the affidavit. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-111)
 
Sec. 22-122. Tender of debt and costs before sale; effect on right to property.
The borrower, at any time prior to the sale, may pay or tender to the pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer the debt and interest and charges thereon, together with the cost of advertising the sale, if the sale has been advertised. The payment or tender shall reinvest the pawner with the title and right of possession to the property pledged. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-112)
 
Sec. 22-123. Surplus resulting from sale; disposition; exception.
(a)	The surplus money, if any, arising from the sale, after deducting the amount of the loan, the interest and charges then due on the loan, and the expense of advertising, shall be paid by the pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer to the person who would be entitled to redeem the pledge or pawn if no sale had taken place. 
(b)	Sections 22-121, 22-122 and this section shall not apply to secondhand dealers and junk dealers who do not engage in the activities of a pawnbroker as described in section 22-81. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-113)
 
Sec. 22-124. Pawned property; destruction or defacing unlawful.
No pawnbroker shall deface, scratch, obliterate, melt, separate or break into parts any article or thing received in pawn or otherwise, or in any manner do, cause or suffer to be done by others anything which shall destroy or tend to destroy the identity of such article or render the identification thereof more difficult. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-114)
 
Sec. 22-125. Retention of goods purchased; tagging.
Such articles purchased or exchanged by secondhand dealers or junk dealers shall be retained by the purchaser thereof, for at least 15 days before disposing of them, in an accessible place in the building where such articles are purchased and received. A tag shall be attached to such articles in some visible and convenient place, with the number written thereupon to correspond with the entry number in such book. Such purchaser shall prepare and deliver on Monday of each week to the law enforcement agency providing law enforcement services to the township, before 12:00 noon, a legible and correct copy, written in the English language, from such book containing a description of each article purchased or received during the preceding week, the hour and day when the purchase was made, and the description of the person from whom it was purchased. Such statement shall be verified by affidavit of the person subscribing his name thereto. This section shall not apply to old rags, wastepaper and household goods except radios, televisions, record players and electrical appliances. Nothing contained in this section shall make it necessary for the purchaser to retain articles purchased from individuals, firms or corporations having a fixed place of business after such articles shall have been reported. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-115)
 
Sec. 22-126. Pawned property; acceptance from posted person or minor unlawful.
No pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer shall receive any pledge, pawn, articles or thing whatever from any person after receiving written notice from any law enforcement officer or the parent or guardian of any minor or person of unsound mind that such person is a minor or is of unsound mind or is a thief or receiver of stolen property. No pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer shall receive any pawn from any person under 18 years of age nor from any person who does not present a valid driver's license or state personal identification card. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-116)
 
Sec. 22-127. Penalty for violation of article.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, whether as owner or as clerk, agent, servant or employee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof in any court of competent jurisdiction, shall be punished by the imposition of a fine not to exceed $500.00, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or by imposition of both fine and imprisonment within the discretion of the court. 
(Code 1975, § 11½-74)
 
Secs. 22-128—22-145. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. PEDDLERS 
 
Sec. 22-146. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Canvassing and soliciting meaning the going from door to door, house to house, place to place, street to street or remaining in one place within the township for the purpose of soliciting orders for or canvassing occupants or residents for the sale of food products, books, magazines, goods, wares or merchandise of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for the purpose of soliciting orders for or canvassing occupants or residents for the installation or servicing of any household equipment or appliances, including but not limited to, furnace or boiler repair and maintenance, repair and servicing of washing windows and screens, awnings, roofing and siding of buildings or for any other services to be furnished. It shall also include persons soliciting for funds or donations of any kind. It shall also include the assisting of others in canvassing and/or soliciting. Newsboys and persons traveling on a regularly established route at the request, expressed or implied, of their customers, are not to be considered within the definitions of "peddler" or "canvasser" under the terms of this chapter. 
Charitable, religious or political organization means a not-for-profit charitable, religious, political, benevolent, educational, philanthropic, humane, patriotic, or civic organization of persons, registered and in good standing under Section 501(c) of the Federal Internal Revenue Code, that solicits or obtains contributions solicited from the public for charitable, religious or political purposes. 
Clerk means the clerk for the township. 
Commercial purposes means any business or activity carried on for profit. 
Handbill means any written or printed notice distributed by hand for the purpose of communication, including but not limited to any pamphlet, booklet or leaflet. 
Minor means a person under 17 years of age. 
Non-commercial purposes means any purpose other than that involving a business or activity carried on for profit, including, but not limited to, a political, religious or charitable purpose, or an activity sponsored by a political, religious, not-for-profit charitable, benevolent, educational, philanthropic, humane, patriotic or civic organization of persons, registered and in good standing under Section 501(c)(3) of the Federal Internal Revenue Code. 
Peddling means the going from door to door, house to house, place to place, street to street, or remaining in one place, in the township carrying or conveying or transporting by person, wagon, motor vehicles or other type of conveyance for the purpose of offering for immediate sale, food products, including but not limited to, meat, fish, vegetables, farm produce or provisions, candy, goods, wares or merchandise of any nature and landscaping materials of all types. It shall also include the assisting of others in "peddling." 
Person means and includes any person, agent, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
( Ord. No. 2015-447 , § 1, 6-16-15)
 
Sec. 22-147. Soliciting, peddling or canvassing on posted premises or when requested not to do so.
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit, peddle or canvass upon any premises in the township, if requested by anyone in control upon the premises not to do so, or if there is placed on such premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign or similar notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of such premises do not desire to have solicitors, canvassers or peddlers call upon them. For purposes of this section, soliciting and peddling include religious proselytizing, political speech (anonymous or otherwise) and passing out handbills. 
( Ord. No. 2015-447 , § 2, 6-16-15)
 
Sec. 22-148. Hours of operation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, or attempt to conduct, any canvassing, soliciting or peddling before the hours of 9:00 a.m. and after sundown, at any location within the township. 
( Ord. No. 2015-447 , § 3, 6-16-15)
 
Sec. 22-149. Use and restriction of stops, scales, bells, horns, etc.
(a)	No person shall stop in any one place longer than is necessary to make a sale or stop on private property without the consent of the owner. No person shall stop for the purposes of selling or offering to sell any food products within a distance of 300 feet from any public, private, charter or parochial school building, or the lands on which such buildings are located on any day during which school is in session, unless express permission is granted by the school principal or their designee. No person operating as a solicitor, canvasser or peddler shall interfere with traffic or cause or permit large numbers of persons, especially children, to congregate upon the public streets. 
(b)	It shall by unlawful for any person to call out or make any noise of any kind whatsoever, or to use a bell, horn or other noise making device so as to unreasonably disturb persons in the immediate vicinity for an extended period of time with the purpose of attracting persons to buy goods such licensee has for sale. 
( Ord. No. 2015-447 , § 4, 6-16-15)
 
Sec. 22-150. Vehicles, sanitation; health standards.
(a)	All vehicles used in the sale of food products must be kept clean and sanitary conditions at all times, and when containing loads or parts of loads of food products they must be kept only in places and operated in a manner which, in the opinion of the health officer for the county department of health and the state department of agriculture, are sanitary and wholesome. This section does not apply to the sale of whole and uncut fresh fruit and vegetables. 
(b)	All vehicles used for the purpose of selling or transportation of meat, milk, pastry, ice cream and all other food products for human consumption in the township shall be inspected and have in possession a current valid approval by the county board of heath, or the state department of agriculture before a license is granted. The holder of a license under which a food vending vehicle is operated shall be the person responsible for all the conditions and requirements of this chapter. 
(c)	Failure to maintain the standards and requirements of the county board of health or the state department of agriculture for the sale or transportation of food will constitute cause for revocation of the license under which such vehicles are operated. 
( Ord. No. 2015-447 , § 5, 6-16-15)
 
Sec. 22-151. Minors; soliciting, canvassing or peddling, requirements.
If an applicant intends to use a minor or minors to do the actual solicitation, canvassing, or peddling for commercial purposes, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)	An approved copy of the work permit issued by the State of Michigan, showing the approved hours of work and the job duties of each minor shall be attached to the application, and 
(2)	Minor(s) shall at all times be under the direct supervision of the adult who was issued the license under section 22-160. 
( Ord. No. 2015-447 , § 6, 6-16-15)
 
Sec. 22-152. Minors; soliciting, canvassing or peddling, accompanied by parent or guardian.
A minor who is accompanied by his parent or legal guardian during all times of soliciting, canvassing or peddling is exempt from the licensing provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2015-447 , § 7, 6-16-15)
 
Sec. 22-153. Misrepresentation.
(a)	No fraudulent or misleading representations to any person shall be made in connection with any peddling or soliciting activities, including, but not limited to, any misleading representation concerning the product or service involved, the purposes for which contributions solicited will be used, the name of the peddler or solicitor, the trade name and nature of the parent organization, or the purposes for which the parent organization was organized. 
(b)	No person shall represent that the issuance of a solicitor registration certificate under this chapter is an endorsement by the township of the solicitor, its products or the organization the solicitor represents. 
( Ord. No. 2015-447 , § 8, 6-16-15)
 
Sec. 22-154. Solicitation of persons inside motor vehicles.
No peddler or solicitor shall solicit the immediate payment of money from a person who is inside a motor vehicle. 
Exception: The prohibition against solicitations set forth in [this] section shall not apply to persons who solicit contributions on behalf of charitable or civic organizations during daylight hours if all of the following requirements are satisfied: 
(1)	Charitable or civic organization is a nonprofit organization that is qualified under Section 501(C)(3) or 501(C)(4) of the Internal Revue Code, 26 USC 501, or a veterans' organization that has tax-exempt status under the Internal Revenue Code. 
(2)	The charitable or civic organization maintains at least $500,000.00 in liability insurance. 
(3)	The person is 18 years of age or older. 
(4)	The person is wearing high-visibility safety apparel that meets current American standards promulgated by the International Safety Equipment Association. 
(5)	The portion of the roadway upon which the solicitation occurs is not a work zone and is within an intersection where traffic control devices are present. 
( Ord. No. 2015-447 , § 9, 6-16-15; Ord. No. 2017-475 , § 9, 10-17-17)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2017-475 , § 9, adopted Oct. 17, 2017, changed the title of § 22-154 from "Solicitation of persons inside motor vehicles prohibited" to read as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 22-155. Fixed stands.
No peddler or solicitor shall establish a fixed stand and/or store for soliciting upon any street, road, highway, lane, sidewalk, driveway, alley or publicly-owned property, unless said stand and/or store shall be in compliance with all applicable provisions of appendix A to this Code, the zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 2015-447 , § 10, 6-16-15)
 
Sec. 22-156. License required.
(a)	Unless exempt, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on the business of soliciting, canvassing or peddling for commercial purposes in the township as defined in section 22-146, without first obtaining a license in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)	Unless exempt, it shall by unlawful for any person to operate as a solicitor, canvasser, or peddler without first having obtained a license for each vehicle, piece of equipment or container used in connection therewith. 
( Ord. No. 2015-447 , § 11, 6-16-15)
 
Sec. 22-157. Application.
(a)	Application for licenses required by this article shall be made upon forms provided by the clerk, which shall be signed and verified under oath by the applicant of an individual, or by the authorized agent for any firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization and shall, as a minimum, contain the following: 
(1)	If an individual, the name, address and telephone number of the individual. 
(2)	If a partnership, the name, residence and business address and telephone number of each partner. 
(3)	If a corporation, the name, business address and telephone number of the corporation and names of the principal officers, directors and local representatives, their residence and business address, telephone numbers, and if a foreign corporation, whether they are authorized to do business in the state. 
(4)	If an employee the name, residence and telephone number of the employee together with written credentials setting forth the exact nature of his employment. 
(5)	The length of time for which the right to do business is sought. 
(6)	Two current photographs of the applicant or the agent(s) for the applicant who is to do the actual canvassing, soliciting or peddling. Each photograph shall be two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant or agent(s). 
(7)	A brief description of the product or services involved. 
(8)	A description of the vehicle or vehicles being used in the operation of the canvasser, solicitor and/or peddler along with a license plate number of each vehicle. 
(c)	The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee to be established by resolution of the township board. The township board may, from time to time, modify the established fee schedule. The application fee is separate from the license fee described in section 22-158. 
( Ord. No. 2015-447 , § 12, 6-16-15)
 
Sec. 22-158. Investigation; issuance or denial; appeal of denial.
(a)	Upon receipt of the application for a license, the clerk shall forward the same to the director of the department of community standards, or his designated representative, for a review of the same. Upon receipt by the director or his designated representative, the director or designated representative shall cause an investigation to ensure that the applicant meets all requirements set forth in subsection (b) of this section. After such investigation, the director of community standards, or his designated representative, shall certify to the clerk that the application is complete and that the information contained therein and other information known to the department of community standards does not reasonably lead to the conclusion that the applicant, or the activity to be licensed, constitutes an apparent danger to the health, safety and welfare to the people of the township. 
(b)	The clerk may refuse to issue a license to: 
(1)	A person whose license under this article has been revoked within the last year. 
(2)	A person unless the application is fully and completely filed, and the applicant discloses fully all arrests and convictions other than those that are traffic related. Failure to completely and truthfully complete the application shall result in a denial. 
(3)	A person who materially misrepresents any facts or statements on his license application. 
(4)	A person who has been convicted of a felony or any crime related to or involving larceny, assault, fraud, receiving and concealing stolen property, embezzlement, robbery, home invasion, breaking and entering, theft, dishonesty, false statement or fraudulent scheme, trick or device, or any crime that is an unreasonable threat to persons or property within the township. 
(5)	A person who has been convicted of a violation of any municipal soliciting ordinance within the two years prior to the application being submitted to the township. 
(6)	A person whose master driving record indicates that his use of a motor vehicle in association with a requested license may present an unreasonable threat to persons or property within the township by such use of a motor vehicle. 
(7)	If the applicant or activity licensed constitutes an apparent danger to the health, safety and welfare to the people of the township. 
(c)	No license shall be issued to any applicant as a solicitor, canvasser, or peddler until such applicant shall have obtained the age of 18 years. 
(d)	Any person whose license application has been denied shall have the right to petition the board of trustees of the township for an appeal. A written request for an appeal must be filed with the clerk's office within 14 days after notice of the denial has been mailed to the applicant's last known address. A written statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal must be included with the written request for an appeal. The township board shall grant a public hearing on this appeal, and the applicant shall have the right to appear and present evidence on his behalf. Following such hearing, the board shall submit to the applicant a written statement of its findings and determinations. The board's determination shall be based upon whether the clerk's refusal to issue a license pursuant to subsection (b) was supported by competent, material and substantial evidence. 
( Ord. No. 2015-447 , § 13, 6-16-15)
 
Sec. 22-159. Exemptions; registration of charitable and nonprofit organizations.
(a)	Persons involved in soliciting, canvassing or peddling for any noncommercial purpose, and/or delivery of handbills are hereby exempt from the licensing, registration and fee requirements of this article, but shall be subject to the other sections of this article. 
(b)	Any person who has obtained a peddler's license from the state pursuant to Public Act No. 359 of 1921 (MCL 35.441 et seq.), on account of such person being honorable discharged from the armed forces of the United States of America shall be exempt from the licensing provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2015-447 , § 14, 6-16-15)
 
Sec. 22-160. Fees.
(a)	A license fee for soliciting, canvassing and peddling for commercial purposes shall be established by resolution of the township board. The township board may, from time to time, modify the established fee schedule. This fee is separate from the application fee described in section 22-157. 
(b)	No license fee shall be charged to any person selling produce which he has raised himself, who has attained the age of 65 years, or who shows evidence of being an honorably discharged military veteran. 
( Ord. No. 2015-447 , § 15, 6-16-15)
 
Sec. 22-161. Term and limitation.
Each license and registration issued pursuant to this article shall expire on midnight on December 31 of each year, unless previously terminated pursuant to this article. 
( Ord. No. 2015-447 , § 16, 6-16-15)
 
Sec. 22-162. Transfer or misuse of license, badge or identification.
No license, badge or identification issued under the provisions of this article shall be used or worn at any time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued and only when engaged in the activities for which the license or I.D. card was issued. 
( Ord. No. 2015-447 , § 17, 6-16-15)
 
Sec. 22-163. Display.
(a)	Unless exempt, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate as a peddler, canvasser, or solicitor without displaying on the outer clothing the license issued by the township provided for in this article. Unless exempt, each vehicle, conveyance and container must have a license attached to it so it can be seen from the outside of such vehicle, conveyance or container. 
(b)	Peddlers, solicitors and canvassers are required to exhibit their license at the request of any citizen or public official. 
( Ord. No. 2015-447 , § 18, 6-16-15)
 
Sec. 22-164. License suspension or revocation.
(a)	The township clerk may suspend a license for a period not to exceed 90 days upon determining, based on his or her own investigation or upon certification by the local law enforcement agency that any of the following circumstances exists: 
(1)	The licensee failed to truthfully provide in his or her application the information required in this article, or that the licensee has engaged in a fraudulent transaction or enterprise; 
(2)	The licensee has been convicted of a violation of federal, state or local laws, ordinances, or regulations reflecting adversely on the licensee's ability to conduct the business for which the license has been issued in an honest and legal manner, including, but not limited to, burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person, or any type of criminal sexual conduct; 
(3)	The licensee is listed on any criminal sex offender registry or has any outstanding warrants for any misdemeanor or felony and such information was not disclosed on the application; 
(4)	If the licensee will be engaging in peddling from or out of a motor vehicle in the streets and roads of the township, the licensee's driver's license has been suspended or revoked or the licensee has been convicted of a felony moving violation; or 
(5)	The licensee has, in the course of peddling in the township, engaged in conduct that is contrary to the peace, privacy, safety, health and welfare of the residents, businesses and persons in the township. 
(b)	A licensee shall be given written notice of the cause and term of the suspension and of the right to have such suspension reversed, modified or affirmed following a hearing to be conducted by the township board at the next available board meeting, but in all cases not later than 21 days following receipt of a written request by the licensee. At the hearing, the licensee shall have the right to hear the evidence relied upon by the clerk and the right to present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf. At the hearing, or at an adjourned date, the township board shall determine whether to reverse, modify or affirm the suspension and shall put its decision and the reasons therefore in the form of a resolution, which the township clerk shall forward to the licensee. 
(c)	Before a license or registration can be revoked, the township board shall serve the license holder or registered applicant, by first class mail, mailed not less than four days prior to the hearing with a notice of hearing, which notice shall contain the following: 
(1)	Notice of proposed action. 
(2)	Reason for the proposed action. 
(3)	Date, time and place of hearing. 
(4)	A statement that licensee may present evidence and testimony and confront adverse witnesses. 
Following the hearing, the township board shall submit to such person a written statement of its findings and determination. 
(d)	The township board shall revoke a license issued under this article upon determination by it that based upon competent, material and substantial evidence presented at the hearing, either of the following exists: 
(1)	A violation of any of the prohibitions set forth in this article. 
(2)	The person, entity or organization is engaged or has engaged in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick in any place in the township to obtain money or other valuable things, or is aiding or abetting any person engaged in such scheme, device or trick. 
( Ord. No. 2015-447 , § 19, 6-16-15)
 
Secs. 22-165—22-200. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. JUNKYARDS AND AUTOMOBILE DISMANTLING
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 22-201. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Junkyard means any premises upon which two or more motor vehicles, which cannot be operated under their own power, are kept or stored for a period of 15 days or more. 
(Code 1975, § 11-2)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 22-202. Reserved.
 
Sec. 22-203. Location of different vehicles during separate time periods.
A property owner may locate different inoperable vehicles on his property on the basis of no more than one inoperable vehicle being permitted on a parcel at any one time during the 90-day period specified in section 22-217; provided, however, that all of the vehicles are registered with the township ordinance department, as provided in section 22-217. Nothing contained in this section shall in any way permit any property owner to locate different inoperable motor vehicles on his property for any period of time in excess of 90 days. 
(Code 1975, § 11-4)
 
Sec. 22-204. Vehicular burning.
The intentional burning of automobiles so as to remove the nonferrous portions thereof is expressly prohibited. 
(Code 1975, § 11-10)
 
Sec. 22-205. Fence requirements.
Fences, as specified in this article, shall be painted, and the only advertising on the fence shall be the name of the operator and the type of business conducted within the fence on the property and in accordance with all other applicable ordinances. 
(Code 1975, § 11-12)
 
Secs. 22-206—22-215. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. LICENSES
 
Sec. 22-216. Required.
No person shall store, dismantle or in any way process vehicles which cannot be operated under their own power, without having first obtained an appropriate license therefor from the township board, as required in this article. 
(Code 1975, § 11-1)
 
Sec. 22-217. Temporary storing of inoperable vehicle without license; notification of ordinance department; expiration.
Any person may keep one unlicensed motor vehicle that cannot be operated under its own power on property he owns or controls for a period of time not to exceed 90 days from the date of its initial location thereon; provided, however, that the owner of the unlicensed motor vehicle shall notify the township ordinance department, on forms to be provided by the department, on the date that the vehicle shall be placed on any lands within the township. Subsequent to the expiration of this 90-day period, any vehicle that has not either been made operable or been covered by a license issued under the provisions of this article shall be deemed a nuisance per se and shall be subject to all appropriate legal actions as provided under the provisions of this article and/or the laws of the state. 
(Code 1975, § 11-3)
 
Sec. 22-218. Submitting and handling of application.
In requesting a junkyard or dismantling license, an application shall be submitted in duplicate to the township board on forms available from the community development department. Upon receipt of such application and the fee which must accompany it, the community development department shall transmit one copy of the application to the planning commission so as to determine the acceptability of the zoning of that property for the intended use prior to township board action on the issuance of a license for that use. 
(Code 1975, § 11-5)
 
Sec. 22-219. Transfer; bond.
When a license is transferred from one property to another by action of the township board, the operation on the property from which the license is transferred is no longer permitted. As a condition in granting the transference of the license from one location to another, it shall be within the power of the township board to have the applicant post a bond in a reasonable amount determined to be necessary by the township board to guarantee the restoration of the former property to a neat and orderly condition. 
(Code 1975, § 11-6)
 
Sec. 22-220. Alteration of operating procedure resulting in violation.
Any licensee operating in conformance with all of the requirements of this article may not change his manner of operation so that a portion of this article not previously violated is, in fact, violated. 
(Code 1975, § 11-7)
 
Sec. 22-221. Records required to be kept; contents.
All licensees coming within the scope of this article shall keep a separate set of books as a result of their operation. Information recorded in such books shall be in the English language and shall set forth the vehicle identification number for each vehicle that is purchased or otherwise obtained, including also, the make, model, year, body style and serial number of the motor thereof, and the names and addresses of the persons from whom such vehicle is purchased. 
(Code 1975, § 11-8)
 
Sec. 22-222. Authority of township ordinance department to inspect records, books and manner of operation.
As a condition to the granting of any license under this article, the licensee hereby grants to any member of the township ordinance department the right to inspect their books, records and manner of operation of their junkyard and/or dismantling yard to see that it is being operated in accordance with the terms and conditions of this article, and all applicable statutes. 
(Code 1975, § 11-9)
 
Sec. 22-223. Fee; term; expiration.
The fee accompanying the request for a license under the provisions of this article or the renewal of a previously approved license shall be established by resolution of the township board. A license issued by the township board shall be for a period of one year, expiring at midnight on June 30 of the year of issuance. 
(Code 1975, § 11-11)
 
Sec. 22-224. Storage of two or more junked vehicles; required zoning compliance; fences; time limit for vehicle location.
(a)	A license shall be required for all establishments or premises where two or more wrecked, disabled and/or abandoned vehicles are impounded, kept, and/or stored, for any reason whatsoever; provided, however, that premises upon which the principal business conducted thereon is either a gasoline service station, bump shop and/or repair shop may be permitted to store any number of motor vehicles that are awaiting repair upon not more than 30 percent of the land area comprising the premises upon which such businesses are conducted. 
(b)	Prior to issuing a junk car storage license, the township board shall determine that the property is properly zoned for the intended use or that the use is accessory, as defined by the current zoning ordinance in effect in the township upon the date of application, to the authorized principal use. 
(c)	It shall be the applicant's responsibility to screen the storage area from the view of adjacent property owners or across a street or alley, either public or private, by erecting a six-foot high obscuring fence or wall which shall be maintained in good condition by the operator of the storage facility, in accordance with all other applicable ordinances. 
(d)	The operator of a licensed storage yard shall have a period of 120 days after he first locates any wrecked, disabled or abandoned vehicle on his property to rid the property of that vehicle in accordance with the provisions of section 252(b) of Act No. 99 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1964 (MCL 257.252b, MSA 9.1952(2)). 
(Code 1975, § 11-13)
 
Sec. 22-225. Storage and dismantling yards; zoning compliance; fences; hours of operation.
(a)	Storage and dismantling yards shall require a license for all operations wherein two or more wrecked, disabled and/or abandoned vehicles are kept either temporarily or permanently and parts that are taken from the vehicles so stored are sold on either a retail or wholesale basis. 
(b)	Prior to issuing a junk car storage and dismantling license, the township board shall determine that the property is properly zoned for the intended use or that the use is accessory, as defined by the current zoning ordinance in effect in the township, upon the date of application, to the authorized principal use. 
(c)	The applicant shall completely enclose the storage and dismantling yard by erecting an eight-foot high solid obscuring fence or wall around the facility, which shall be maintained in good condition by the operator thereof. Wrecked, disabled and/or abandoned vehicles shall not be piled higher than the height of the required fence or wall. In no case shall wrecked, abandoned or disabled vehicles be visible to persons driving on adjacent public roads. 
(d)	Storage and dismantling yards shall not be located within 250 feet of any other property, unless such property is zoned for industrial purposes. 
(e)	All storage and dismantling yards may conduct business between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. No business shall be conducted on Sundays or holidays. 
(Code 1975, § 11-14)
 
Sec. 22-226. Processing yards; zoning requirements; fences; hours of operation.
(a)	A license shall be required for any operation involved in crushing, shredding or in any way reducing or refining the ferrous metal found in wrecked, disabled and/or abandoned vehicles. 
(b)	Prior to issuing a junk car processing license, the township board shall determine that the property is properly zoned for the intended use. 
(c)	The applicant shall completely enclose the processing yard by erecting a solid eight-foot high obscuring fence or wall around the facilities which shall be maintained in good condition by the operator thereof. Wrecked, disabled and/or abandoned vehicles to be processed shall not be piled higher than the required fence or wall. In no case shall wrecked, disabled or abandoned vehicles be visible to persons driving on adjacent public roads. 
(d)	Processing yards shall not be located within 500 feet of any other property, unless such property is zoned for general industrial purposes. 
(e)	All processing yards may conduct business between the hours of 7:00 a.m. through 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. No business shall be conducted on Sundays and holidays. 
(Code 1975, § 11-15)
 
Sec. 22-227. Enforcement; penalty for violation of article.
(a)	The failure of any person to comply with the requirements of this article shall be grounds for the township board to immediately suspend the license. 
(b)	The township community development department is hereby designated as the enforcing agency for this article. 
(c)	Any person which shall violate this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding the sum of $500.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. 
(Code 1975, § 11-16)
 
Secs. 22-228—22-245. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VI. AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Secs. 22-246—22-260. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. BILLIARD AND POOL ROOMS
 
Sec. 22-261. Operating hours.
(a)	The hours during which duly licensed billiard and pool rooms within the township may be open and operate shall be from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight on each and every day of the week, except that billiard and pool rooms may be open and operate for an additional hour, until 1:00 a.m. the following morning, on all Fridays and Saturdays and on the day preceding any day designated as a legal holiday under the laws of the state. No such billiard or pool room shall be open or operated at any time other than within the hours set out in this section, and all persons, other than the proprietor or his employees, shall be excluded from every such billiard or pool room during hours other than those set out in this section. 
(b)	Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and the owner and the agent in charge of operating any such billiard or pool room shall both be deemed to be in violation of this section if their pool or billiard room is open or operated in violation of this section. 
(Code 1975, § 3-1)
 
Secs. 22-262—22-285. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VII. SMOKING LOUNGES 
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 22-286. Purpose.
Since the state enacted Public Act 188 of 2009 to prohibit smoking in public places smoking lounges have become increasingly popular. Cigar bars and tobacco specialty retail stores that qualify and were in existence on May 1, 2010, are exempt from the smoking in public prohibition. 
The potential adverse impacts associated with smoking lounges have been identified as large numbers of patrons during the evening and night time, crowds overflowing into parking areas and impeding on nearby businesses, leaving behind trash, broken alcohol bottles and debris, incidents requiring police response, fights, alcohol possession on unlicensed premises, traffic, noise, and complaints from neighboring businesses and residents. The purpose of this article is to regulate smoking lounges for the public health, safety, and welfare of the township and persons within its jurisdictional boundaries; to prevent access to tobacco and non-tobacco smoking products by minors at these establishments, and to prevent the spread of smoke fumes to adjacent properties, and persons passing by these establishments. 
This article is designed to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent potential adverse impacts relating to these establishments. The regulations adopted are designed to provide objective and orderly procedures for the administration of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2016-456 , § 1, 3-15-16)
 
Sec. 22-287. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the words, terms, and phrases shall be defined as follows: 
Cigar shall mean any roll of tobacco weighing three or more pounds per 1,000, which roll has a wrapper or cover consisting of tobacco. 
Cigar bar shall mean an establishment or area within an establishment that is open to the public and is designated for the smoking of cigars that has a state issued exemption certificate. 
Disqualifying criminal act shall mean any of the following: 
(1)	Any of the following misdemeanor or felony offenses under any of the following statutes, as amended, for which less than seven years elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date: 
a.	Michigan Penal Code, Chapter X, Arson and Burning; 
b.	Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XI, Assaults, except MCL 750.81(1) and (2); 
c.	Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XVII, Bribery and Corruption; 
d.	Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XXII, Compounding Offenses; 
e.	Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XXVA, Criminal Enterprises; 
f.	Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XXVIII, Disorderly Persons; 
g.	Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XXXI, Embezzlement; 
h.	Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XXXIII, Explosives, Bombs, Harmful Devices; 
i.	Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XXXIV, Extortion; 
j.	Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XLIII, Frauds and Cheats; 
k.	Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XLIV, Gambling; 
l.	Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XLV, Homicide; 
m.	Michigan Penal Code, Chapter XLVIII, Indecency and Immorality; 
n.	Michigan Penal Code, Chapter LVIII, Mayhem; 
o.	Michigan Penal Code, Chapter LXVII, Prostitution; 
p.	Michigan Penal Code, Chapter LXVIIA, Human Trafficking; 
q.	Michigan Penal Code, Chapter LXXVI, Sexual Conduct; 
r.	Michigan Penal Code, Chapter LXXVIII, Robbery; 
s.	Michigan Penal Code, Chapter LXXXIII-A, Michigan Anti-Terrorism Act; 
t.	Controlled Substances—Offense and Penalties, Section 333.7101 et seq. of the Michigan Compiled Laws; 
u.	Taxation-Prohibited Acts, including tax evasion, Section 205.27 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
(2)	Any attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit one of the foregoing offenses; or 
(3)	Any offense enumerated in the Code of Ordinances which substantially corresponds to one of the foregoing state offenses; or 
(4)	Any offense in another jurisdiction that, had the predicate act(s) been committed in the state, would have constituted any of the foregoing offenses. 
Influential interest shall mean any of the following: 
(1)	Actual power to operate or control the operation, management, or policies of a current or prospective business; including the manager of the prospective business; or 
(2)	Ownership of a financial interest in the business, or ownership of an interest that is ten percent or more of the total interest of a current or prospective business, including such business entities as a firm, partnership, limited partnership, association, limited liability company, or corporation; or 
(3)	Holding an office, such as, e.g., president, vice president, secretary, treasurer, managing member, managing director, etc., in a legal entity which operates a current or prospective business. 
Minor shall mean any person under 18 years of age. 
Non-tobacco smoking products or substances shall include any product or substance that can be consumed by smoking such as, but not limited to: e-cigarettes, bidis, kreteks, clover cigarettes, herbal cigarettes, electronic and herbal hookah, steam stones, smoking gels or other smoked product. 
Premises shall mean the location for which a smoking lounge establishment operates under a state issued exemption certificate and includes the land, and all improvements located thereon, including the primary building and all accessory and out-buildings, not limited to the smoking area, and the designated parking area for the business. 
Sale shall mean, the exchange, barter, traffic, furnishing, or giving away of tobacco products and non-tobacco smoking products and substances which is regulated by the state and pursuant to this article. 
Smoking lounge shall mean an establishment that allows smoking of tobacco products or non-tobacco products or substances on the premises. The term "smoking lounge" includes, but is not limited to, facilities commonly described as cigar bars and lounges; hookah bars, cafes and lounges; tobacco bars and lounges; tobacco clubs or zero percent nicotine establishments. 
State shall mean the State of Michigan. 
State issued exemption certificate shall mean a valid exemption certificate issued by the state for the premises, from the Public Act 188 of 2009 smoking in public ban which allows indoor smoking on the premises in compliance with the Act. 
Tobacco product shall mean a product that contains tobacco and is intended for human consumption, including, but not limited to, cigars, cigarettes, non-cigarette smoking tobacco or smokeless tobacco as defined by the Tobacco Products Tax Act, Section 205.422 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
Tobacco specialty retail store shall mean an establishment that has a state issued exemption certificate and for which the primary purpose is the retail sale of tobacco products, non-tobacco smoking products and substances, and smoking paraphernalia. 
( Ord. No. 2016-456 , § 2, 3-15-16)
 
Secs. 22-288—22-300. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. LICENSE
 
Sec. 22-301. Business license required.
A person shall not operate a smoking lounge in the township without first obtaining a smoking lounge business license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2016-456 , § 3, 3-15-16)
 
Sec. 22-302. Application.
(a)	Information required. An applicant for a smoking lounge license shall annually file in person at the office of the township clerk, a completed application made on a form provided by the clerk. The application shall be signed as required herein and shall be notarized. An application shall be considered complete when it contains, for each person required to sign the application, the information and/or items required in paragraphs (1) through (9) below, accompanied by the required fee. 
(1)	The applicant's full legal name and any other names used by the applicant in the preceding seven years. If the applicant is a partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or other legal entity, then all persons with an influential interest in the entity shall be deemed an applicant and shall provide the information required by this article. Each applicant must be qualified under section 22-303, and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(2)	Current business address or another mailing address of the applicant. 
(3)	Written proof of identity, in the form of a driver's license or a copy of a birth certificate accompanied by a picture identification document issued by a governmental agency. 
(4)	The proposed business name, location, parcel identification number, mailing address and phone number. 
(5)	A copy of the state issued exemption certificate for the premises; or if a transfer has been applied for, a copy of the application filed with the state. 
(6)	The name and business address of the designated local agent who is responsible to supervise the premises and activities and who is authorized to receive service of process. 
(7)	A statement of whether any applicant has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a disqualifying criminal act as defined in this article, and if so, specify each criminal act involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each, as well as, the dates of conviction and release from confinement, where applicable. This statement shall be accompanied by an authorization to conduct a criminal background check. 
(8)	A statement as to whether any applicant has ever had a license revoked under the penalty provisions of the Michigan Liquor Control Code, PA 58 of 1998, as amended. 
(9)	A statement as to whether any business in which an applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous seven years, and at the time during which the applicant had the influential interest: 
a.	Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance, as defined under the Revised Judicature Act, Section 600.3801 of the Michigan Compiled Laws; or 
b.	Been subject to a court order of closure or padlocking. 
(10)	A statement of nature of proposed operation. 
The information provided pursuant to paragraphs (1) through (10) of this subsection shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the township clerk within ten working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
(b)	Signature required. If a person who wishes to operate the business is an individual, the person shall sign the application. If a person who wishes to operate a business is other than an individual, each person with an influential interest in the business shall sign the application for a license as applicant. 
(c)	Disclosure. The information provided by an applicant in connection with an application for a license under this article shall be maintained by the township clerk's office and all personal information shall be deemed confidential and may be disclosed only as required by law or by court order. 
( Ord. No. 2016-456 , § 4, 3-15-16)
 
Sec. 22-303. Issuance of license.
(a)	Pre-existing businesses. All smoking lounges operating pursuant to a valid certificate of occupancy on the effective date of this article are hereby granted a de facto temporary license to continue operating for a period of 45 days following the effective date. During this period all smoking lounge businesses shall apply for a license pursuant to this article; and by the expiration date of 45 days shall conform to all requirements for issuance of a license. 
(b)	Application review. Upon the filing of a completed application for a smoking lounge business license, the township clerk shall forward a copy to the following departments: office of community standards, the planning department and the Washtenaw County Sheriff's Department, and any other necessary department(s), to review the application for compliance with the requirements of all applicable ordinances and codes. 
(c)	[Issuance by township clerk.] The township clerk shall either issue a license to the applicant or issue to the applicant a written notice denying the application. The township clerk shall issue a license unless: 
(1)	Information. An applicant has failed to provide information as required by section 22-302 for issuance of a license, or has falsely answered a question or a request for information on the application form; 
(2)	Fee. The license application fee required by this article has not been paid; 
(3)	State exemption certificate. The applicant does not have a valid state issued exemption certificate, the state has denied the application for a transfer, or the exemption has been revoked; 
(4)	Code compliance. The subject premises lacks a current certificate of occupancy or does not comply with applicable building, zoning, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, health, property maintenance or fire prevention codes. Upon filing an application for a building permit, plan review, or certificate of occupancy, the applicant shall also file a copy with the township clerk; 
(5)	Ventilation and parking. The department of community standards indicates that the premises lack the ventilation and/or parking required for the proposed use; 
(6)	Unpaid fees. Any of the reviewing departments or divisions has indicated that there are unpaid fees or uncured violations under its purview related to the subject premises; 
(7)	Ownership/lease. The business does not own the premises for which a license is sought or does not have a current lease for the proposed licensed premises; 
(8)	Previous revocation/non-renewal. An applicant has had a smoking exemption revoked, or not renewed for cause, in the last two years under this article or a comparable municipal ordinance or state law, whether in the state or otherwise; 
(9)	Prior nuisance. Any business in which the applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous seven years, and at the time during which the applicant had the influential interest: 
a.	Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance, as defined under the Revised Judicature Act, Section 600.3801 of the Michigan Compiled Laws; or 
b.	Been subject to an order of closure or padlocking. 
(10)	Disqualifying criminal act. An applicant has been convicted of, or pled guilty, or nolo contendere or no contest, to a disqualifying criminal act as defined in this article, or has had a license suspended under the Michigan Liquor Control Code; 
(11)	Additional licensing. The business is not licensed to do business in the state or has not obtained a sales tax license. 
(d)	Reservation of authority. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, no applicant has a right to the issuance of a license; and the township hereby reserves the right to determine who, if anyone, shall be entitled to the issuance of such a license, based on the objective criteria listed in this article which relate to concerns for public health, safety, and welfare as identified herein. 
(e)	License contents; posting; possession. The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to the licensee(s), the expiration date, and, the address of the business. The business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the business so that it may be read at any time. 
(f)	Other laws applicable. Nothing in this article shall be construed to exempt the licensee from any other requirements set forth by township ordinance, state or federal law. 
( Ord. No. 2016-456 , § 5, 3-15-16)
 
Sec. 22-304. Fees.
The fees for a license under this article shall be established by resolution adopted by the township board and shall be placed on file, and made available, at the office of the township clerk. 
( Ord. No. 2016-456 , § 6, 3-15-16)
 
Sec. 22-305. Inspection.
Filing an application for a smoking lounge shall constitute consent to inspection by township officials as provided herein, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the specific regulations of this article. During business hours of operation, the applicant shall allow authorized township representatives and the Washtenaw County Sheriff's Office onto the property and into the proposed licensed premises to ensure compliance with this article. This section shall be narrowly construed by the township to authorize reasonable inspections of the licensed premises pursuant to this article. 
( Ord. No. 2016-456 , § 7, 3-15-16)
 
Sec. 22-306. Transfer of license.
(a)	A licensee shall not transfer the license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a smoking lounge under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the smoking lounge license application. Any transfer shall be grounds for suspension and revocation. A proposed transfer shall require a new application be filed and shall be subject to the same procedures, standards and fees required for a new license. Each location operated by a licensee requires a separate license. 
(b)	Approval of the transfer of a state issued exemption certificate by the state shall not abrogate the requirement to apply for and obtain a smoking lounge license as required by this article. There shall be no transfer into the Charter Township of Ypsilanti of a State of Michigan Exemption Permit under the Dr. Ron L. Davis Act of 2009; Section 333.12601 et seq. of the Michigan Compiled Laws, as amended. 
( Ord. No. 2016-456 , § 8, 3-15-16)
 
Sec. 22-307. Annual license, expiration.
The license issued under this article shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issue, unless otherwise suspended or revoked. A renewal license shall be obtained within 30 days following expiration of the current license, and may be renewed only by making application and payment of the fee as required by this article. 
( Ord. No. 2016-456 , § 9, 3-15-16)
 
Secs. 22-308—22-320. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. DENIAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, HEARING
 
Sec. 22-321. Denial.
In the event the township clerk issues a written notice to deny for failure to comply with the requirements of section 22-303, the provisions of section 22-324 providing for an appeal hearing shall apply. 
( Ord. No. 2016-456 , § 10, 3-15-16)
 
Sec. 22-322. Suspension.
The township clerk shall suspend the license for a period of 30 days if the licensee has knowingly violated this article or has knowingly allowed an employee to violate this article. Upon receiving notice of a violation, the clerk shall issue a written notice to suspend, which shall include the grounds for the suspension, the effective date of the suspension, and that the licensee may within 20 days, request in writing, an appeal hearing before the township board pursuant to the provisions of section 22-323. The suspension shall take effect 21 days after the date of the notice of suspension. 
( Ord. No. 2016-456 , § 11, 3-15-16)
 
Sec. 22-323. Revocation; non-renewal.
(a)	Violation after previous suspension. The township clerk shall issue a written notice of revocation if the licensee knowingly violates this article or has knowingly allowed an employee to violate this article and the licensee's license has been suspended within the previous 24-month period. 
(b)	Grounds for revocation/non-renewal. The township clerk shall issue written notice to revoke or non-renewal of the license if: 
(1)	The licensee would not meet the standards set forth in section 22-303 if the licensee were an applicant for a new license. 
(2)	The licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed two or more violations of the regulations of this article in the preceding 24-month period. 
(3)	The licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed a nuisance, as defined under the Revised Judicature Act, Section 600.3801 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, to be maintained upon the premises. 
(4)	The subject premises have existing violations of building, zoning, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, health or fire prevention codes. 
(5)	The operation of the licensed establishment has resulted in a pattern of patron conduct in the neighborhood of the establishment that continually and substantially disturbs the peace, order, and tranquility of the neighborhood. 
(6)	The licensee has failed to maintain the grounds and exterior of the licensee's establishment and parking area by allowing litter, debris, and/or refuse to unreasonably remain on the property or adjoining properties. 
(7)	The licensee knowingly or recklessly operated the business during a period of time when the license was suspended. 
(8)	The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in illegal activity or allowed any illegal activity to occur in or on the licensed premises, or has been found liable for a violation of the state liquor control code. 
(c)	Effect of appeal of conviction. The fact that any relevant conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation/non-renewal of the license, provided that, if any conviction which serves as a basis of a license revocation/non-renewal is overturned or reversed on appeal, that conviction shall be treated as null and of no effect and the license shall be reinstated. 
(d)	Effective date. The revocation/non-renewal shall not take effect for 21 days from the date of the notice of revocation/non-renewal. 
(e)	Appeal. The written notice to revoke/non-renewal, shall include the grounds for the revocation/non-renewal, the effective date of the revocation/non-renewal, and that the licensee may request in writing, within 20 days of the date of the notice of suspension, or revocation/non-renewal, an appeal hearing before the township board pursuant to the provisions of section 22-323. If not appealed, the suspension shall take effect 21 days after the date of the notice of suspension. 
( Ord. No. 2016-456 , § 12, 3-15-16)
 
Sec. 22-324. Appeal hearing.
(a)	Notice of hearing. Upon receipt of a request for appeal, the township board shall provide the licensee with notice and an opportunity to be heard. The township board shall serve notice upon the licensee by certified mail, not less than 20 days prior to the hearing date. The notice shall state: 
(1)	The date, time and place of the hearing. 
(2)	A statement that the licensee may present evidence and testimony, and may be represented by an attorney. 
(b)	Hearing and decision. The hearing shall be conducted by the township board and shall be open to the public. The township board shall submit to the licensee a written statement of its findings, decision, specific grounds for its decision, and a statement that the decision may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
( Ord. No. 2016-456 , § 13, 3-15-16)
 
Secs. 22-325—22-340. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 4. REGULATIONS
 
Sec. 22-341. Zoning requirements.
A smoking lounge may only be located in permitted zoning districts as identified in appendix A to this Code of Ordinances, the zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 2016-456 , § 14, 3-15-16)
 
Sec. 22-342. Limitation.
There shall be no more than five smoking lounge businesses granted licenses and operating in Ypsilanti Township at any given time. 
( Ord. No. 2016-456 , § 15, 3-15-16)
 
Sec. 22-343. Hours of operation.
Businesses operating a licensed smoking lounge shall be closed between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day. No one shall be allowed on the premises except employees after 2:00 a.m. Only a minimum of three employees shall remain on the premises after 2:00 a.m. and shall carry proof of employment, such as an identification badge. 
The manager and/or employees shall provide proof of employment when requested to do so by a member of the police department. Only employees and/or contractors shall remain on the premises after closing and shall carry proof of employment. 
( Ord. No. 2016-456 , § 16, 3-15-16)
 
Sec. 22-344. Local agent on premises.
The licensee, or the local agent designated in the application, shall remain on the premises while open for business to supervise the activities and shall be responsible to ensure compliance with the regulations of this article. In the event a licensee changes the local agent, the licensee shall immediately notify the clerk in writing of the name and business address of the new local agent. All managers or local agents shall be over the age of 21 years old. 
( Ord. No. 2016-456 , § 17, 3-15-16)
 
Sec. 22-345. Mechanical ventilation required.
Mechanical ventilation shall be supplied in compliance with the Michigan Mechanical Code to ensure sufficient ventilation of the smoking lounge. The recirculation and the natural ventilation of air from the smoking lounge is prohibited; and the air supplied to the smoking lounge shall be exhausted and discharged to an approved location in compliance with the Michigan Mechanical Code. 
( Ord. No. 2016-456 , § 18, 3-15-16)
 
Sec. 22-346. Off-street parking required.
Off-street parking shall be provided for the smoking lounge business. The minimum amount of parking shall be calculated by utilizing the parking requirements listed for bars and lounges contained in the zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 2016-456 , § 19, 3-15-16)
 
Sec. 22-347. Storage lockers prohibited.
Storage lockers shall be prohibited on the premises of a smoking lounge, except that on-site humidors may be permitted in the smoking area of a cigar bar. 
( Ord. No. 2016-456 , § 20, 3-15-16)
 
Sec. 22-348. Outdoor activities prohibited.
There shall not be any outdoor activities, outdoor public admission events, or outdoor seating. The business activities shall be conducted wholly indoors. In no event shall designated on-site parking areas be used for any other purpose than parking of passenger vehicles. To ensure that the smoke is contained within the smoking area, all windows and doors shall remain closed to ensure that the smoke does not infiltrate nonsmoking areas and is not emitted to passersby. 
( Ord. No. 2016-456 , § 21, 3-15-16)
 
Sec. 22-349. Loitering, exterior lighting and monitoring requirements.
It shall be the duty of the licensee or the designated local agent to: 
(1)	Signs. Post conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on the outdoor premises; no minors are permitted on the premises; and patrons must leave the parking area immediately upon close of the business; 
(2)	Monitor. Designate one or more employees to monitor, while the premises are open for business, the activities of persons on the premises by visually inspecting the interior and exterior of the premises at least once every 90 minutes or inspecting the premises by use of video cameras and monitoring; 
(3)	Exterior. Ensure lighting of the exterior premises is provided, including all parking areas, for visual inspection and security. All exterior lighting shall comply with all provisions of the zoning ordinance; 
(4)	Parking area. The licensee shall ensure that patrons are not parking in adjacent or neighboring parking lots or in residential areas that are not part of the parking area approved on the site plan for the licensed premises. 
( Ord. No. 2016-456 , § 22, 3-15-16)
 
Sec. 22-350. Disturbing the peace.
The licensee or local agent shall be responsible to maintain the premises to ensure there is not a violation of disturbing the peace. Section 750.170 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. If the licensee or designated local agent is convicted of disturbing the peace, the conviction shall be grounds for revocation, denial or suspension of a license. 
( Ord. No. 2016-456 , § 23, 3-15-16)
 
Sec. 22-351. Prohibited activities.
It is unlawful for a licensee or local agent to knowingly violate the following regulations or to knowingly allow an employee, patron or any other person to violate the following regulations. The licensee or local agent shall remove anyone violating the following regulations: 
(1)	Minors prohibited. No one shall be allowed on the premises of a smoking lounge business unless the individual is 18 years of age or older. The licensee and local agent shall ensure that identifications of individuals on the premises have been checked to determine that every individual is 18 years of age or older before entry into the premises. The exit doors shall be monitored to ensure that no one is attempting to gain secret entry into the premises. A sign shall be posted near the entrance stating "No one under the age of 18 allowed." 
(2)	Alcoholic liquor. No person shall sell, offer for sale, trade, provide, allow, possess, consume or attempt to consume any alcoholic liquor on the premises unless the licensee has obtained the appropriate license from the Liquor Control Commission pursuant to Section 436.1101 et seq. of the Michigan Compiled Laws, as amended. 
(3)	Nudity prohibited. No one shall be allowed on the premises of a smoking lounge business to appear nude or in a state of nudity. 
(4)	Controlled substances prohibited. It shall be unlawful to sell or permit to sell, offer for sale, trade, provide, allow, possession, consumption or attempt to consume any controlled substance on the premises in violation of Article 7 of the Public Health Code, Section 333.1101 et seq. of the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
( Ord. No. 2016-456 , § 24, 3-15-16)
 
Sec. 22-352. Penalties and enforcement.
A person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a maximum fine of $500.00 and/or a maximum of 90 days imprisonment. Each day a violation is committed, or permitted to continue, it shall constitute a separate offense and shall be treated as a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 2016-456 , § 25, 3-15-16)
 
Secs. 22-353—22-370. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VIII. OUTDOOR COLLECTION BOXES 
 
Sec. 22-371. Intent.
This article is intended to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of all persons who use collection boxes within the Ypsilanti Township. The intent of this collection boxes article is to regulate outdoor collection boxes in the township so that they are clean and safe; establish standards for their size and location so they do not create hazards to pedestrians or vehicular traffic; and to prohibit their location in residential areas. 
( Ord. No. 2016-463 , § 1, 7-19-16)
 
Sec. 22-372. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section. 
Collection box means any metal container, receptacle, or similar device that is located on any parcel or lot of record within the township and that is used for soliciting and collecting the receipt of clothing, household items, or other salvageable personal property. This term does not include recycle bins solely used for the collection of recyclable material, any rubbish or garbage receptacle or any collection box located within an enclosed structure. 
Department means the office of community standards for the Charter Township of Ypsilanti. 
Director means the director of planning for the Charter Township of Ypsilanti. 
Operator means a person who owns, operates or otherwise is in control of collection boxes to solicit collections of salvageable person[al] property. 
Permitee means a person over 18 years of age or an entity who is issued a permit authorizing placement of collection box(es) on real property. 
Real property, property or land means a lot of record located in the Township of Ypsilanti. 
( Ord. No. 2016-463 , § 2, 7-19-16)
 
Sec. 22-373. Collection box permits required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, store, keep or maintain or to permit to be deposited, stored, kept or maintained a collection box on any real property without first obtaining an annual permit issued by the department. A permit is required for each collection box. 
( Ord. No. 2016-463 , § 3, 7-19-16)
 
Sec. 22-374. Application for a permit.
Application for permits required by this article shall be upon forms provided by the department which shall be signed by an individual who is an officer, director, or member of the entity seeking a permit. An application shall contain the following: 
(1)	If the collection box is used to solicit donations on behalf of a for profit organization, the name, address and email of all partners or limited partners of a partnership applicant, all members of an LLC applicant, all officers and directors of a non-publicly traded corporation applicant, all stockholders owning more than five percent of the stock of a non-publicly traded corporate applicant, and any other person who is financially interested directly in the ownership or operation of the business, including all aliases. 
(2)	If the collection box is used to solicit donations on behalf of a non-profit 501(c)(3) organization, the name, address and email of its headquarters; and proof of the 501(c)(3) status of the charitable organization or a valid registration under the Charitable Organization and Solicitation Act. 
(3)	Whether the applicant has previously received a permit for a collection box in the township or currently operates a collection box. 
(4)	The name, address, email address and telephone number of a contact person accepting responsibility for all matters relating to a collection box located in the township. 
(5)	Removal agreement: The applicant shall submit a signed removal agreement and cash security, satisfactory to the township attorney, for the removal of collection boxes, any related site improvements and/or code violations. The applicant shall demonstrate that adequate funds will be available to the township for the removal of the collection boxes, restoration of the site and associated administrative costs incurred by the township in the event that the applicant, property owner or their successors fail to remove the collection boxes in a timely manner as required by this article. 
(6)	The physical address of the real property where the collection box is proposed to be located including parcel ID number. 
(7)	A scaled drawing sufficient to illustrate the proposed location of the collection box on the real property, the dimensions of the proposed collection box and that the location complies with the requirements of section 22-375 of this article. 
(8)	A nonrefundable application fee to be established by resolution of the township board. The township board may, from time to time, modify the established fee schedule. 
( Ord. No. 2016-463 , § 4, 7-19-16)
 
Sec. 22-375. Requirements for a permit.
(a)	Maintenance standards. A permitee shall operate and maintain, or cause to be operated and maintained, all collection boxes located in the township, as follows: 
(1)	Collections boxes shall be metal or other appropriate material as approved by the director, and shall further be maintained in good condition and appearance with no structural damage, holes or visible rust and shall be free of graffiti; 
(2)	Collection boxes shall be locked or otherwise secured in such a manner that the contents cannot be accessed by anyone other than those responsible for the retrieval of the contents; 
(3)	Collection boxes shall have, at a minimum, two-inch type visible from the front of each collection box the name, address, email, website and phone number of the operator, and whether the collection box is owned and operated on behalf of a for profit company or non-profit organization. The collection box shall not have information, advertising or logos other than those relating to the operator, for profit or non-profit organization. 
(4)	Collection boxes shall be serviced and emptied as needed, but at least every seven days. 
(5)	The permitee and property owner shall maintain, or cause to be maintained, the area surrounding the collection boxes, free from any junk, debris or other material. The property owner shall be responsible to the extent provided by law for the township's cost to abate any nuisance, in accordance with section 26-28, "cause of blight or blighted factors enumerated," of the Township Code. 
(b)	Collection boxes prohibited:
(1)	Not be permitted on any land zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(2)	Not be permitted, if the applicant does not own the real property designated for the placement of the collection box, unless a notarized affidavit signed by the property owner granting permission for the placement of the proposed collection box is submitted to the department. For purposes of this subsection, the affidavit and acknowledgement may be executed by an individual who is an officer, director, member or manager of the property owner. 
(3)	Not be permitted on any unimproved parcel, nor where the principal use of the land has been closed or unoccupied for more than 30 days. 
(4)	Not be less than 1,000 feet from another collection box as measured along a straight line from one box to the other. Notwithstanding this separation requirement, up to two collection boxes on a single lot of record are permitted if the two collection boxes are side by side and are no more than one foot apart. 
(5)	Not exceed 7.0 feet in height, 6.0 feet in width and 6.0 feet in depth. 
(6)	Not cause a visual obstruction to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(7)	Maintain all applicable yard setbacks for the district in which the box is located as prescribed within article XX of the township zoning ordinance. 
(8)	Not be placed closer than ten feet from: i) a public or private sidewalk; ii) a public right-of-way; iii) a driveway; or iv) a side or rear property line of adjacent property used for residential purposes. 
(9)	Not cause safety hazards with regard to a designated fire lane or building exit. 
(10)	Not interfere with an access drive, off-street parking lot maneuvering land and/or required off-street parking space to an extent which would cause safety hazards and/or unnecessary inconvenience to vehicular or pedestrian traffic; encroach upon an access drive, fire lane, off-street parking lot maneuvering lane and/or required off-street parking space as illustrated on the approved site plan. 
(11)	Be placed on a level, hard (asphalt or concrete) paved, dust-free surface. 
( Ord. No. 2016-463 , § 5, 7-19-16)
 
Sec. 22-376. Permit issuance or denial; appeal of denial.
(a)	Upon receipt of the application for a license, the department shall forward the same to the director or his designated representative for a review of the same. Upon receipt by the director or his designated representative, the director or designated representative shall cause an investigation to ensure that the applicant meets all requirements set forth in sections 22-374 and 22-375. After such investigation, the director or his designated representative shall notify the department whether the application is complete and whether the applicant meets the requirements of sections 22-374 and 22-375. 
(b)	A permit may be denied for the following reasons: 
(1)	An applicant had a permit revoked under this article within the last year. 
(2)	The applicant does not fulfill the requirements of section 22-374. 
(3)	An applicant that does not fulfill the requirements of section 22-375. 
(4)	An applicant who materially misrepresents any facts or statement on the permit application. 
(5)	No license shall be issued to any applicant until such applicant shall have obtained the age of 18 years. 
(c)	Any person whose permit application has been denied shall have the right to petition the board of trustees of the township for an appeal. A written request for an appeal must be filed with the clerk's office within 14 days after notice of the denial has been mailed to the applicant's last known address. A written statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal must be included with the written request for an appeal. The township board shall grant a public hearing on this appeal, and the applicant shall have the right to appear and present evidence on his behalf. Following such hearing, the board shall submit to the applicant a written statement of its findings and determinations. The board's determination shall be based upon whether the department's refusal to issue a permit pursuant to this section was supported by competent, material and substantial evidence. 
( Ord. No. 2016-463 , § 6, 7-19-16)
 
Sec. 22-377. Term of permit and renewal of permit.
(a)	Each permit issued pursuant to this article shall expire on midnight October 31 of each year, unless previously terminated pursuant to this article. 
(b)	A collection box permit shall be renewed annually. The application for renewal must be filed not later than 45 days before the permit expires. The application for renewal shall be upon a form provided by the director. 
(c)	The director shall either approve or deny the renewal of a permit after receipt of a complete renewal application and payment of the renewal fee. 
(d)	A permit renewal fee set by resolution of the township board shall be submitted with the application for renewal. 
(e)	Prior to expiration of the permit, the permittee may voluntarily cancel the permit by notifying the director in writing of the intent to cancel the permit. The permit shall become void upon the director's receipt of a written notice of intent to cancel the permit. 
(f)	The director shall approve the renewal of a permit if the director finds that at the time of submission of the application for renewal, or at any time during the renewal application process, there were not circumstances inconsistent with any finding required for approval of a new permit. Any permittee whose permit has been revoked shall be denied renewal of the permit for the subsequent year. 
(g)	If the permit expires and is not renewed, the collection box(es) must be removed from the real property within a maximum of ten days after expiration of the permit. 
( Ord. No. 2016-463 , § 7, 7-19-16)
 
Sec. 22-378. Transfer not permitted.
No permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be transferred, assigned or conveyed to another person or legal entity. 
( Ord. No. 2016-463 , § 8, 7-19-16)
 
Sec. 22-379. Revocation of permit, removal of collection boxes and liability.
(a)	The director shall have the right to revoke any permit issued hereunder for a violation of this article. Any of the grounds upon which the director may refuse to issue an initial permit shall also constitute grounds for such revocation. In addition, the failure of the permittee to comply with the provisions of this article or other provisions of this Code or other law shall also constitute grounds for revocation of the permit. The director shall provide written notification to the permittee and property owner via first class mail, email or in person stating the specific grounds for a revocation and a demand for correction and abatement. The notice shall allow a maximum of seven days from mailing of the notice to correct or abate the violation. Upon failure to make the correction or abatement, the permit may be revoked by the director and, thereafter, the permittee shall not be eligible for a permit on the property for the subsequent year. 
(b)	Upon revocation, the collection box shall be removed from the real property within ten days and, if not so removed within the time period, the township may remove, store or dispose of the collection box at the expense of the permittee and/or real property owner. Any such boxes that are not claimed within 30 days shall be destroyed. All costs associated with the removal, storage or disposal of the collection box incurred by the township, or the township's contractor, shall be the responsibility of the property owner. If such obligation is not paid within 30 days after mailing of a billing of costs to the property owner, the township may place a lien upon such real property enforceable as a tax lien in the manner prescribed by the general laws of this state against the property and collected as in the case of general property tax. If the same is not paid prior to the preparation of the next assessment roll of the township, the amount shall be assessed as a special tax against such premises on the next assessment roll and collected thereunder. 
(c)	A permit for a collection box may be revoked if any governmental authority or agency determines that the collection box has violated the Michigan Consumer Protection Act and/or the Charitable Organizations and Solicitations Act. 
( Ord. No. 2016-463 , § 9, 7-19-16)
 
Sec. 22-380. Appeal to township board of trustees.
Any person aggrieved by the decision rendered by the director in revoking a permit issued under this article may appeal the decision to the township board of trustees. This appeal shall be made by filing a written notice thereof with the township clerk's office setting for the grounds for the appeal not later than 14 days after notice of the decision of the director has been mailed to the permit holder at its last known address. The township board may grant relief if the person presents competent, material and substantial evidence that there was an error in the decision of the director. Following the hearing, the township board shall submit a written statement of its findings and determinations. 
( Ord. No. 2016-463 , § 10, 7-19-16)
 
Sec. 22-381. Penalty and remedies.
(a)	In addition to revocation of permit pursuant to section 22-379 of this article, any person in violation of the provisions of this article is guilty of a civil infraction. 
(b)	In addition to the penalty provided in subsection (a) of this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of the provisions of this article, or any ordinance of the township, shall be deemed a new and separate offense for each day that such condition continues to exist. 
(c)	Nothing in this article shall prevent the township from pursuing any other remedy provided by law in conjunction with or in lieu of prosecuting persons under this section for violation of this article. 
(d)	The real property owner and permittee shall be jointly and severally liable for each violation and for payment of any fine and costs of abatement. 
(e)	All collection boxes existing at the effective date of the article shall apply for a permit as required herein within 30 days of the effective date. Any collection boxes not in compliance with this article after 60 days of the effective date shall be subject to all remedies for violation as provided herein. 
( Ord. No. 2016-463 , § 11, 7-19-16)
 
Secs. 22-382—22-400. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IX. REGISTRATION OF COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL BUSINESSES
 
Sec. 22-401. Purpose.
The purpose of this article concerning the registration of commercial and industrial businesses within the township is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of persons in the township by providing the township with the information necessary to ensure compliance with safety, structure and fire laws; identify business activities and establishments which concern zoning, occupancy, density of occupancy; the presence, storage and handling of hazardous materials; the physical condition of places where persons are employed or carry on trade, and the enforcement of the law, including local, state and federal laws, and regulations, applying to business establishments located within Ypsilanti Township. 
( Ord. No. 2018-477 , § 1, 5-15-18)
 
Sec. 22-402. Definitions.
The following terms when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section. 
Business establishment means any lot, building or structure, or a part thereof, including without limitation, leased or occupied space in a mall, store or building, permanently located within Ypsilanti Township, from which: 1) a person(s) engages in or causes to be engaged in any act or acts of buying, selling, leasing, renting, or otherwise disposing of, performing or marketing, any goods, services, merchandise or commodities of any kind or description for commercial profit; 2) a person(s) engages in industrial production of merchandise or commodities of any kind or description for commercial profit. 
( Ord. No. 2018-477 , § 2, 5-15-18)
 
Sec. 22-403. Business registration
certificate required.
No person, firm partnership or corporation shall, directly or indirectly, operate, conduct, maintain or manage any business establishment within Ypsilanti Township without first obtaining a business registration certificate issued pursuant to this article. 
( Ord. No. 2018-477 , § 3, 5-15-18)
 
Sec. 22-404. Business registration
certificate required to be posted.
The business registration certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance [to] the business so that it may be read at any time. 
( Ord. No. 2018-477 , § 4, 5-15-18)
 
Sec. 22-405. State license or permit not a substitute.
The fact that a license or permit has been granted to any person, firm, partnership or corporation by the state to engage in the operation, conduct, maintenance, or management of any business establishment shall not constitute an exemption from the necessity of procuring a business registration certificate as required by this article. 
( Ord. No. 2018-477 , § 5, 5-15-18)
 
Sec. 22-406. Application; form; contents.
Each person, firm, partnership or corporation required to procure a business registration certificate from the township shall make application for such certificate to the office of community standards in the form and manner prescribed by that office and shall state, under oath, such facts as may be prescribed for, or applicable to, the granting of such certificate, including the following: 
(1)	The full name, business address, residence address, email address and telephone number of the owner or their agent. 
(2)	The full name, email address and 24-hour emergency telephone number of the person to contact in the event of an emergency during non-business hours. 
(3)	The address where the business will be located. 
(4)	The nature and character of goods, wares, merchandise to be sold or offered for sale or services to be provided by the applicant. 
(5)	The nature and kind of business establishment which the applicant proposes to conduct. 
(6)	Whether any hazardous materials will be stored, kept or used at the business establishment premises. Hazardous materials are those chemicals or substances defined as such in the International Fire Code adopted by reference in section 30-26 of the township Code of Ordinances. 
(7)	Business hours of operation. 
(8)	Number of employees. 
( Ord. No. 2018-477 , § 6, 5-15-18)
 
Sec. 22-407. Term.
A business registration certificate granted under this article shall be valid until the business establishment is transferred or sold to a new owner or if the business expands it use to include uses not listed in the original application. 
( Ord. No. 2018-477 , § 7, 5-15-18)
 
Sec. 22-408. Separate premises.
If a business registration certificate holder intends to locate a business establishment at a new address in the jurisdiction, a business registration certificate issued for the new address is required before business is conducted at the new address. 
( Ord. No. 2018-477 , § 8, 5-15-18)
 
Sec. 22-409. Transferability.
A certificate of registration issued under this article is not transferable. If a business establishment is transferred or sold to a new owner or if the business establishment use expands or changes to include uses not listed in the original application, a new business registration application and certificate is required before business is conducted by the new owner or the new use is added to the business establishment. 
( Ord. No. 2018-477 , § 9, 5-15-18)
 
Sec. 22-410. Requirements for certificate of compliance; compliance with state law and township ordinances.
(a)	No certificate required by this article shall be issued to any applicant who is required to procure a license or permit from a state of federal agency until such applicant shall submit evidence that the required state or federal license or permit has been issued and that all applicable fees have been paid. 
(b)	No certificate shall be granted to any applicant until such applicant has complied with all the provisions of this article and other ordinances of the township pertaining to businesses for which an application for a certificate is made. No certificate shall be granted, if the approval of any officer of the township is required, until such approval is made. Approval in each instance shall mean written approval by the designated officer upon the face of the application for a certificate, subscribed by such officer, and the date of approval. 
( Ord. No. 2018-477 , § 10, 5-15-18)
 
Sec. 22-411. Certificate fees.
Business registration certificate fees shall be set from time to time by resolution of the township board for the cost of administering this ordinance including but not limited to zoning verification, building code compliance, and fire safety code compliance for any change of use or change of occupancy of commercial and industrial spaces as applicable, except that no fee shall be collected for initial registration of businesses in existence at the time of publication in a newspaper of general circulation as required by law. 
( Ord. No. 2018-477 , § 11, 5-15-18)
 
Sec. 22-412. Fees; exemptions.
No registration fee shall be required from any applicant exempt from payment of the fee by state or federal law. 
( Ord. No. 2018-477 , § 12, 5-15-18)
 
Sec. 22-413. Denial, revocation and suspension; right to appeal; hearing.
Business registration certificates issued under this article may be revoked or suspended by the director of community standards, at any time, for any of the following reasons: 
(1)	Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement made in the application for certificate; 
(2)	Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement made in the operation of the business establishment. 
(3)	Conducting a business establishment in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public. 
( Ord. No. 2018-477 , § 13, 5-15-18)
 
Sec. 22-414. Revocation/suspension/denial of certificate; notice required.
Written notification of suspension/ revocation/denial of certificate, stating the causes for said action, shall be delivered to the certificate holder personally or mailed to his business address as shown on the application for license. 
( Ord. No. 2018-477 , § 14, 5-15-18)
 
Sec. 22-415. Right to appeal; hearing; standard of review.
(a)	A certificate holder has the right to appeal such suspension/revocation to the township board, provided a written request to appeal is filed with the township clerk within ten days after the notice of suspension/revocation/denial of certificate is sent to the certificate holder at its business address as shown on the application for business registration certificate. 
(b)	At the hearing before the township board, the certificate holder/applicant shall have the right to hear the evidence relied upon by the director of community standards in determining to suspended/revoke/deny the certificate; and the right to present evidence and witnesses on his/her own behalf. 
(c)	Following the hearing, the township board shall determine whether the decision to suspend/revoke/deny the certificate was supported by competent, material and substantial evidence. A written statement of the township board's findings and determination shall be made within 21 days after the conclusion of the hearing. 
( Ord. No. 2018-477 , § 15, 5-15-18)
 
Sec. 22-416. Penalty.
(a)	Persons, firms, partnerships or corporations who violate any section of this article shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction as provided in chapter 40, article II, of this Code of Ordinances for the Charter Township of Ypsilanti. 
(b)	The imposition of a fine shall not relieve the business establishment from responsibility to correct the violation. All such persons, firms, partnerships or corporations shall be required to correct or remedy such situation or defects within a reasonable time and each act or violation and every day upon which said violation should occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)	The application of the penalty of this section shall not be held to prevent the enforcement removal of prohibited conditions by injunctive or other relief in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
( Ord. No. 2018-477 , § 16, 5-15-18)
 
Chapter 24 DEVELOPMENT
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Secs. 24-1—24-25. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. EARTH BALANCING AND EXCAVATION
 
Sec. 24-26. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the Charter Township of Ypsilanti "Earth Balancing and Excavation" Ordinance, and it shall be deemed sufficient in any action for the enforcement of the provisions hereof to define the same by such short title and by reference to the number hereof. 
(Ord. No. 97-161, § 1, 2-28-97)
 
Sec. 24-27. Purpose.
(a)	To further secure and protect the general welfare and safety of the citizens and other persons within the Charter Township of Ypsilanti; 
(b)	To regulate the removal of topsoil, subsoil, sand, gravel, and other materials, and the moving and filling of land; 
(c)	To authorize the issuance of permits for earth excavation and/or filling; to provide performance standards; 
(d)	To provide for enforcement and for penalties for the violation of its provisions; 
(e)	To repeal all ordinances and portions of other ordinances that are inconsistent with this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-161, § 2, 2-28-97)
 
Sec. 24-28. Definitions.
(a)	Community development department means the Ypsilanti Township Community Development Department. 
(b)	Earth balancing means the moving, grading or leveling of earth or rock materials. 
(c)	Groundwater means any water found under the surface of the earth. 
(d)	Person means any individual, partnership, corporation or association. 
(e)	Planning commission means the Ypsilanti Township Planning Commission. 
(f)	Processing means any alteration in any manner of gravel, clay, sand, soil, earth, fill or similar materials. 
(g)	Soil excavation means the excavation or removal of any kind of nature from a site of gravel, clay, sand, soil or similar materials. 
(h)	Suitable fill material means clean, natural earth materials (compactible), containing no more than five percent broken concrete. With the exception of the broken concrete, the fill shall be free of foreign matter such as brick, crockery and other insert solid wastes as well as other refuse or rubbish. All fill materials shall be free of chemical contamination. 
(i)	Surface waters means water occurring generally on the surface of the earth. 
(j)	Township board means the Ypsilanti Township Board of Trustees. 
(Ord. No. 97-161, § 3, 2-28-97)
 
Sec. 24-29. Permits; procedures.
(a)	Permit required. From and after the effective date of this article, no person shall operate a soil excavation site, or perform earth balancing operations on any property in Ypsilanti Township except in accordance with a permit issued by the planning commission pursuant to the authority of this article. No permit shall be required for: 
(1)	Excavations for the construction of buildings and structures for which a building permit has been issued, and the distribution of the excavated material is placed and graded entirely within the boundaries of the property described on the building permit. Distribution of this material cannot cause ponding or be detrimental to the drainage of surrounding properties; 
(2)	For the moving, grading or leveling of earth or rock materials by a property owner solely upon his property where the allowable balancing shall be 50 cubic yards per half acre and not-to-exceed 100 cubic yards. This fill should be placed so it will not exceed a maximum slope ratio of four-feet horizontal to one-foot vertical from any adjacent property owner and not block any natural drainage course; 
(3)	For the filling of land for purposes of construction or land balancing where the land is low and in need of fill so long as the fill does not contain any refuse, is not a commercial operation and not more than 100 cubic yards of fill are deposited in any calendar year; 
(4)	For the removal of soil when no more than 20 cubic yards are removed in any calendar year; 
(5)	Any site that has site plan approval granted by the planning commission and a grading plan approval by the township engineers. 
(b)	Authority of community development department. The community development department shall receive applications and refer the application to the planning commission. 
(c)	Referral to planning commission. Before granting a new permit under this article, the planning commission shall hold public hearings. 
(d)	The planning commission may, after considering all available facts and details, issue a permit to expire on May 15th of the following year, which is renewable annually by the planning commission without further public hearing. The planning commission shall authorize the issuance of a permit only if it finds that the granting of said permit will: 
(1)	Not be injurious to the public health, safety and welfare of the township and its residents; 
(2)	There has been compliance with all the requirements and standards of this article, and the other applicable township ordinances, standards and regulations; 
(3)	The proposed operation will not create an unreasonable hazard, annoyance or inconvenience to the owners or occupants of nearby property. 
(4)	Will not create any significant obstacle to the implementation of the plan for township development as evidenced by the zoning ordinance and the master plan of the township. 
The planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of the permit as it finds necessary to insure that the intent and purpose of this article is fulfilled. Any violation of a condition included in the permit shall be construed as a violation of this article and shall be grounds for revoking the permit. 
An applicant for a permit shall pay such fees and/or costs as are required by resolution of the township board and shall submit to the community development department an application containing the following information: 
a.	A legal description of the premises wherein the operations are proposed. 
b.	Names and addresses of all parties having an interest in said premises setting forth their legal interest. Proof of legal interest shall be provided. Any person with any ownership interest in the property, when differing from the applicant, must also sign the application as a co-applicant to ensure their responsibility for activity upon their property. 
c.	Topographical survey map at a scale of one inch to 100 feet or one inch to 50 feet as may be required by the planning commission showing existing and proposed final grades on a two-foot contour interval. Grades shall be prepared and sealed by a civil engineer registered as a professional engineer in the state or land surveyor registered as a professional surveyor in the state. 
The required topographical map shall be complemented with a 100-foot minimum grid which is consecutively numbered. The applicant shall identify the grids intended for various activities such as excavation and restoration. If it is deemed by the planning commission that a 100-foot grid is unnecessary, the requirements may be waived. 
If the applicant is reapplying on a yearly basis to continue an on-going excavation project, the applicant may use the same topographical survey map up to a maximum of eight years with any additional topographical survey to be submitted at the discretion of the planning commission. Unless the final proposed grades and site use change, the applicant need only submit one final grading plan for the duration of his/her operation. 
d.	An estimate by a civil engineer registered as a professional engineer in the state or land surveyor registered as a professional surveyor in the state as to the cubic yards of material to be removed and/or placed, and a detailed statement as to how the filling and/or removal is to be accomplished. 
e.	A statement as to all types of materials to be removed and/or placed, and indication of specific places on the property where each of the materials or fill are to be removed or placed, a detailed statement as to the methods of operation, the type of machinery or equipment to be used, and the estimated period of time that such operations shall cover. 
f.	Details or similar operations carried on by the applicant, if any. 
g.	The type and daily number of vehicles to be used in the proposed operations. 
h.	Identification of access roads, on-site roads, grades for proper drainage and any special drainage devices, if necessary, fencing, any structures on-site existing or proposed, existing and proposed utilities, and an explanation of any on-site testing or other survey data, including soil surveys, water tables and subsurface characteristics. 
i.	A statement which specifies in detail the proposed use of the land after the excavation or filling. The final grades presented shall be consistent with the purposes for use of the property after completion of operation. 
j.	Applicants and property owners who have been granted a license shall grant township officials and township employees the right to enter onto the licensed property for the purpose of inspections and to bring the property into compliance with the provisions of this article, if necessary. 
k.	Such other information and material as the planning commission may require. 
(Ord. No. 97-161, § 4, 2-28-97)
 
Sec. 24-30. Bonds and insurance.
(a)	Bonds. The applicant shall post a surety bond or some other security satisfactory to the planning commission naming the township as the beneficiary in an amount determined by the township engineers or engineering consultant to be reasonably necessary to ensure compliance hereunder. In no case will the sum of the surety bond be less than $500.00 for each acre or fraction thereof of land to be covered by the permit. Every bond shall be received and approved by the township attorney and shall guarantee compliance with this article, the permit requirements and conditions, and that the operations will be carried out according to the approved plans and specifications. Upon failure of a licensee to fulfill any of the conditions of the bond, the township may use the proceeds of the bond to go upon the licensee's premises and perform any acts necessary to produce compliance. By filling out an application every applicant shall be deemed to have granted a license to the township officials and employees to enter onto the licensed property for the purpose of inspections and bringing such property into compliance with the provisions of this article. 
In fixing the amount of such surety bond, the township engineers or engineering consultant shall take into account the size and scope of the proposed operation, current prevailing costs of rehabilitating the premises and other conditions and factors as might be relevant. The applicant shall notify the bonding company and provide proof thereof that the township be notified in the event of any lapse in the effectiveness of the bond. For each acre restored and reclaimed in accordance herewith, or otherwise, a bond may be proportionately reduced as determined by the planning commission. 
(b)	Insurance. The applicant shall secure and file with the township clerk certificates of insurance, insuring the applicant, his or her employees and/or agents or representatives, and the township for general comprehensive liability in an amount of at least $100,000.00 per person and $300,000.00 per occurrence. The certifications or renewals thereof shall provide that the township shall be notified upon discontinuance or alteration of any such insurance coverage for any reason. 
(Ord. No. 97-161, § 6, 2-28-97)
 
Sec. 24-31. Performance standards.
No soil excavation or removal and no filling of land is permitted within the township unless the following standards are complied with: 
(1)	Sound. The pressure level of sounds shall not exceed the following decibel levels when adjacent to the following types of uses: 
Sound 
Level 	Adjacent 
Use 	Where 
Measured 
75dBA 	Residential 	Common property line 
85dBA 	Commercial 	Common property line 
90dBA 	Industrial & Other 	Common property line 

The sound levels shall be measured using A-weighted decibel measurements (reference to 20 micropascals) and with a type of audio output meter approved by the U.S. Bureau of Standards. Objectionable noises due to intermittence, beat, frequency, or shrillness, shall be muffed so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses. 
(2)	Vibrations. All machinery shall be so mounted and operated as to prevent transmission of ground vibration exceeding a displacement of .003 of one inch measured at any lot line of its source. 
(3)	Odors. The emission of noxious, odorous matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable at any point along property lines, when diluted in the ratio of one volume of odorous air to four or more volumes of clean air, or as to produce a public nuisance or hazard beyond property lines, is prohibited. 
(4)	Gases. The escape of or emission of any gas in concentration so as to be injurious, destructive or explosive shall not be allowed. 
(5)	Glare or heat. Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within an enclosure so as to completely obscure and shield such operation from direct view from any point along the property line, except during the period of construction of the facilities to be used and occupied. 
(6)	Light. All lighting used to illuminate buildings, signs and/or parking areas shall conform to the BOCA Code. Such lighting shall be arranged or shielded so as to direct light away from adjoining properties. The lighting source shall not be directly visible from the adjoining property. 
(7)	Smoke, dust, dirt and ash fly. There shall be no discharge into the atmosphere from any single source of emission or any air contaminate for a period or periods aggregating more than four minutes in any one-half hour which is: 
a.	As dark or darker in shade as that designated as No. 2 on the Ringelmann Chart as published by the United States Bureau of Mines. The Umbrascope readings of smoke densities may be used when correlated with the Ringelmann Chart. A Ringelmann Chart shall be on file in the office of the community development department. 
b.	Of such opacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than the smoke described in (a) above, except when the emission consists only of water vapor. The quantity of gas borne or air borne solids shall not exceed 0.20 grains per cubic foot of the carrying medium at a temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(8)	Drifted and blown material. There shall be no drifting or airborne transmission beyond the property line of dust, particles or debris from any open stockpile. 
(9)	Radioactive materials. Radioactive materials shall not be emitted to exceed safe quantities. 
(10)	Hours of operation. Hours of operation shall be 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. unless otherwise specified by the planning commission. No operation shall be permitted on Sundays and legal holidays. In emergency situations, this time period may be modified by the community development department provided such emergency shall not be effective for more than 72 hours. 
(11)	Drainage. Natural drainage shall not be blocked or diverted in such a manner as to cause the natural water flow to back up onto adjacent property, or to flow in a different course upon leaving the property upon which the blocking or diversion occurs, unless an application is made and a permit is issued by the community development department pursuant to plans which provide for a drainage flow which will not be detrimental to surrounding properties. 
Issuance of said permit by the community development department is subject to receipt of any permits or approval of this drainage discharge by other agencies having jurisdictional authority. 
(12)	Mud, dirt, clay on public roads. The permit holder shall take whatever steps are necessary to prevent any motor vehicle from carrying onto any public right-of-way any mud, dirt, clay or refuse. If mud, dirt, clay or refuse is carried or tracked onto a public right-of-way, the permit holder shall clean the right-of-way when and as often as is necessary. In any case, a permit holder shall not leave any such debris on a public right-of-way after the end of a working day. If notified during a working day by the township that cleaning is required, it shall be accomplished within one hour, weather permitting, of the giving of such notice. 
(Ord. No. 97-161, § 7, 2-28-97)
 
Sec. 24-32. Requirements; soil excavation and removal.
(a)	Setbacks. No cut or excavation shall be closer than 100 feet from the nearest street, highway or alley right-of-way line, nor from the nearest perimeter property line, provided, however, that the planning commission may prescribe greater setbacks if it determines it necessary in order to give sublateral support to surrounding property; provided further that the planning commission may prescribe lesser setbacks near a property line if it is determined that sublateral support to surrounding property is not necessary. 
(b)	Standing water. No soil, sand, gravel or other similar material shall be removed in such a manner as to cause water to stand or accumulate, or to result in a place of danger or a menace to the public health or safety. The premises shall at all times be graded so that surface water drainage is not interfered with. Where removal or grading operations result in a body of water forming, the permit holder shall erect "KEEP OUT - DANGER" signs on the required fence around the excavation not more than 200 feet apart, or as otherwise required by the planning commission. 
(c)	Fencing or some other suitable substitute as shall be approved by the planning commission, not to exceed six feet in height, may be required to enclose the excavation results in a place of danger or a menace to the public health or safety, and to prevent access by unauthorized persons. 
(d)	Roads. All private roads used for ingress or egress located within 400 feet of occupied residences shall be kept dust-free by oiling or chemical treatment or by hardtopping with cement or bituminous substance. 
(e)	Topsoil; replacement. Whenever topsoil exists, suitable for growing turf or for other land use, at the time the operations begin, a sufficient quantity of the existing topsoil shall be stockpiled on said site so that the entire site, when stripping or removal operations are completed, may be recovered with a minimum of four-inches of topsoil. The replacement of such topsoil shall be made immediately following the termination of the stripping or removal operation. In the event that such stripping or removal operations continue over a period of time greater than 30 days, the operator shall replace the stored topsoil over the stripped area as he/she progresses. The replacement of the topsoil shall be in a manner suitable for growing turf or other vegetation. 
(f)	Processing. Processing of materials mined from any property shall be permitted only as provided in section 2107.5 of the zoning ordinance. 
(g)	Slopes. The slopes of the banks of any excavation shall not exceed a minimum ratio of four feet horizontal to one foot vertical except in the immediate area of excavation and this area shall be paralleled by approved construction fencing as required in subsection (c) of this section. In addition, where ponded water results from the operation, the slope must be maintained and extended into the water to a depth of five feet. Vegetation sufficient to prevent erosion shall be placed on all finished slopes. 
(h)	Effective data. All of the requirements of this article shall apply to and be in effect immediately as to new mining operations, or for new areas of existing mining operations, for which there are no plans approved by the township. For other mining operations there shall be compliance with all of the requirements of this article no later than six months from the effective date of this article. 
(i)	Soil erosion control. Approved temporary and permanent soil erosion control measures shall be placed and maintained to protect all drainage courses, wetlands and adjacent properties from soil erosion and runoff. 
(j)	Phasing. The planning commission may require that soil excavation operations or earth balancing operations be conducted on property in phases, with all activity including restoration and reclamation, being completed on one phase before any activities commence on another phase. 
(Ord. No. 97-161, § 8, 2-28-97)
 
Sec. 24-33. Appeals.
If a person subject to regulation under this chapter disagrees with an official interpretation of a certain provision of this chapter, they may appeal the interpretation to the township board. The request for appeal shall be in letter form to the township board submitted to the attention of the township clerk. The township board shall consider the matter of the appeal at a regular scheduled board meeting. The township board may refer the matter to the planning commission for their review and recommendation. In any case, the decision of the township board shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 97-161, § 8A, 2-28-97)
 
Sec. 24-34. Restoration and inspection.
(a)	All areas within any soil excavation site operating under a single permit shall be restored progressively. Restoration shall be in accordance with the plan as approved by the planning commission at the time the permit is secured. 
(1)	Upon completion of the restoration, or upon completion of a part thereof, the permit holder may make application for refund or reduction of the bond. Upon determination by the planning commission that said restoration is in keeping with the approved plan therefore, the planning commission may refund or reduce the bond pro rata. 
(2)	In the event that the restoration does not comply with the approved plan therefore, in the event said restoration is not complete within 60 days after expiration of all permits issued pursuant to this article, the township may utilize the bond proceeds to restore the site and affected areas to comply with the approved plan and perform whatever work needs to be done to avoid harmful movement of gases or contamination to the ground or surface water and/or environment for five years after completion or expiration of permits. Should the cost of said restoration exceed the amount of the bond, the permit holder shall pay the township the amount of such excess. 
An inspector from the community development department or other persons as may be appointed by the township board shall conduct inspections and shall notify the owner and/or operator by certified (return receipt) mail of any portions of the site that it deems abandoned and/or ready for restoration. Upon receipt of such notification, the owner and/or operator shall have said areas restored within 30 days, or within such additional time as may be allowed by the planning commission. 
This article shall be enforced by the community development department. The community development director and his/her representatives shall have the authority to issue municipal civil infraction citations for a violation pursuant to Act 236 of Public Acts of 1961, as amended. By accepting a permit issued under this article, and/or the township zoning ordinance, the owner and/or operator of any operation shall be presumed to have consented to regular and routine inspections of the property. Said consent shall be authority to go on to any property under permit for purposes of any inspection. 
(Ord. No. 97-161, § 9, 2-28-97)
 
Sec. 24-35. Violations and penalties.
(a)	Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 plus costs of prosecutions. 
(b)	In addition to such fine, the planning commission may notify the owner and/or operator of any violation of the permit and/or this article, and upon failure of the owner and/or operator to abate said violation within five days after mailing of said notice, said operation site may be closed, and the permit therefore suspended or revoked, and resort to the bond for restoration. Any owner and/or operator aggrieved by any notice sent pursuant to this section, may file a written request for a hearing before the planning commission. The request should set forth why the operation site should not be summarily closed, the permit suspended or revoked, and resort had to the bond. If a request for a hearing is received, the planning commission may summarily close the site and suspend or revoke the permit, pending the hearing, if it is determined the health and safety of persons and/or property requires it. 
(c)	Violations of this article shall be deemed to be a nuisance per se, and the township shall be authorized to abate such nuisance by seeking injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction, in addition to the other remedies available pursuant to this article or otherwise by law. 
(Ord. No. 97-161, § 15, 2-28-97)
 
Secs. 24-36—24-55. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. WOODLANDS PROTECTION
 
Sec. 24-56. Short title.
The ordinance codified shall be known and may be cited as the Ypsilanti Township Woodlands Protection Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 97-163, 1, 2-28-97)
 
Sec. 24-57. Purpose.
The township finds that rapid growth, the spread of development, and increasing demands upon natural resources have had the effect of encroaching upon, despoiling, or eliminating many of the trees and other forms of vegetation and natural resources and processes associated therewith which if preserved and maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition, constitutes important physical, aesthetic, recreational, and economic assets to existing and future residents of the township. Specifically, the township finds: 
(1)	That woodland growth protects public health through the absorption of air pollutants and contamination, the buffering of excess noise and wind, the screening of undesirable views, the cooling of buildings in summer and insulating buildings in winter; 
(2)	That woodlands provide for public safety through the prevention of erosion, siltation, and flooding; 
(3)	That trees and woodland growth are an essential component of the general welfare of the township by maintaining natural beauty, recreational opportunities, wildlife habitat, and irreplaceable heritage for existing and future township residents; 
(4)	That the protection of such natural resources is a matter of paramount public concern, as provided by Article IV, 552 of the Constitution of 1963, and the Environmental Protection Act of 1970, MCL 691.1201 et seq.; MSA 14.528(201); 
(5)	To protect significant individual trees located on sites subject to development during the course of construction of improvements to benefit the development site and buildings on the site: 
a.	To provide for the protection, preservation, replacement, proper maintenance, and use of trees and woodlands located in the township in order to minimize disturbance to them and to prevent damage from erosion, siltation, and flooding; 
b.	To protect the woodlands (including trees and other forms of vegetation) of the township for their economic support of local property values when allocated to remain uncleared and/or unharvested; 
c.	To protect the woodlands (including trees and other forms of vegetation) of the township for their significance as large specimens of their species and/or rare and endangered species; 
d.	To protect functional strips of vegetation (including fencerows, hedgerows, shrubby borders of streams and public rights-of-ways, railroad-edge and road-edge) of the township for their significance as travel lanes for wildlife, noise buffer, visual screens, aesthetically pleasing enclosures and vistas for pedestrian and vehicular traffic; 
e.	To provide for the paramount public concern for these natural resources in the interest of health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the township. 
(Ord. No. 97-163, 2, 2-28-97)
 
Sec. 24-58. Definitions.
The following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meaning, given in this section, unless the context requires otherwise: 
Bona fide agriculture means a land use to derive income from growing plants and trees on land including but not limited to land used principally for fruit grove and timber production, and not including land used principally for another use and incidentally for growing trees or plants for income. 
Commercial nursery or tree farm means a licensed plant or tree nursery or farm in relation to those trees planted and growing on the premises of the licensee, which are planted and growing for sale or intended sale to the general public in the ordinary course of said licensee's business. 
Development includes any lawful land use authorized under the township zoning ordinance, as amended. 
Diameter breast high (d.b.h.) means the diameter in inches of a tree measured at four and one-half feet above the existing grade. 
Drip line means an imaginary vertical line that extends downward from the outermost tips of the tree branches to the ground. 
Forbs means flowing plants commonly referred to as "weeds" or "herbs" that are nonwoody and grown close to the ground. 
Grubbing means the effective removal of under-story vegetation from a site which does not include the removal of any tree with a d.b.h. of greater than three inches. 
Historical tree means a tree which, pursuant to section 24-61 of this article, has been designated by the township planning commission to be of notable historic interest to the township because of age, type, size, or historic association. 
Land clearing means those operations where trees and vegetation are removed and which occur previous to construction of building (e.g. road right-of-way excavation, utility excavation, grubbing, and any other necessary clearing operation). 
Large tract means a tract of one acre or more in an area. 
Linkage vegetation means strips of vegetation defined as primary linkage strips and secondary linkage strips including fencerows, hedgerows, shrubby stream banks, road-edge, railroad-edge, and public rights-of-way that function as travel lanes for wildlife, pedestrian and vehicular traffic, as passive and recreational green belts, and as visual screens, noise buffers, and weather control vegetation. 
Locate means construct, place, insert, or excavate. 
Material includes soil, sand, gravel, clay, peat, mud, debris, and refuse, or any other material organic or inorganic. 
No-tree affidavit means a signed, notarized statement by owner or agent stating that no tree exists upon the site of eight-inch d.b.h. or greater, or no linkage vegetation of significant value to the township. 
Operations includes the locating, moving or deposition of any material, or any construction use or activity, or a combination thereof which in any way modifies the conditions of land subject to this article. 
Owner means any person who has domain over, control of, or title to woodlands. 
Person includes any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including governmental agencies conducting operations within the township, including all tree removal companies and persons removing trees on behalf of others. 
Commission means the planning commission of the township, organized under article XXV of the township zoning code as amended. 
Primary linkage strips means strips of vegetation, 20 to 30 feet across, that exist as old fencerows, hedgerows, road-edge, railroad-edge, shrubby stream sides, and are composed of trees in the center, shrubs bordering the trees and grasses and forbs on the edge and serve as a connective link to other linkage strips in the township or abutting communities. 
Protective barrier means a physical structure limiting access to a protected area, composed of wood or other suitable materials, which assures compliance with the intent of this article. Variations of these methods may be permitted upon written request if they satisfy the intent of this article. 
Remove and removal include the cutting of trees and the injury and/or destruction of any form of vegetation, by whatever method, on any lands subject to this article. 
Secondary linkage strips means strips of vegetation, ten to 20 feet across, that exist as old fencerows, hedgerows, road-edge, railroad-edge, shrubby stream sides, and are composed primarily of shrubs bordered by grasses and forbs. Isolated trees may be present but are not historical or specimen trees. 
Significant individual trees means deciduous hardwood or coniferous trees existing in a healthful condition with d.b.h. in excess of eight inches. 
Small tract means a tract of less than one acre in an area. 
Specimen tree means a tree which, pursuant to section 24-61 of this article, has been designated as a specimen tree by the township planning commission because of its high value as a representative tree of a species, due to its size, age, or other prominent characteristic. 
Structure means any assembly of materials above or below the surface of the land or water, including but not limited to houses, buildings, bulkheads, piers, docks and landings, dams, waterway obstruction, towers, or utility transmission devices. 
Transplant means the digging up by a property owner of a tree from one place on a property and the planting of the same tree in another place on the same property. 
Tree means a woody plant with an erect perennial trunk, which at maturity is 13 feet or more in height, which has a more or less definite crown of foliage. 
Woodlands areas means all lands which are subject to this article under section 24-59. 
(Ord. No. 97-163, 3, 2-28-97)
 
Sec. 24-59. Land to which article applies.
This article applies to: 
(1)	All large or small tracts of land which have a historic tree, specimen tree, an endangered species of plant, or any significant individual tree with d.b.h. of 36 inches or greater. 
(2)	All large or small tracts of land which have a canopy cover of at least 10,000 square feet formed by trees, a majority of which trees have a d.b.h. of eight inches or greater. 
(3)	All primary and secondary linkage strips; and 
(4)	All trees, eight-inch d.b.h., within 20 feet of the road's edge. 
(Ord. No. 97-163, 4, 2-28-97)
 
Sec. 24-60. Reserved.
 
Sec. 24-61. Historic or specimen trees and linkage strips.
(a)	A person may nominate a tree within the township for designation as a historic tree, or specimen tree, or a linkage strip based upon its age, type, size, historic, or cultural associations. Such a nomination shall be made upon that form provided by the planning commission. 
(b)	A nomination for designation of a historic or specimen tree shall be brought up for consideration by the planning commission. Where the nomination is not made by the owner of the property where the tree is located, the owner shall be notified in writing at least 15 days in advance of the time, date, and place that the planning commission will consider the designation. The notice shall advise the owner that the designation of the tree as a linkage strip or historic or specimen tree will make it unlawful to remove, damage, or destroy the vegetation absent the granting of a woodlands use permit by the township. 
(c)	The planning commission may designate a tree upon finding that, because of one or more of the following unique characteristics, the tree should be preserved as a historic tree: 
(1)	The tree is associated with a notable person or historic figure; 
(2)	The tree is associated with the history or development of the nation, the state, or the township; 
(3)	The tree is associated with an outstanding person or institution; 
(4)	The tree is associated with early forestry or conservation; 
(5)	The tree is associated with American Indian history, legend or lore. 
(d)	The planning commission may designate a tree as a specimen tree upon a finding that, because of one or more of the following unique characteristics, the tree should be preserved as a specimen tree: 
(1)	The tree is the predominant tree within a distinct, scenic or aesthetically valued setting; 
(2)	The tree is of unusual age or size for that species and this climatic and geographic location. Examples include trees listed on the American Associate Social Register of Big Trees or the Michigan Botanical Club as a large tree; 
(3)	The tree has gained prominence due to unusual form or botanical characteristics. 
(e)	The planning commission may designate a vegetative linkage strip as a strip of vegetation that, for one or more of the following reasons, should be preserved as a linkage strip: 
(1)	Roadside strips of vegetation which contain large trees or shrubs that are scenic or aesthetically valued; 
(2)	The strip of vegetation offers passive or recreational opportunities as travel lanes for pedestrian traffic around the community by linking different parts of the township with walking trails, bike trails and so forth; 
(3)	The strip of vegetation is adjacent to streams, drains, creeks, swamps, or bogs so designated on the wetlands map. 
(f)	The tree or vegetative strip designated by the planning commission as a specimen tree, a historic tree, or linkage strip shall be so depicted on a woodlands map. 
(Ord. No. 97-163, 6, 2-28-97)
 
Sec. 24-62. Property inspection.
The township, its officials, agents, and employees may make reasonable entry upon any lands or water within the township for the purpose of enforcement of this article or the conduct of any investigation, survey or study contemplated by this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-163, 7, 2-28-97)
 
Sec. 24-63. Use permits required.
(a)	Except for those activities expressly permitted by section 24-64 it is unlawful for any person to conduct any activity within a woodlands area without first having obtained a use permit upon proper application, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)	Remove, damage, or destroy any tree or similar woody vegetation with a d.b.h. of eight inches or more; 
(2)	In a woodlands area that is also within a wetland or watercourse regulated by the wetlands protection act MCL 324.30301 et seq., remove, damage or destroy any tree or similar woody vegetation of any d.b.h.; 
(3)	Remove, damage, or destroy any historic or specimen tree; 
(4)	Remove, damage, or destroy any vegetation within a linkage strip designated by the planning commission; and 
(5)	Land clearing or grubbing. 
(Ord. No. 97-163, 8, 2-28-97)
 
Sec. 24-64. Permitted activities.
Notwithstanding the prohibition of section 24-64, the following activities are permitted within woodlands areas without a use permit, unless otherwise prohibited by statute or ordinance: 
(1)	The transplanting of a tree on a small tract within the designated woodlands areas; 
(2)	The removal of a tree with a d.b.h. of less than eight inches on a small tract where a valid certificate of occupancy has been issued; 
(3)	The removal or trimming of dead, diseased, or damaged trees or other woody vegetation provided that the damage resulted from an accident or nonhuman cause and provided further that the removal or trimming is accomplished through the use of standard forestry practices and techniques; 
(4)	Conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish, wildlife, and other natural resources; 
(5)	Outdoor recreation, such as field trails for nature study, hiking and horseback riding, boating, trapping, hunting, and fishing where otherwise legally permitted and regulated; 
(6)	Farming, gardening, grazing of small animals, harvesting of crops, forestry, and nursery practices, where otherwise legally permitted, and where compatible with the individual woodland ecology and not in conflict with the standards contained in section 24-67, provided that a forest management use permit is obtained pursuant to section 24-65(d) for forestry activities within a woodlands area; 
(7)	The operation and maintenance of existing dams and other water control devices, if in compliance with all applicable statutes and ordinances; and 
(8)	Actions taken in times of emergency, including the repair or restoration of public roads, electrical line, natural gas lines, sewage lines, and storm drainage systems when immediate action is necessary to protect public health or safety or to prevent damage to property. A person taking such emergency action shall within 14 days thereof provide a report to the township planning commission describing the action taken, the nature of the emergency necessitating the action, and the extent of any cutting or removal of, or damage to, any trees within the woodlands area. The matter be reviewed by the township planning commission who shall make a determination as to whether the resulting tree cutting, removal or damage was reasonably necessitated by the emergency situation. To the extent the resulting tree cutting, removal, or damage exceed that reasonably necessitated by the emergency situation, the person shall be required to provide replacement trees in accordance with the replacement standards of section 24-68. 
(Ord. No. 97-163, 9, 2-28-97)
 
Sec. 24-65. Use permit application.
(a)	A use permit applicant shall submit the following materials to the community development department: 
(1)	A completed use permit application which includes the following: 
a.	The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and of the applicant's agent; 
b.	The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the property; 
c.	The project location, including, as applicable, the street, road, or highway, section number, name of subdivision, and name of any watercourse which will or may be impacted; and 
d.	A detailed description and statement of purpose of the proposed activity. 
(2)	A use permit application fee in an amount as set by resolution of the township board; 
(3)	Where the applicant is not the owner of the property, a written authorization from the owner permitting the proposed activity; and 
(4)	A site plan including topographical survey, sealed by a registered engineer or registered surveyor, which includes the following information: 
a.	The shape and dimensions of the lot or parcel, together with the existing and proposed locations of structure and improvements, if any; 
b.	Locations, based upon actual field survey, identifying by number all existing trees of eight-inch d.b.h. or greater and all other trees to be protected. All such trees proposed to remain, to be transplanted or to be removed shall be so designated. The plan shall be accompanied by a separate key identifying the trees numbered by size, common and genus name (e.g.: maple/acer), condition, density and spacing. All such trees shall be tagged in the field with their identifying numbers; 
c.	Location, based upon actual field survey, of all primary and secondary linkage strips on the site as well as descriptions of the dominant shrubs and, if present, trees within the association; 
d.	Existing general soil conditions throughout the parcel; 
e.	A statement showing how trees not proposed for removal are to be protected during land clearing, construction, and on a permanent basis, including the proposed use of protective barriers, tree wells, tunneling or retaining walls (see section 24-69, Tree Protection During Construction); 
f.	Location and dimensions of all setbacks, easements, and existing and proposed public and private utilities; 
g.	Statements as to grade changes proposed and proposed drainage pattern changes for the lot or parcel and how such changes will affect these regulations. Existing contour interval of no more than two feet, and vertical contour data at an interval of no more than one foot for all areas to be disturbed by proposed tree removal operations, extending for a distance of at least 50 feet beyond the limits of such areas. Indicated elevations shall be based on United States Geological Survey datum; 
h.	The number of trees to be cut which have a d.b.h. of eight inches or more or the number of shrubs to be cut in a linkage strip, plus a plan and cost estimate for their replacement. 
i.	Information as to how all trees and linkage strips to be retained shall be identified at the site, whether by painting with a water base paint, flagging, etc., prior to field inspection; and 
j.	The legal property description, zoning classification (including adjacent parcels), existing structures, the extent of existing woodland areas, and the size and location of all elements of proposed activity. 
(b)	Alternative site plan information. Where the proposed activity is located on a site with no trees of eight-inch d.b.h. or greater or linkage strips, the applicant shall so indicate in his/her application, and submit a no-tree affidavit. In such case, the township shall conduct an inspection of the site. If the inspection substantiates the applicant's claim, the applicant shall be relieved of the necessity of providing unnecessary information, such as the topographic survey, etc. However, where these are trees less than eight inches d.b.h. that are otherwise potentially good specimens of that particular woodlot or linkage strip, additional information will be required, such as quality, size species, health, and such additional information as the township request. In those instances where areas of woodlands or linkage strips on a site are not to be disturbed, the site plan shall designate such areas as "not to be disturbed" and shall not be required to identify, except for general information as to species, number and size of protected trees and shall further be required to protect such areas from encroachment during construction activities. 
(c)	Land clearing or grubbing. Where the proposed activity is land clearing or grubbing only, the preparation of a site plan which depicts the location of all trees as required by subsection (a)(4)b of this section shall not be required. However, the applicant shall provide general information as to the number, species, and size of the protected trees on the property before a use permit for the clearing or grubbing may be granted. 
(d)	Forest management use permit. An owner may be granted a forest management use permit for the purpose of maintaining and improving a woodlands area by professional forestry management methods. Application for this permit must be accompanied by a management plan for the subject area prepared by a forester licensed and registered in the state. The management plan shall include a description of and a schedule for the program, justifying reasons for the work specified and a summary of the benefits to be obtained. Work under a forest management use permit shall be directed by a licensed and registered forester. Under the forest management use permit, provisions of this article which are applicable solely to development or land clearing activities shall not apply. The township shall not levy any fee for this special permit. 
(e)	De Minimis activities. Where the proposed activities involve the removal of not more than ten trees of eight inches d.b.h. or greater on lots or tracts of up to five acres; not more than 20 trees of eight-inch d.b.h. or greater on the tracts over five acres and up to ten acres; and not more than 30 trees of eight-inch d.b.h. or greater on the tracts over ten acres, and is not taken in conjunction with the development of a parcel. 
(Ord. No. 97-163, 10, 2-28-97)
 
Sec. 24-66. Review of use permit application.
(a)	The township administration shall review the submitted use permit application to ensure that all required information has been provided. At the request of the applicant or the township, an administrative review meeting shall be held to review the proposed activity in light of the purpose and review standards of the chapter. A field inspection of the site may be conducted. A report and recommendation shall be prepared by either the township administration or the consultant following the review. 
(b)	After review of the use permit application and site visit by the township administration or consultants, the application shall be granted subject to clarification or denied by one of the following parities. The granting or denial of the use permit shall be governed by the review standards contained in section 24-67. 
(1)	If the subject property is a single-family residential site, the township administration shall process the application. The issuance of permits under these circumstances would not involve the review of the planning commission. The township administration shall consult the township community development director prior to issuing the permit. 
(2)	If the proposed activity does not otherwise require site plans or plat approval (not including activities addressed in subsection (b)(1) of this section) the granting or denying of the use permit shall be the responsibility of the township community development director. 
(3)	The granting or denying of all other use permits shall be the responsibility of the township planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-163, 11, 2-28-97)
 
Sec. 24-67. Review standards.
The following standards shall govern the grant or denial of use permit applications: 
(1)	No application shall be denied solely on the basis that some trees are growing on the property under consideration. However, the protection and conservation of irreplaceable natural resources from pollution, impairment or destruction is a paramount concern. While the preservation of woodlands, trees, linkage strips and endangered species and related natural resources is the object of this article, every effort will be made to meet not only that objective but to preserve the basic property rights of the landowner as well. 
(2)	The integrity of woodland areas shall be maintained irrespective of whether such woodlands cross property lines. 
(3)	Diversity of tree species shall be maintained where essential to preservation of woodland. 
(4)	The removal or relocation of trees or shrubs shall be limited to those instances: 
a.	When necessary for the location of a structure or site improvement and when no feasible alternative location for the structure or improvements can be achieved without causing undue hardship; 
b.	The tree is dead, diseased, injured and in danger of falling, is too close to proposed or existing structures, interferes with existing utility services, interferes with safe vision clearances, or conflicts with other ordinances or regulations. 
Replacement of trees as provided in section 24-68 shall not apply to removals permitted under this paragraph. This exemption shall not be construed by affected property owners as an exemption from providing new plantings on the development site as a part of a landscaping plan which may be required by the planning commission in order to address the loss of trees or other vegetation due to construction activity. 
Replacement trees when required shall be provided as follows: 
1.	Tree replacement at 100 percent of trees removed will be required except in instances where the location of buildings, structures or grading are necessary to allow the development of the site and replacement of the trees cannot be accommodated on the site. 
2.	In instances where 100 percent tree replacement, is not feasible as provided in this section, the planning commission may allow reduction of the replacement trees to not less than 30 percent for industrial and business properties and not less than 50 percent replacement for residential properties. 
3.	Tree replacement as required shall be on the site in question; or, in lieu thereof, monies may be placed in escrow with the township at a fee established by the township for tree purchase and planting on public properties within the township. 
4.	Street trees required for subdivision may serve as a credit of 50 percent toward the number of replacement trees required. 
(5)	Where the removal or cutting of linkage strip, a portion of linkage strip, or any trees eight inches d.b.h. or greater is permitted, replacement trees shall be provided in accordance with section 24-68. 
(6)	The proposed activity shall include necessary provisions for tree protection in accordance with section 24-69. 
(7)	Where the proposed activity consists of land clearing, it shall be limited to designated street rights-of-way, drainage, and other utility areas, and areas necessary to the construction of proposed buildings and structures, as depicted on the plat or site plan. Where the proposed activity consists of grubbing, all trees with a d.b.h. of three inches or greater will be left undisturbed with the drip line understory left intact. 
(8)	Where the proposed activity includes residential development, residential units shall blend into the natural setting of the landscape for the enhancement of the sound, orderly, economic growth and development and for the protection of property values in this township. 
(9)	The proposed activity shall be in compliance with all other applicable statutes and ordinances. 
(10)	The burden of demonstrating that no feasible and prudent alternative location or improvements without undue hardship shall be upon the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 97-163, 12, 2-28-97)
 
Sec. 24-68. Relocation or replacement.
(a)	Whenever use permit allows the removal of trees of eight-inch d.b.h. or greater or shrubs within a linkage strip, said trees shall be relocated or replaced by the permit grantee. Such plant relocation or replacement shall be on a one-to-one ratio, provided that all replacement trees are of a two-inch caliper or greater. Shrubs should be at least two feet high. No credit shall be given for trees otherwise required pursuant to the landscaping requirements of the township zoning ordinance or the planned development district. 
(b)	All replacement trees shall satisfy American Association Nurseryman standards, and be: 
(1)	Nursery grown; 
(2)	State department of agriculture inspected; 
(3)	Tree spade transplanted while in the dormant state, or, if not in the dormant state, having been balled and burlapped with a solid well-laced root ball when in the dormant state; 
(4)	No. 1 grade, with a straight unscarred trunk and a well-developed uniform crown (park grade trees are unacceptable); 
(5)	Staked, fertilized, watered and mulched in accordance with standard planting practices; 
(6)	Guaranteed for one year, including labor, to remove and dispose of dead materials; 
(7)	Approved through inspection by the township; 
(8)	Of the same species as the removed plants where available from Michigan nurseries. Where plants of the same species are not available, replacement shall be made by recommendation of the planning commission and shall only consist of species within the forest association the woodland is composed of. 
(c)	The location of replacement trees shall be subject to the approval of the township, and shall be such as to provide the optimum enhancement, preservation and protection of woodland area. Where woodland densities permit, tree relocation or replacement shall be within the same woodland area as the removed plants. 
(d)	Where tree relocation or replacement is not feasible within the woodland area, or on the property where the activity is to be conducted, or on other approved property within the township, the permit grantee shall pay into the township tree fund monies for tree replacement in a per-tree amount representing the current market value for the tree replacement that would be utilized for the maintenance and preservation of woodland areas and the planting and maintenance of trees within the township. 
(Ord. No. 97-163, 13, 2-28-97)
 
Sec. 24-69. Tree protection during construction.
(a)	Before development, land clearing, filling or land alteration for which a use permit is required by this article commences, the developer shall be required to erect for the protection of remaining plants, barriers as approved by the township. Such protection shall remain in its approved location until such time as it is authorized to be removed by the township, or issuance of a final certificate of occupancy. During construction, no attachments or wires shall be attached to any of said trees so protected. Wood, metal, or other substantial material shall be utilized in the construction of barriers. Barriers will be required for all trees being protected, except in the following cases: 
(1)	Street right-of-way and utility easements may be ribboned by placing stakes a maximum, of 50 feet apart and tying ribbon, plastic tape, rope, etc., from stake along the outside perimeters of such areas to be cleared; and 
(2)	Large property areas separate from the construction or land clearing area into which no equipment will venture may also be ribboned off as above. 
(b)	It is unlawful for any person to conduct any activity within the drip line of any tree designated to be retained, including but not limited to the placing of any solvents, material, construction machinery, or soil within such drip line. 
(c)	The township may require the developer to also reasonably highlight those trees which are to be preserved during the course of construction, through such means as flagging, use of biodegradable paint or other form of designation determined by the township staff. 
(Ord. No. 97-163, 14, 2-28-97)
 
Sec. 24-70. Display permits.
The permit grantee shall prominently display on the site the permit issued. Such display shall be continuous while trees are being removed or replaced or while work authorized under the permit is being done, and for at least ten days after the completion thereof. Failure to allow entry for inspection by township representatives pursuant to the conditions attached to the permit shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-163, 15, 2-28-97)
 
Sec. 24-71. Taking without compensation.
(a)	This article shall not be construed to abrogate rights or authority otherwise protected by law. 
(b)	For the purposes of determining if there has been a taking of property without just compensation under Michigan law, an owner of property who has sought and has been denied a permit or has been made subject to modifications or conditions in the permit, under this article, may file an action in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)	If the court determines that an action of the township pursuant to this article constitutes a taking of the property of a person, then the court shall order the township, at the township's option, to do one or more of the following: 
(1)	Compensate the property owner for the full amount of the lost value; 
(2)	Purchase the property in the public interest as determined before its value was affected by this article; 
(3)	Modify its action with respect to the property so as to minimize the detrimental effect to the property's value; and 
(4)	Modify its action with respect to the property so that the action will not constitute a taking of the property. 
(Ord. No. 97-163, 16, 2-28-97)
 
Sec. 24-72. Appeals.
If a person subject to regulation under this article disagrees with an official interpretation of a certain provision of this article, they may appeal the interpretation to the township board. The request for appeal shall be in letter form to the township board submitted to the attention of the township clerk. The township board shall consider the matter of the appeal at a regular scheduled board meeting. The township board may refer the matter to the planning commission for their review and recommendation. In any case, the decision of the township board shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 97-163, 17, 2-28-97)
 
Sec. 24-73. Interpretation and application.
In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be minimum, requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience, or general welfare. It is not intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way impair or interfere with any existing provisions of law or ordinance, or with any rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to the law relating to activities within woodland area; provided, however, that where this article imposes a greater restriction than is required by existing ordinance or by rules, regulations, or permits, the provisions of this article shall control. 
(Ord. No. 97-163, 18, 2-28-97)
 
Sec. 24-74. Violation; penalties; enforcement.
(a)	Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a municipal civil infraction, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than $500.00 for each such violation. Each day upon which such violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)	In addition to the penalties provided in this article, any person who violates any provision of this article shall forfeit and pay to the township a civil penalty equal to the total value of those trees illegally removed or damaged, as computed from the International Society of Arboriculture shade tree value formula. Such sum shall accrue to the township and may be recovered in a civil action brought by the township. Said sum so collected shall be placed in the township tree fund. Replacement of illegally removed trees may be required as restoration in lieu of money. This replacement will be computed on an inch-for-inch ratio based on the total diameter measured at d.b.h. in inches of the illegally removed trees. If, because of destruction of the removed trees, exact inch-to-inch measurements cannot be obtained, the township may use other means to estimate the tree loss. A combination of money and tree replacement may be required. 
(c)	Any use or activity in violation of the terms of this article is declared to be a nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. The township board in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, abate, or restrain the violation. All cost, fees, and expenses in connection with such action shall be assessed as damages against the violation. 
(d)	If activities are conducted in a woodlands area contrary to a use permit, this article or other applicable laws or ordinances, the township community development department shall given written notice to the permit grantee, or if a permit has not been issued, then to the person conducting the activity, notifying him/her of the violation of the permit, this article, or other applicable law or ordinance, and to appear and; show cause why the activity should not be stopped. If the permit grantee or the person conducting the activity fails to appear and show cause within one full work day after notice is delivered, the community development department shall cause a written order to stop the activity to be posted on the premises. A person shall not continue or cause or allow to be continued, activity in violation of such an order, except with permission of the enforcing agency to abate a dangerous condition or remove the violation, or except by court order. If an order to stop is not obeyed, the enforcing agency may apply to the circuit court of Washtenaw County for an order enjoining the violation of the order. This remedy is in addition to, and not in limitation of, any other remedy provided by law or ordinance, and does not prevent criminal prosecution for failure to obey the order. 
(e)	Any person violating the provisions of this article shall become liable to the township for any expense or loss or damage occasioned by the township by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 97-163, 19, 2-28-97)
 
Secs. 24-75—24-95. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2005-359, adopted on Aug. 16, 2005, was included herein as superceding article IV. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
DIVISION 1. TITLE AND PURPOSE
 
Sec. 24-96. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be designated as the "Township of Ypsilanti Traffic Impact Analysis Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2005-359, 8-16-05)
 
Sec. 24-97. Purpose.
The Charter Township of Ypsilanti recognizes the direct correlation between land use decisions and the resultant impact on traffic operations and safety. The intent of this article is to describe situations where traffic impact information must be provided and evaluated as part of the decision-making process. This article is further intended to help achieve the following objectives: 
A.	Ensure land use decisions are made with consideration to the findings and recommendations in the thoroughfare plan chapter of the township's comprehensive plan. 
B.	Establish thresholds for submittal of various types of traffic impact studies and a procedure for preparation and review based on accepted traffic engineering procedures and guidelines in the Michigan Handbook "Evaluating Traffic Impact Studies". 
C.	Allow the community to assess the traffic impacts a proposed project may have on the community and possible changes to the development proposal or improvements to the roadway system to lessen that impact. 
D.	Promote consistency with the goal that signalized intersections operate at a Level of Service C or better and un-signalized at D or better throughout the township. 
E.	Help ensure safe and reasonable traffic operating conditions on streets and intersections after development of proposed use. 
F.	Provide direction to community decision-makers, road agencies and developers of expected impacts of a project. 
G.	Alert the community, transportation agencies, and developers of improvements or modification needed to the roadway, access or site design. 
H.	Protect the substantial public investment in the existing street system. 
I.	Help ensure safe and reasonable traffic operation conditions on roads and intersections and protect the public health, safety, and welfare, which can be damaged by unmanaged increases in traffic congestion. 
(Ord. No. 2005-359, 8-16-05)
 
DIVISION 2. DEFINITIONS
 
Sec. 24-98. Definitions.
The following terms used in this article shall be defined as follows: 
Development: A site plan, subdivision tentative preliminary plat, condominium project, mobile home park, redevelopment, reuse or expansion of a use or building. 
Average day: A Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday for most uses. The average day may be a Saturday for uses that have higher peak-hour traffic volumes on a Saturday rather than mid-week. 
Background traffic: Traffic anticipated to occur regardless of the decision on the subject application based on overall trends as demonstrated by, annual traffic increases and associated with specific approved projects for the opening year of a project. Data such as historic counts and long-range traffic projections from the UATS model shall be considered as part of the background traffic calculation. 
Gap (critical): The median time headway (in seconds) between vehicles in a major traffic stream which will permit side-street vehicles at STOP or YIELD controlled approach to cross through or merge with the major traffic stream under prevailing traffic and roadway conditions. 
Level of service: A qualitative measure describing operational conditions within a traffic stream; generally described in terms of such factors as speed and travel time, delay, freedom to maneuver, traffic interruptions, comfort and convenience and safety. 
(a)	Level of Service A: Operations with very low control delay occurring with favorable progression and/or short cycle lengths. 
(b)	Level of Service B: Operations with low control delay occurring with good progression and/or short cycle lengths. 
(c)	Level of Service C: Operations with average control delays resulting from fair progression and/or longer cycle lengths. Individual cycle failures begin to appear. Typically determined to be acceptable for signalized intersections. 
(d)	Level of Service D: Operations with longer control delays due to a combination of unfavorable progression, long cycle lengths, or high V/C ratios. Many vehicles stop and individual cycle failures are noticeable. Typically determined to be acceptable for un-signalized intersections. 
Comprehensive plan: The plan adopted by the Ypsilanti Township Planning Commission which illustrates the intended future land use pattern, includes the master thoroughfare plan and may also described roadway functional classifications and intended improvements to the transportation system (i.e. master plan, future land use plan, thoroughfare plan, etc.). 
Peak hour: A one hour period representing the highest hourly volume of traffic flow in the adjacent street system during the morning (a.m. peak hour), during the afternoon or evening (p.m. peak hour); or representing the hour of highest volume of traffic entering or exiting a site (peak hour of generator). 
Study area: The geographic area containing those critical arterial intersections (and connecting roadway segments) which are expected to be affected by the site-traffic generated by a development. 
Trip (i.e. directional trip): A single or one direction vehicle movement with either the origin of the destination (exiting or entering) inside a study site. 
(Ord. No. 2005-359, 8-16-05)
 
DIVISION 3. APPLICABILITY AND SUBMITTAL INFORMATION
 
Sec. 24-99. Applicability and types of studies.
The following traffic impact analysis shall be required at the preliminary review stage for any site plan, special conditional use, condominium project, subdivision plat or rezoning. The process for reviews are set forth in the Zoning Ordinance and the Subdivision Regulations. The level of detail required is based on the expected amount of traffic to be generated by the proposed use, based on generally accepted traffic engineering sources as described herein and the Michigan handbook "Evaluating Traffic Impact Studies." 
(a)	Traffic impact comparison. A comparison of the number of trips expected to be generated during the a.m. peak hour, p.m. peak hour and on a typical weekday for any existing use of the subject site, representative uses permitted under current zoning and representative uses permitted under the requested zoning. For projects where the comparison yields a difference greater than 50 directional trips during a peak hour or 500 trips on a typical weekday, a traffic impact assessment shall be performed. 
(b)	Traffic impact assessment. An analysis that evaluates current and future inbound and outbound traffic operations at site access points shall be required for projects expected to generate either 50—99 directional trips during a peak hour or 500—750 trips during a typical day. 
(c)	Traffic impact study. An analysis that evaluates current, background, and future traffic operations at site access points and major signalized or non-signalized intersections in proximity to the site shall be required for any proposed development which would be expected to generate over 100 directional trips during the peak hour of the traffic generator or the peak hour on the adjacent streets, or over 750 trips in an average day. Intersections to be evaluated in the traffic impact statement shall be established by the township. 
(d)	Updates. A traffic impact study or assessment shall also be required for new phases, expansions or changes to a development that requires site plan review, based on the thresholds established above, except where such report was approved (date of site plan approval) within two years of the new site plan submittal date, and a demonstration by the applicant's traffic engineer that traffic volumes have not increased by over two (2) percent annually. 
(Ord. No. 2005-359, 8-16-05)
 
Sec. 24-100. Required contents.
The following information is required for both traffic impact assessments and traffic impact studies unless otherwise specified: 
(a)	Existing site conditions. Illustrations and a narrative which describes the characteristics of the site and adjacent roadway system (planned and existing right-of-way, functional classification, lane configuration, speed limits, any sight distances limitations, locations and potential conflicts with operations at existing access points or intersections within 250 feet of the site's frontage, current traffic conflicts, etc.). This description should include surrounding land uses, expected development in the vicinity which could influence future traffic conditions, special site features and a description of any committed roadway improvements. The study should define and justify the study area selected for analysis. 
(b)	Existing traffic conditions. Illustrations, narratives, tables and capacity analysis that reflects existing traffic conditions including: 
(1)	Roadway alignment, including any problems with sight distance, number of lanes, lane width and lane configurations; 
(2)	Posted speed limits for various segments; 
(3)	Existing traffic control; 
(4)	Existing signal timing, as applicable; 
(5)	Existing peak-hour weekday traffic volumes (and daily volumes or peak period counts (7—9 a.m.—4—6 p.m.) to support the selection of the evaluated peak hour (if applicable) on street(s) adjacent to the site. For uses with weekend peak characteristics, the township may require new counts be taken on typical weekend days during the anticipated peak hours of the proposed use. All counts shall be collected using accepted practices and shall not be over two (2) years old; 
(6)	For projects that require a traffic impact study, existing counts and levels of service for intersections in the study area shall be performed; and 
(7)	For a traffic impact study, crash data shall be provided and analyzed for the most recent three (3) year period upon which information is available for sites in close proximity to intersections identified in the township's comprehensive plan as either a "critical crash location" or a "fatality" location, for projects that generate 500 or more peak hour trips. SEMCOG data or UD-10 reports should be used in the analysis. Critical crash locations should be identified using SEMCOG's critical crash thresholds. The township's traffic engineer may waive this requirement upon a finding that the crash potential would not be significantly impacted by the proposed project. Crash data shall also be obtained and analyzed if a signal warrant analysis must be preformed where existing or projected level of service is D or worse for un-signalized intersections. The signal warrant analysis should contain, at a minimum, Warrants 1, 2, 6, 9, and 11. 
(c)	Background traffic conditions. Projects that are not expected to be completed and occupied within one year of site plan approval shall provide a separate evaluation of background traffic for the expected completion date of the proposed development. This background traffic shall be based on historic counts to acknowledge general growth trends in the area, plus traffic associated with approved developments either currently under construction or approved (and would be operational before the build out year of this proposed project), in the project area. The background traffic shall be evaluated based on the existing road system plus programmed improvements where funding has been committed. A level of service analysis shall be preformed for each intersection in the study area. No unfunded mitigation shall be provided under the background conditions. Background traffic turning movements shall be illustrated in the report. 
(d)	Proposed use or future conditions. For a site plan review, mobile home park, condominium project, a subdivision plat, planned development, or special conditional use: a description of factors that relate to project trip generation such as the number and types of dwelling units, the gross and usable floor area, the number of employees and shift change factors shall be provided. Intended phasing or future expansion shall be noted. For a rezoning, a description of the potential representative uses which would be allowed, compared to representative uses allowed under current zoning. Representative uses shall include the most intense traffic generation use allowed under current zoning in compliance with all township site development regulations. 
(e)	Trip generation forecast. Forecasted trip generation of the proposed use for the a.m. peak hour, the p.m. peak hour and average day shall be provided for the overall project and each phase. The forecasts shall be based on the data and procedures outlined in the most recent edition of Trip Generation published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE). The applicant may use other commonly accepted and published sources of data or supplement the standard data with data from at least three (3) similar projects in Michigan. 
(f)	Trip reduction. Any trip reduction for pass-by trips, transit, ride-sharing, other modes and internal capture rates shall be based both on ITE findings and documented survey results acceptable to the township and applicable road agency. The township may elect to reduce the trip reduction rates used. 
(g)	Trip distribution. The projected traffic generated shall be distributed (inbound v. outbound, left turn v. right turn) onto the existing street network to project turning movements at site access points, and nearby intersections where required. Projected turning movements shall be illustrated in the report. A description of the application of standard engineering procedures for determining the distribution should be provided such as trip distribution model, market studies or counts at existing driveways. 
(h)	Access point level of service. A level of service or "capacity" analysis is required at the proposed access points using the procedures outlined in the most recent edition of the Highway Capacity Manual published by the Transportation Research Board. The capacity analysis should be provided in the appendix of the report. 
(i)	Intersection level of service. Traffic impact studies shall provide capacity analyses for all nearby street intersections identified by the township under the following conditions: 
(1)	Existing traffic under existing road conditions; 
(2)	Future project traffic under existing road conditions with programmed road improvements that will be completed before the build out year of this proposed project; and, 
(3)	Future traffic, including project and background, under background road conditions. Background road conditions shall include the existing road system plus programmed improvements where funding has been committed. 
(j)	Warrant analysis. A traffic signal warrant analysis based on the procedures outlined in the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices shall be performed for un-signalized intersections identified with an existing Level of Service D or worse for existing conditions. The signal warrant analysis should contain, at a minimum, Warrants 1, 2, 6, 9, and 11. For un-signalized intersections projected to operate at Level of Service D or worse under background or future conditions, an assessment using the peak hour (Warrant 11) shall be provided. At least two (2) traffic signal warrants should be met to warrant a signal. 
(k)	Access design. The report shall include a map and description of the location and design of proposed access (driveways or new street intersections) including: 
(1)	Sight distance limitations and sketches from field notes; 
(2)	Dimensions from adjacent driveways and intersections within 250 feet on either side of the main roadway; 
(3)	Potential for shared access facilities; 
(4)	Data to demonstrate that the number of driveways proposed is the fewest necessary; 
(5)	Support that the access points will provide safe and efficient traffic operation and be in accordance with the standards of Section 2123 and the applicable road agency; and 
(6)	Comments shall also be provided on internal circulation design such as the adequacy of queuing (stacking) at site access points and other features that may affect traffic operations and safety. 
(l)	Mitigation. The study shall outline mitigation measures and demonstrate any changes to the level of service achieved by these measures for the proposed future conditions. The mitigated capacity analysis should be provided in the appendix of the report. Mitigation shall be provided in order to meet the township's goal that signalized intersections operate at a Level of Service C or better and un-signalized at D or better during the peak hours of the day. Any alternatives or suggested phasing of improvements should be described and illustrated. The mitigation measures may include items such as, but not limited to, roadway widening, change to road intersection alignment or grades, need for bypass lanes or deceleration tapers/lanes, changes to signalization, relocation change in design, or reduction in number of access points, or a reduction in the proposed density of intensity of use. Sketches should be provided of suggested mitigation. Any mitigation that involves changes to optimize signal timing must demonstrate that such changes will benefit the overall operations and will be acceptable to the applicable road agency. Proposed mitigation measures should be discussed with the Washtenaw County Road Commission and Michigan Department of Transportation, as applicable. The responsibility and timing of roadway improvements shall be described. 
(Ord. No. 2005-359, 8-16-05)
 
Sec. 24-101. Qualifications of preparer.
The person responsible for the preparation of the study shall have a degree or specific professional training in the preparation of traffic impact studies. The preparer shall have at least three (3) years of recent experience in the preparation of traffic impact studies, provide evidence of ongoing experience and familiarity with the Highway Capacity Manual and other traffic operation evaluation techniques, be an associate (or higher) member of one or more professional transportation-related organizations, and be either a registered engineer (PE) or a planner with AICP or PCP certification. Any study involving roadway or traffic signal design work shall be prepared by or under the supervision of a registered engineer (PE) with specific training in traffic engineering. 
(Ord. No. 2005-359, 8-16-05)
 
Sec. 24-102. Procedures.
(a)	The applicant shall submit a traffic impact questionnaire, on a form provided by the township. In addition to completing the questionnaire, the applicant must include a description of the proposed development, the ITE Trip Generation Land Use(s), and the anticipated number of directional trips generated during the a.m. and p.m. peak hours of the traffic generator or the a.m. and p.m. peak hours on the adjacent streets, as well as for an average day. The township traffic engineer shall review the traffic impact questionnaire and determine the level of traffic impact analysis required (i.e. traffic impact comparison, traffic impact assessment or traffic impact study) and establish the study intersections based on the proposed development and size. 
(b)	Once the applicant has complete and submitted the traffic impact analysis to Ypsilanti Township, it is distributed to the Washtenaw County Road Commission, the township traffic engineer, and adjacent community, if appropriate. The study is to be submitted at a minimum of 45 days prior to the planning commission meeting at which the proposed development is to be considered. 
(c)	If the township or the road commission determines there are deficiencies in the traffic impact analysis, a report of such deficiencies shall be provided to the applicant and the applicant shall be required to revise and resubmit the traffic impact analysis. Any traffic impact analyses with noted deficiencies will not be re-reviewed until all elements have been addressed. All partial re-submittals will be rejected. 
(d)	Township traffic engineer and Washtenaw County Road Commission and other review agencies shall provide the Ypsilanti Township Planning Commission with comments on the traffic impact analysis prior to any consideration of the proposed development. 
(e)	For site plans and special conditional uses requiring approval by the Ypsilanti Township Planning Commission, the planning commission shall approve or deny the traffic impact study based upon the recommendation of the township traffic engineer, and Washtenaw County Road Commission and compliance with the requirements of this article. For rezonings, planned developments, condominiums, subdivision plats and multiple family site plans requiring approval by the Ypsilanti Township Board, the township board shall approve or deny the traffic impact study based upon the recommendation of the planning commission, township traffic engineer, and Washtenaw County Road Commission and compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-359, 8-16-05)
 
Sec. 24-103. Joint traffic impact studies.
A single traffic impact study which conforms to the requirements of section 24-100 may be submitted by two or more applicants provided the following conditions exists: 
(a)	Both applicants submit plans (rezoning, site or subdivision) for sites adjacent or in close proximity to one another; and 
(b)	The Ypsilanti Township Community and Economic Development Director determines that both applicants need to submit traffic impact studies; and 
(c)	The traffic impact study conforms to the requirements of 24-100, including an analysis of both sites. 
(Ord. No. 2005-359, 8-16-05)
 
Sec. 24-104. Waiver of requirements.
The requirement for a traffic impact study, or the specific study elements required may be waived or modified by the township. Reasons for the waiver or modification shall be documented. Factors to be considered include: 
(a)	Roadway improvements are programmed to be constructed prior to completion of the proposed development which are expected to mitigate any impacts associated with the proposed project. 
(b)	The existing level of service along the roadway is not expected to drop below C for signalized intersections and D for un-signalized intersections due to the proposed project. 
(c)	The existing level of service is not expected to be significantly impacted by the proposed project due to specific conditions at this location. 
(d)	A similar traffic study was previously prepared for the site and is still considered applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2005-359, 8-16-05)
 
DIVISION 4. REPEAL
 
Sec. 24-105. Repeal.
All ordinances and part of ordinances, which are inconsistent with the provisions of this article are hereby repealed, to include but not limited to Ordinance No. 97-162 of the Municipal Code and Section 2115 (6) of the Township Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2005-359, 8-16-05)
 
Secs. 24-106—24-125. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. LAND DIVISION 
 
Sec. 24-126. Intent.
An ordinance to regulate partitioning or division of parcels or tracts of land, enacted pursuant of but not limited to Michigan Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, and Act 248 of 1945, as amended, being the Township General Ordinance statute to provide a procedure therefore; to repeal any ordinance or provision thereof in conflict herewith; and to prescribe penalties and enforcement remedies for the violation of this ordinance. 
 
Sec. 24-127. Definitions.
A.	Applicant. A proprietor who is seeking approval for a division or partition pursuant to this ordinance. 
B.	Combination. Attaching two or more parcels of land to form a new parcel. 
C.	Development site. Any parcel or lot on which a building exists or which is intended for building development other than the following: 
1.	Agricultural use involving the production of plants and animals useful to humans, including forages and sod crops; grains, feed crops, and field crops; dairy and dairy products; poultry and poultry products; livestock, including breeding and grazing of cattle, swine, and similar animals; berries; herbs; flowers; seeds; grasses; nursery stock; fruits; vegetables; Christmas trees; and other similar uses and activities. 
2.	Forestry use involving, the planting, management, or harvesting of timber. 
D.	Divide or partition. The partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his or her heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors, or assigns for the purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and that satisfies the requirements of sections 108 and 109 of PA 591 of 1996, as amended. Division does not include a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel; and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of this act or the requirements of any applicable local ordinance. 
E.	Driveway. A strip of land, that is not dedicated to the public, used to provide vehicular access to a single zoning lot. 
F.	Exempt split. The partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his or her heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors, or assigns that does not result in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent. For a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of this act or the requirements of an applicable local ordinance. 
G.	Forty acres or the equivalent. Forty acres, a quarter-quarter section containing not less than 30 acres, or a government lot containing not less than 30 acres. 
H.	Land. All land areas occupied by real property. 
I.	Lot. A parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a main building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for the principal uses and uses accessory thereto, together with such yards and open spaces as are required under the township zoning ordinance. A lot may or may not be specifically designated as such on public records. 
J.	Lot area. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot. For lots adjacent to private roads, the lot area shall not include any portion of the private road. 
K.	Outlot. When included within the boundary of a recorded plat, means a lot set aside for purposes other than a development site, park, or other land dedicated to public use or reserved to private use. 
L.	Parcel. A continuous area or acreage of land. 
M.	Parent parcel or parent tract. A parcel or tract, lawfully in existence on April 1, 1997. 
N.	Proprietor. A natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or combination of any of them which may hold any ownership interest in land whether recorded or not. 
O.	Plat. A map or chart approved for the division of land pursuant to the laws of the State of Michigan. 
P.	Private road. An area of land used for ingress and egress to and from land which does not abut a public road, and said area is not owned or maintained by the public. 
Q.	Public road. An open way for passage or travel under public ownership and/or maintenance. 
R.	Tract. Two or more parcels that share a common property line and are under the same ownership. 
 
Sec. 24-128. Division and partitioning of land.
A.	Pursuant to Land Division Act. It shall be unlawful for any person to divide, partition, or combine any lot, outlot, or other parcel of land in a recorded plat, or divide, partition or combine any unplatted parcel or tract of land, except in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, unless the division or partition is approved and a part of a recorded plat pursuant to the Land Division Act, Act 591 of the Public Acts of 1996 of the State of Michigan, as amended. 
B.	All divisions of land, whether platted or unplatted, shall comply with the following: 
1.	Approval. An approval pursuant to this ordinance shall be obtained. 
2.	Conformance with zoning ordinance and subdivision regulations Any lot, outlot or other parcel of land shall be in compliance with the applicable width, area, and design layout requirements of the Ypsilanti Township Subdivision Regulations, and the Ypsilanti Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended. Land within dedicated road right-of-way or road easement shall not be included in the calculation of lot area, width, depth, building setbacks or other applicable requirements. 
3.	All plans shall be in compliance with Ypsilanti Township engineering standards. 
4.	Lots without utilities. If public sewer and water is not available, the resulting lot size and width of any residential lot shall not be less than the minimum requirements of the Ypsilanti Township Zoning Ordinance. Compliance with such minimum may or may not adhere to the requirements of the Washtenaw County Health Department. 
5.	Tax or assessment liens. Any due or unpaid taxes or special assessments upon the property shall be paid before the division, partitioning, or combination is given final approval. 
6.	Access. Every resultant parcel shall abut a public street, or right-of-way, or if there is no public street, there shall be a private road approved pursuant to the Ypsilanti Township Private Road Ordinance prior to or concurrent with any division, partitioning, or combination. 
7.	Future road right-of-way.
a.	Right-of-way shall be dedicated as necessary to provide for public roads as depicted on the Ypsilanti Township Thoroughfare Plan adopted as a component of the Township Master Plan of Future Land Use. 
b.	Land within existing or proposed right-of-way shall not be included in the calculation of lot area. 
c.	Setbacks shall be measured from existing or proposed future right-of-way lines, whichever is greater. 
8.	Each resulting parcel that is a development site shall have all of the following: 
a.	Public water or health department approval for on-site water supply. 
b.	Public sewer or county health department approval for on-site sewage disposal. 
c.	Adequate easements for public utilities from the parcel to existing public utility facilities. 
9.	Subject to paragraph 10. below, the division, together with any previous divisions of the same parent parcel or parent tract, shall result in a number of parcels not more than the sum of the following: 
a.	For the first ten acres or fraction thereof in the parent parcel or parent tract, four parcels. 
b.	For each whole ten acres in excess of the first ten acres in the parent parcel or parent tract, one additional parcel, for up to a maximum of 11 additional parcels. 
c.	For each whole 40 acres in excess of the first 120 acres in the parent parcel or parent tract, one additional parcel. 
10.	For a parent parcel or parent tract of not less than 20 acres, the division may result in a total of two parcels in addition to those permitted by paragraph 9. if one or both of the following apply: 
a.	Because of the establishment of one or more new roads, no new driveway accesses to an existing public road for any of the resulting parcels under paragraph 7. or this paragraph are created or required. 
b.	One of the resulting parcels under paragraph 9. above and this subsection comprises not less than 60 percent of the area of the parent parcel or parent tract. 
11.	A parcel of 40 acres or more created by the division of a parent parcel or parent tract shall not be counted toward the number of parcels permitted under paragraphs 9. and 10. above. 
12.	A parcel or tract created by an exempt split or a division is not a new parent parcel or parent tract and may be further partitioned or split if all of the following requirements are met: 
a.	Not less than ten years have elapsed since the parcel or tract was recorded. 
b.	The partitioning or splitting results in not more than the following number of parcels, whichever is less: 
i.	Two parcels for the first ten acres or fraction thereof in the parcel or tract plus one additional parcel for each whole ten acres in excess of the first ten acres in the parcel or tract. 
ii.	Seven parcels or ten parcels if one of the resulting parcels under this subsection comprises not less than 60 percent of the area of the parcel or tract being partitioned or split. 
13.	Unless declared "not buildable" as per paragraph 14 below, all divisions shall result in parcels containing sufficient land outside of wetlands, floodplains and other water bodies to allow use of the property in conformance with all required setback provisions, minimum floor areas, off-street parking spaces, on-site sewage disposal and water well locations (if applicable) and other ordinance requirements. 
14.	Not withstanding disqualification from approval pursuant to this ordinance, a proposed land division which does not fully comply with the applicable requirements of the zoning ordinance or of this ordinance, may be approved in any of the following circumstances: 
a.	Where the applicant executes and records an affidavit or deed restriction with the county register of deeds, in a form acceptable to the municipality, designating the parcel as "not buildable". Any such parcel shall also be designated as "not buildable" in the municipal records, and shall not thereafter be the subject of a request to the zoning board of appeals for variance relief from the applicable lot and/or area requirements, and shall not be developed with any building or above ground structure exceeding four feet in height. 
b.	Where, in circumstances not covered by paragraph a. above, the Zoning Board of Appeals has, prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, granted a variance from the lot area, width, coverage, or other requirements with which the parcel failed to comply. 
c.	Where the proposed land division involves only the minor adjustment of a common boundary line or involves a conveyance between adjoining properties which does not result in either parcel violating this ordinance, any applicable zoning ordinance, or the State Land Division Act. 
 
Sec. 24-129. Submittal requirements.
A.	Application. An applicant for a division or partition regulated by this ordinance shall submit to the township assessing department an application on the forms provided by said department setting forth the information required by this ordinance. A land division application that is found to be incomplete, may be returned to the applicant without review or further action. 
B.	Plan submittal. The applicant may, at their discretion submit information in two stages. A two-stage process would require the submittal of a plot plan for tentative approval. The plot plan would include only the most basic information necessary for the township to make a preliminary determination as to whether or not a proposed land division may be acceptable. A plot plan need not be prepared by a licensed surveyor or registered engineer. 
1.	Plot plan for tentative approval. The applicant shall submit a plot plan to include at a minimum, the following information: 
a.	The subject property, including approximate dimensions of all property lines. 
b.	The location of all existing structures with dimensions to all property lines. 
c.	Proposed means of access. 
d.	An accurate legal description of each resulting parcel. 
e.	The approximate location of any on-site wetlands or water bodies. 
f.	A signed statement which reads as follows: "This plan is for the purposes of gaining a preliminary determination and shall not constitute the submittal of a final plan. As such, the township is not required to grant final approval on this proposal within 45 days of submittal." 
2.	Final plan. The applicant shall submit a plan drawn to scale by a registered engineer or licensed surveyor and meeting all requirements of the Certified Survey Act, Act 132 of P.A. 1970, MCLA 54.211 as amended. Such plans shall include at least the following: 
a.	The subject property, including dimensions of all property lines. 
b.	The location of all existing structures with dimensions to all property lines. 
c.	Legal descriptions for all means of access including all existing or proposed private roads. 
d.	Existing and proposed utilities. 
e.	The area of existing and proposed parcels. 
f.	An accurate legal description of each resulting parcel. 
g.	Specific information identifying which parcels, if any, will retain the rights for future splits. 
h.	The location of any on-site wetlands or water bodies. 
There shall also be presented, for approval, a written instrument fully executed in a form legally sufficient for recording with the Washtenaw County Register of Deeds. Such instrument shall contain a legal description of all of the lots, outlots and/or parts that will result from the partition or division of the parcel(s) described therein. 
C.	Additional data. In addition to the required plans and application forms, the following data shall be submitted: 
a.	A copy of a warranty deed, showing the applicant as the owner of the property, must be provided with a final plan. If ownership interest was obtained after March 31, 1997 the warranty deed must specify land division rights. 
b.	If the property is the subject of a land contract, a title insurance policy must be included with the application and the signature of the person holding the land contract must be provided with a final plan. 
c.	The township departments, through the assessing department, or the township board may also require the applicant to furnish it with such additional data as will enable the township to make a determination. 
D.	Fees. Fees to be charged pursuant to this ordinance shall be set, or from time to time amended, by a Resolution of the township board. 
 
Sec. 24-130. Approval procedure.
No building or occupancy permits shall be issued by the building department for the use of any parcel of land which has resulted from a division or partition, without the approvals required by this ordinance, if the division or partition is accomplished after the effective date of this ordinance. 
A.	Review. The assessing department shall refer the application to the various township departments and consultants for review and approval. 
B.	Findings for approval. The township shall find in each case, before giving its approval that: 
1.	The division or partition will result in lots or parcels of land consistent with the character of the area in which the property is located, the Ypsilanti Township Zoning Ordinance and the Ypsilanti Township Master Plan. 
2.	There has been compliance with the requirements of this ordinance, and the other applicable township ordinances, Code provisions, standards, rules and regulations. 
3.	The provisions for any private road shall be in compliance with the Township Private Road Ordinance, and that the proposed split or combination will not be injurious to the public health, safety and welfare, and will be generally compatible with the surrounding land use and development. 
C.	Decision. The assessor and the community development director shall review and act upon each request for division of land submitted in accordance with the provision of this subsection within 45 days. They may: 
1.	Grant tentative approval with final approval conditioned upon the petitioner fulfilling certain requirements. 
2.	Grant final approval if the request meets all requirements of this subsection. 
3.	Deny the request with reasons. 
The decision made by the assessor and the community development director shall be unanimous. If their decision is not unanimous, the request for land division shall be referred to the township board, whose majority decision shall be final. 
D.	Appeal. If a petitioner's request is denied, the petitioner may appeal that decision to the township board. The township board's majority decision shall be final. 
E.	Time limit. Where an applicant chooses a two-stage process, if the final plan for land division is not submitted within ten months of the date that tentative approval is given the application shall be deemed to be null and void. 
(Ord. No. 98-190, 4-21-98)
 
Sec. 24-131. Violation and penalties.
Any parcel created in noncompliance with this ordinance shall not be eligible for any building permits, or zoning approvals, and shall not be recognized as a separate parcel on the assessment roll. In addition, violation of this ordinance shall subject the violator to the penalties and enforcement actions set forth below and as may otherwise be provided by law. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than 500 dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this ordinance shall also be subject to a civil action seeking invalidation of the land division and appropriate injunctive or other relief. 
 
Secs. 24-132—24-155. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VI. SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 24-156. Findings of fact.
The township board hereby finds that excessive quantities of soil are eroding from certain areas that are undergoing development such as housing developments, industrial areas, recreational facilities and roads. The erosion makes necessary costly repairs to gullies, washed out fills, roads and embankments. The resulting sediment clogs storm sewers and road ditches, muddies streams, leaves deposits of silt in lakes and reservoirs and is considered a major water pollutant. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Sec. 24-157. Purpose of article.
The purpose of this article is to prevent soil erosion and off-site sedimentation from occurring as a result of development within the township by requiring proper provisions for water disposal and the protection of soil surfaces during and after construction. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Sec. 24-157.1. Rules adopted.
Part 91, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control, P.A. 451 of 1994, as amended and the rules promulgated under Part 91 is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this article as is fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Sec. 24-158. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings, ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accelerated soil erosion means the increased loss of the land surface that occurs as a result of human activities. 
Agricultural practices means all land farming operations except the plowing or tilling of land for the purpose of crop production or the harvesting of crops. 
Certification of completion means a signed written statement by a person who has the required training and authority that the permitted earth change has been inspected and found to comply with the approved SESC plan, SESC conditions, this article, Part 91, and the rules promulgated under Part 91. 
CEDD means the township's community and economic development department. 
MDEQ means the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
Earth change means a human made change in the natural cover or topography of land, including cut and fill activities, which may result in or contribute to soil erosion or sedimentation of the waters of the state. Earth change does not include the practice of plowing and tilling soil for the purpose of crop production. 
Environmental specialist means the person working in the CEDD responsible for this article. 
Erosion means the process by which the ground surface is worn away by action of wind, water, gravity or a combination therefrom. 
Excavation or cut means any act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated, and also included shall be the conditions resulting thereof. 
Floodplain means those lands within the township and subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Grading means any stripping, excavating, filling, stockpiling or any combination thereof and also included shall be the land in its excavated or filled condition. 
Permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control measures means those control measures which are installed or constructed to control soil erosion and sedimentation and which are maintained after completion of the project. 
Person means a natural person, firm, or corporation, partnership or association. 
SESC permit means a permit issued to authorize work to be performed under this article. 
Sediment means solid particulate matter, including both mineral and organic matter that is in suspension in water, is being transported, or has been removed from its site of origin by the actions of wind, water, or gravity and has been deposited elsewhere. 
Stripping means any activity which removes or significantly disturbs the vegetative surface cover including clearing and grubbing operations. 
Temporary soil erosion control and sedimentation control measures means interim control measures which are installed or constructed and maintained for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation and are removed after project completion. 
Township means the Charter Township of Ypsilanti. 
Violation of this part or violates this part means a violation of this article, Part 91 (MCL 324.9101 et seq.) and the Administrative Rules promulgated under Part 91, or of the terms and provisions of any permit issued under this article. 
Waters of the state means the Great Lakes and their connecting waters, inland lakes and streams as defined in the rules promulgated pursuant to Part 91, and wetlands regulated under Part 303 (MCL 324.30301 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 24-158.1. Earth change; permit required; deposit as a condition of issuance.
(a)	A person shall not maintain or undertake an earth change which disturbs one or more acres of land or which is within 500 feet of the water's edge of a lake or stream governed by this article, Part 91 or the rules promulgated under Part 91 unless a permit has first been acquired from the CEDD which contains all of the state-prescribed information. The issuance of a permit shall be granted or denied within 30 days after the filing of a complete application. 
(b)	The applicant may be required to deposit with the township treasurer, in such form as the township treasurer may require, an amount sufficient to assure the installation and completion of such corrective or protective measures as may be required by the township. 
(c)	No permits shall be required for the following: 
(1)	Plowing and tilling of land for purposes of crop production or harvesting. 
(2)	Earth changes associated with well locations, surface facilities, flow lines, or access roads relating to oil or gas exploration and development activities regulated under Part 615, if the application for a permit to drill and operate under Part 615 contains a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan that is approved by the department under Part 615. However, those earth changes shall conform to the same standards as required for a permit under this part. This subsection does not apply to a multi-source commercial hazardous waste disposal well as defined in section 62506a. 
(3)	Gardening, if the natural elevation of the area is not raised. 
(4)	Normal road and driveway maintenance, such as grading or leveling, that does not increase the width or length of the road or driveway and that will not contribute sediment to lakes or streams. 
(5)	An earth change of a minor nature that is stabilized within 24 hours of the initial earth disturbance and that will not contribute sediment to lakes or streams. 
(6)	A residential property owner who undertakes the following earth change activities that do result in or contribute to soil erosion or sedimentation of the waters of the state or a discharge of sediment off site: 
a.	Post holes for fencing, decks, utility posts, mailboxes, or similar applications, if no additional grading or earth change occurs for use of the post holes. 
b.	Removal of tree stumps, shrub stumps, or roots resulting in an earth change not to exceed 100 square feet. 
c.	All of the following activities, if soil erosion and sedimentation controls are implemented, the earth change is stabilized within 24 hours of the initial earth disturbance, and soil erosion or sedimentation to adjacent properties or the waters of the state has not or will not reasonably occur: 
(i)	Planting of trees, shrubs, or other similar plants. 
(ii)	Seeding or reseeding of lawns of less than one acre if the seeded area is at least 100 feet from the waters of the state. 
(iii)	Seeding or reseeding of lawns closer than 100 feet from the waters of the state if the area to be seeded or reseeded does not exceed 100 square feet. 
(iv)	The temporary stockpiling of soil, sand, or gravel not greater than a total of ten cubic yards on the property if the stockpiling occurs at least 100 feet from the waters of the state. 
(v)	Seawall maintenance that does not exceed 100 square feet. 
(7)	Any future activities that may be exempted through the amendments to Part 91 or the rules promulgated under Part 91. 
(d)	A county or local enforcing agency may grant a permit waiver for an earth change after receiving a signed affidavit from the landowner stating that the earth change will disturb less than 225 square feet and that the earth change will not contribute sediment to lakes or streams. 
(e)	Exemptions provided in (a), (c) and (d) of this section shall not be construed as exemptions from enforcement procedures under Part 91 or this article, if the activities exempted therein cause or result in a violation of Part 91 or this article. Even though no permits are required under this section, those operations and constructions which are exempted from obtaining permits must still be in compliance with the rules and regulations concerning grading and erosion specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Sec. 24-159. Enforcement of article.
The CEDD, by the environmental specialist or his/her duly authorized representative is designated as the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Municipal Enforcement Agency (MEA) having the responsibility to administer and enforce Part 91 (MCL 324.9101 et seq.) and the administrative rules promulgated thereunder. Notwithstanding the existence or pursuit of any other remedy, the township may maintain an action in its own name in any court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction or other process against any person to restrain or prevent violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Sec. 24-159.1. Inspections.
The environmental specialist or his/her duly authorized representative may enter all reasonable times in or upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions and practices which may be a violation of this article, Part 91 or the rules promulgated pursuant to Part 91. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Sec. 24-160. Violation; penalties.
(a)	Any person violating any provision of this article shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than $2,500.00. 
(b)	A person who knowingly violates this article or knowingly makes a false application for a permit or in a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan is responsible for payment of a civil fine of not more than $10,000.00 for each day of a violation. 
(c)	A person who knowingly violates this part after receiving a notice pursuant to section 24-160.1 is responsible for the payment of a civil fine of not less than $2,500.00 or more than $25,000.00 for each day of violation. 
(d)	Civil fines collected hereunder shall be deposited with the township clerk for placement in the township general fund. 
(e)	A default in the payment of a civil fine or cost ordered under this section or an installment of the fine or cost may be remedied by any means authorized by the Revised Judicature Act of 1961, 1961 PA 236, MCL 600.101 to 600.9948. 
(f)	The environmental specialist or his/her duly authorized representative is authorized to issue municipal civil infraction citations. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Sec. 24-160.1. Notice of determination of violation.
If the township's environmental specialist determines that soil erosion or sedimentation of adjacent properties or the waters of the state has or will reasonably occur from land in violation of this article, the environmental specialist may seek to enforce a violation of this article by notifying the permittee or, if no permittee, the owner of the land in question, of his/her determination. The notice shall contain a description of the violation and what must be done to remedy the violation and shall specify a time to comply with this article, Part 91 and the rules promulgated under Part 91. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Sec. 24-160.2. Compliance; time.
Within five days after a notice of violation has been issued hereunder, a person who owns land subject to this article shall implement and maintain soil erosion and sedimentation control measures in conformance with this article, Part 91, and the rules promulgated under Part 91. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Sec. 24-160.3. Entry upon land; construction, implementation and maintenance of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures; costs.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, not sooner than five days after notice of violation of this article has been mailed under section 24-160.1, if the condition of the land, in the opinion of the environmental specialist, may result in or contribute to soil erosion or sedimentation of adjacent properties or to the waters of the state, and if soil erosion and sedimentation control measures in conformance with this part and the rules promulgated under this part or an applicable ordinance are not in place, the environmental specialist may request the township to enter upon the land and construct, implement, and maintain soil erosion and sedimentation control measures in conformance with this article, Part 91, and the rules promulgated under Part 91. However, the township shall not expend more than $10,000.00 for the cost of the work, materials, labor, and administration without prior written notice in the notice provided in section 24-160.1 to the permittee, if applicable, or person who owns the land that the expenditure of more than $10,000.00 may be made. If more than $10,000.00 is to be expended under this section, then the work shall not begin until at least ten days after the notice of violation has been mailed. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Sec. 24-160.4. Reimbursement to township; lien for expenses; priority, collection and treatment of lien.
(a)	All expenses incurred by the township under section 24-160.3 to construct, implement and maintain soil erosion and sedimentation control measures to bring land into conformance with this article, Part 91 and the rules promulgated under shall be reimbursed to the township by the permittee and/or person who owns the land. 
(b)	The township shall have a lien for the expenses incurred under section 24-160.3 in bringing the land into conformance with this article, Part 91 and the rules promulgated under Part 91. However, with respect to single family or multi-family residential property, the lien for such expenses shall have priority over all liens and encumbrances filed or recorded after the date of such expenditure. With respect to all other property, the lien for such expenses shall be collected and treated in the same manner as provided for property tax liens under the General Property Tax Act (1893 PA 206, MCL 211.1 to 211.157). 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Sec. 24-160.5. Rights and remedies are cumulative.
The rights and remedies provided herein are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Secs. 24-161, 24-162. Reserved.
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2004-346, §§ O, P, adopted Oct. 19, 2004, deleted §§ 24-161 and 24-162 in their entirety. Former §§ 24-161 and 24-162 pertained to compliance with article required for site plan or plat approval and compliance with article required for occupancy, and derived from Code 1975, §§ 7-4 and 7-5. 
 
Sec. 24-163. General requirements.
(a)	All earth changes should be conducted in such a manner so as to effectively reduce accelerated soil erosion and resulting sedimentation. 
(b)	All persons engaged in earth changes, shall design, implement and maintain acceptable soil erosion and sedimentation control measures, in conformance with Part 91 (MCL 324.9101 et seq.) and all rules of the department of environmental quality promulgated pursuant thereto, which effectively reduce accelerated soil erosion. 
(c)	All earth changes shall be designed, constructed, and completed in such a manner so that the exposed area of any disturbed land shall be limited to the shortest possible period of time. 
(d)	Sediment caused by accelerated soil erosion shall be removed from runoff water before it leaves the site of the earth change. 
(e)	Any temporary or permanent facility designed and constructed for the conveyance of water around, through, or from the earth change area shall be designed to limit the water flow to a nonerosive velocity. 
(f)	A person shall install temporary soil erosion and sedimentation control measures before or upon commencement of the earth change activity and shall maintain the measures on a daily basis. A person shall remove temporary soil erosion and sedimentation control measures after permanent soil erosion measures are in place and the area is stabilized. A person shall stabilize the area with permanent soil erosion control measures under approved standards and specifications as prescribed by R 323.1710. 
(g)	A person shall complete permanent soil erosion control measures for all slopes, channels, ditches, or any disturbed land area within five calendar days after final grading or the final earth changes has been completed. If it is not possible to permanently stabilize a disturbed area after an earth change has been completed or is significant earth change activity ceases, then a person shall maintain temporary soil erosion and sedimentation control measures until permanent soil erosion control measures are in place and the area is stabilized. 
(h)	If an application for a permit is received for earth change activity in a floodplain, the applicant must first clear with the floodplain section of the department of environmental quality and acquire a floodplain permit if necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Sec. 24-164. Minimum design standards for erosion control and sediment control.
All SESC plans and specifications including extensions of previously approved plans shall include provisions for erosion and sediment control in accordance with, but not limited to, the standards contained in the Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control published by the Natural Resources Conservation Service; Michigan Department of Transportation SESC Manual; Michigan Department of Management and Budget SESC Guidebook, and Michigan Department of Environmental Quality Guidebook of Best Management Practices. Copies of such standards shall be available for inspection in the office of the environmental specialist. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Sec. 24-165. Modification of approved plans.
All modifications of the approved SESC plans must be submitted to and approved by the environmental specialist. All necessary sustaining reports shall be submitted with any proposal to modify the approved SESC plan. No earthwork in connection with any proposed modification shall be permitted without the approval of the environmental specialist. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Sec. 24-166. Responsibility of permittee.
During grading operations the permittee shall be responsible for: 
(1)	The prevention of damage to any public utilities or services within the limits of grading and along any routes of travel of the equipment including, but not limited to, damage resulting from exposing such utilities to frost damage in cut areas. 
(2)	The prevention of damage to adjacent property. No person shall grade on land so close to the property line as to endanger any adjoining public street, sidewalk, alley or any public or private property without supporting and protecting such property from settling, cracking or other damage which might result. 
(3)	Carrying out the proposed work in accordance with the approved plans and in compliance with all the requirements of the permit and this article. 
(4)	The prompt removal of all soil, miscellaneous debris or other materials applied, dumped or otherwise deposited on public streets, highways, sidewalks or other public thoroughfares during transit to and from the construction site, where such spillage constitutes a public nuisance or hazard. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Sec. 24-167. Inspection of work.
(a)	The requirements of this article, Part 91, and the rules promulgated under Part 91 shall be enforced by the community and economic development director. The environmental specialist shall inspect the work and require adequate inspection or compaction by soil engineer or by a soil testing agency, unless he/she determines that such inspection requirements may be waived due to the nonhazardous nature of grading. 
(b)	Upon satisfactory execution of all approved soil erosion and sediment control plans and other requirements, the environmental specialist shall issue a certification of completion. If the community and economic development director finds any existing conditions not as stated in any application, SESC permit or approved plan, he/she may refuse to allow any further site work until approval of a revised SESC plan which will conform to the existing conditions has been granted. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Sec. 24-168. Maintenance requirements.
Persons carrying out soil erosion and sediment control measures under this article, Part 91, or the rules promulgated under Part 91, and all subsequent owners of property concerning which measures have been taken, shall maintain all permanent erosion control measures, retaining walls, structures, plantings and other protective devises. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Sec. 24-169. Variances.
Where it is alleged that there is error or misinterpretation in any order, requirements, decisions, grant or refusal made by the community development director, the board of zoning appeals shall have the power to hear specific applications and may amend or change such order, requirements, decisions, grant or refusal so that it is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Secs. 24-170—24-180. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. SESC PERMIT
 
Sec. 24-181. Required; exceptions.
Unless otherwise exempted herein, no person shall do any grading, stripping, excavating or filling, or undertake any earth change, unless such person has a valid SESC permit issued by the environmental specialist. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Sec. 24-182. Application.
A separate application shall be required for each SESC permit. Plans, specifications and timing schedules shall be submitted with each application for a SESC permit. The plans shall be prepared or approved by a person who is trained and experienced in soil erosion and sedimentation control methods and techniques. The environmental specialist may waive this requirement of the applicant if the work entails little hazard to adjacent property and does not include the construction of a fill upon which a structure may be erected. The plans and specifications accompanying the SESC permit application shall contain the following data: 
(1)	A vicinity sketch at the scale of one inch to 200 feet indicating the site location as well as the adjacent properties within 500 feet of the site boundaries. 
(2)	A boundary line survey of the site on which the work is to be performed. 
(3)	A plan of the site at a scale of one inch to 100 feet showing: 
a.	Name, address and telephone number of the landowner, developer and petitioner; 
b.	A timing schedule indicating the anticipated starting and completion dates of the development's construction sequence and the time of exposure of each area prior to the completion of effective erosion and sediment control measures; 
c.	A certified statement of the quality of excavation and fill involved; 
d.	Existing topography at a maximum of one-foot contour intervals; 
e.	Proposed topography at a maximum of one-foot contour intervals; 
f.	Location of any structure or natural feature on the site; 
g.	Location of any structure or natural feature on the land adjacent to the site and within 50 feet of the site boundary line; 
h.	Location of any proposed additional structures or development on the site; 
i.	Elevations, dimensions, location, extent and the slope of all proposed grading (including building and driveway grades); 
j.	The estimated total costs of the required temporary and permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control measures; 
k.	Plans of all drainage provisions, retaining walls, cribbing, planting, erosion control measures to be constructed in connection with, or as a part of, the proposed work together with a map showing the drainage area of land tributary to the site and estimated runoff of the area served by any drains; 
l.	Other information or data as may be required by the community and economic development director such as a soil investigation report which shall include, but not be limited to, data regarding the nature, distribution and supporting ability of existing soil and rock on the site; 
m.	All information required by Administration Rule 1703 information, sections 1703 (b), (c)(i), (c)(ii), (c)(iii), c(iv), and (c)(v) which is specified below: 
(i)	A soils survey or a written description of the soil types of the exposed land area contemplated for the earth change. 
(ii)	Details for proposed earth changes, including all of the following: 
a.	A description and the location of the physical limits of each proposed earth change. 
b.	A description and the location of all existing and proposed on-site drainage and dewatering facilities. 
c.	The timing and sequence of each proposed earth change. 
d.	The location and description for installing and removing all proposed temporary soil erosion and sediment control measures. 
e.	A description and the location of all proposed permanent soil erosion and sediment control measures. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Sec. 24-183. Fees.
At the time of filing an application for a SESC permit, a nonrefundable plan review fee shall be paid in an amount to be set by resolution by the township board. An additional, nonrefundable, inspection fee shall be paid at the time the SESC permit is issued, the fee shall be in the amount set by resolution by the township board. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Sec. 24-184. Cash deposit or instrument of credit required.
(a)	A SESC permit shall not be issued unless the permittee shall first post with the environmental specialist a cash deposit or instrument of credit drawn on a financial institution and executed by the landowner for the purpose of ensuring the work described in the approved plans shall be completed. 
(b)	The cash deposit or instrument of credit shall be in a form approved by the township attorney, payable to the township, and in the amount of the estimated total cost of all temporary or permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control measures. The total cost shall be estimated by the environmental specialist. The cash deposit or instrument of credit shall include penalty provisions for failure to complete the work on schedule as specified on the SESC permit. 
(c)	Every instrument of credit shall include and every cash deposit shall be made on the conditions that the permittee shall comply with all of the provisions of this article and all of the terms and conditions of the SESC permit, and shall complete all of the work contemplated under the SESC permit within the time limit specified in the SESC permit, or if no time limit is specified, within 180 days after the date of issuance of the SESC permit. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Sec. 24-185. Extension of time.
If the permittee is unable to complete the work within the specified time, he/she may, at least ten days prior to the expiration of the permit, present in writing to the environmental specialist a request for an extension of time setting forth the reasons for the requested extension. If such an extension is warranted, the environmental specialist may grant additional time for the completion of the work, but no such extension shall release the owner or letter of credit or the person furnishing the instrument of credit or letter of credit. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Sec. 24-186. Failure to complete work or comply with terms of permit.
In the event of failure to complete the work or failure to comply with all the requirements, conditions and terms of the permit, the environmental specialist may order such work as is necessary to eliminate any danger to persons or property and to leave the site in a safe condition, and he/she may authorize completion of all necessary temporary or permanent soil erosion control measures. The permittee and the surety executing the letter of credit or person issuing the instrument of credit or making the cash deposit shall continue to be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for the payment of all necessary costs and expenses that may be incurred or expended by the township causing any and all such work to be done. In the case of a cash deposit, any unused portion thereof shall be refunded to the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Sec. 24-187. Denial.
SESC permits shall not be issued where: 
(1)	The proposed work would cause hazards to the public safety and welfare; 
(2)	The work, as proposed by the applicant, will damage any public or private property or interfere with any existing drainage course in such a manner as to cause damage to any adjacent property or result in the deposition of debris or sediment on any public way or into any waterway or create an unreasonable hazard to persons or property; 
(3)	The land area for which grading is proposed is subject to geological hazard to the extent that no reasonable amount of corrective work can eliminate or sufficiently reduce sediment, slope instability, or any other such hazard to persons or property; or 
(4)	The land area for which the grading is proposed may lie within the floodplain of any stream or watercourse, not specifically designated and delineated by the township as an area subject to flood hazard, unless a hydrologic report, prepared by a professional engineer is submitted to certify that the proposed grading will have in his/her opinion, no detrimental influence on the public welfare or upon the total development of the watershed. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Secs. 24-188—24-200. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. DRAINAGE SITE PLAN
 
Sec. 24-201. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any commercially zoned property or office zoning classification or buildings located upon such classifications in the township. 
Drain means any drainage necessary to relieve commercially zoned property in the township. 
Engineer means the township engineer responsible for site plan review. 
Site plan review means a drawing of all buildings, parking lots, and other uses of commercial and office property in the township including, but not limited to, the drains to be inserted into the ground or drainage relief of surface water for the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 24-202. Created; filing required.
There is hereby created, and from July 11, 1974, required to be filed with the community development department prior to the obtaining of a building permit, a site plan for the use of commercial and office property within the township. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Sec. 24-203. Scope of plan.
The site plan shall show all surface waters, natural flow drainage and all buildings or improvements and changes in elevation on the property, and the flow for surface water runoff by either underground drainage pipes or surface drainage areas after construction. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Sec. 24-204. Submission and review.
The site plan shall be submitted to the community development department of the township and shall thereafter be submitted by the community development department to the engineer for his review and comments. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Sec. 24-205. Approval by township engineer prerequisite to building permit.
Building permits shall not be issued by the community development department of the township until the department receives a statement of approval from the township engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Sec. 24-206. Fee.
The township shall secure from the person seeking the site plan review a fee as prescribed by resolution of the township board from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Sec. 24-207. Review by township engineer; standards.
The township engineer shall review the site plan submitted to him within the following standards: 
(1)	The site plan and construction shown by the site plan shall not cause additional surface water runoff on adjoining properties. 
(2)	The site plan and construction shown by the site plan shall not cause erosion of any ditch and/or property within the township. 
(3)	The site plan and construction shown thereon shall not cause any detrimental effect to any private property and/or public property in the township. 
(Ord. No. 2007-372, §§ A, B, 5-1-07)
 
Chapter 26 ENVIRONMENT 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Secs. 26-1—26-25. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. BLIGHT
 
Sec. 26-26. Purpose of article.
It is the purpose of this article to prevent, reduce or eliminate blight or potential blight in the township by the prevention or elimination of certain environmental causes of blight or blighting factors which exist or which may in the future exist in the township. 
(Code 1975, § 13-32)
 
Sec. 26-27. Enforcement of article.
This article shall be enforced by the community development director of the township, any police officer of the county or state, any constable or police officer of the township or such other persons as shall be so designated by the township board. 
(Code 1975, § 13-33)
 
Sec. 26-28. Causes of blight or blighting factors enumerated.
It is hereby determined that the following uses, structures and activities are causes of blight or blighting factors which, if allowed to exist, will tend to result in blight and undesirable neighborhoods: 
(1)	The storage on any property of building materials, unless there is in force a valid building permit issued by the township for construction upon such property and such materials are intended for use in connection with such construction or unless the storage of building materials is otherwise permitted as a principal or accessory use under township Ordinance No. 74 (appendix A of this Code). Building materials shall include, but shall not be limited to, lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete or cement, nails, screws, or any other materials used in constructing any structure. 
(2)	The storage or accumulation of litter, junk, trash, rubbish, refuse, waste materials, garbage, offal, paper, glass, cans, bottles, debris or other foreign substances of every kind and description, except as such may be stored as provided under the rules and regulations of this Code. The term "junk" shall include parts of machinery or motor vehicles; unused appliances stored in the open; and remnants of wood, metal or any other cast-off materials of any kind, whether or not the same could be put to any reasonable use. 
(3)	The existence of any structure or part of such structure which, because of fire, wind or other natural disaster or physical deterioration, is no longer habitable as a dwelling, nor useful for any other purpose for which it may have been intended or lawfully used. 
(4)	The existence of any vacant dwelling, garage or other accessory building, unless the same is securely locked, with windows intact or neatly boarded up, and otherwise protected to prevent entrance thereto by unauthorized persons. 
(5)	The existence of any partially completed structure, unless such structure is in the course of construction in accordance with a valid and subsisting building permit issued by the township and unless such construction is completed within the time specified by existing ordinances. 
(6)	The parking, storage or placing upon any public right-of-way, public property or private property within the township of any truck, road tractor, semitrailer, poletrailer, bus, or trailer coach for a period in excess of 48 hours, unless the same is wholly contained in a fully enclosed building. 
(Code 1975, § 13-34; Ord. No. 2016-460 , 2-16-16)
 
Sec. 26-29. Maintenance of causes of blight or blighting factors prohibited; exception.
No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained any of those causes of blight or blighting factors enumerated in section 26-28 upon any property in the township owned, leased, rented or occupied by such person, except as such uses of property may be permitted or incidental to the carrying out of any business or occupation authorized by the zoning ordinance of the township. 
(Code 1975, § 13-35)
 
Sec. 26-30. Violations, civil infractions.
Any person, firm or corporation violating section 26-29 shall be responsible for a civil infraction and shall be subject to a fine as follows: 
(1)	The fine for any first violation shall be $100.00; 
(2)	The fine for any violation which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of once before, shall be $250.00; 
(3)	The fine for any violation which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of twice before, shall be $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 96-151, 6-18-96)
 
Sec. 26-31. Each day a separate civil infraction.
A separate civil infraction shall be deemed committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 96-151, 6-18-96)
 
Sec. 26-32. Rights and remedies are cumulative.
The rights and remedies provided herein are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 96-151, 6-18-96)
 
Secs. 26-33—26-50. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. NONOPERATING VEHICLES
 
Sec. 26-51. Purpose of article.
The fundamental purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents and property owners of the township; to limit and restrict the outdoor storage and parking of partially dismantled and nonoperating motor vehicles, trailer coaches or tractor-trailers and new or used parts of such vehicles upon public property and residential premises within the township; to limit and restrict the outdoor repairing, modifying or dismantling of such vehicles or trailers upon public property and residential premises; to thereby avoid injury and hazard to children and others attracted to such vehicles or trailers; to attempt to prevent the devaluation of residential property values and the deterioration of residential areas; to preserve the aesthetic value and characteristics of residential areas; and to prevent the psychological ill effects of the presence of such vehicles or trailers upon adjoining residents and property owners. 
(Code 1975, § 13-49)
 
Sec. 26-52. Definitions.
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Major repair work means any repairs to the transmission or differential, any overhaul of the motor which shall involve removal of the head or oil pan, any bodywork which involves repairing or painting over ten percent of the body surface of the vehicle, and other like repairs. 
Minor repairs means adjusting and replacing brakes, replacing mufflers, tail pipes and exhaust pipes, ignition and carburetor tuneups, replacing and repairing tires, repairs to electrical and starter systems, repairs to the cooling system, lubrication and other related work. 
Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled. 
Operable motor vehicle means a motor vehicle which is: Capable of immediate self propulsion, contains all necessary mechanical parts, including but not limited to an engine, inflated tires, and has all major portion of its exterior body. 
Operable trailer means any trailer that has its main component parts intact and is in a condition so that it may be moved under its own power or by the method customarily employed in moving the particular type of trailer involved. 
Residential premises means all land and premises located within areas of the township which are zoned for residential purposes, including single-family residential, multiple-family residential, trailer coach park and agricultural or rural residential districts, under the provisions of the township zoning ordinance, and any parcel of land located in other portions of the township which contains a single-family or multiple-family residence and is primarily used for residential purposes. 
Trailer means every vehicle, with or without motor power, designed for carrying property or persons and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. 
Trailer coach means a vehicle, house car, house trailer or similar mobile unit which may be used for dwelling or sleeping quarters or camping purposes. 
(b)	Any words used in this article requiring special interpretation and not listed in subsection (a) of this section shall be used as defined in the township zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1975, § 13-50; Ord. No. 99-229, 10-5-99)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 26-53. Parking or storing of vehicles on public property or residential premises.
No person shall park, store, place or leave on any street, highway, public property, or residential premises within the township any motor vehicle in a wrecked, junked or partially dismantled condition or which is lacking any major component part or is not in an operable condition. However, such motor vehicles are permitted on residential premises if wholly contained within a fully enclosed building, unless doing so would be in violation of any law, statute, ordinance, or regulation of the township, county, or state. 
(Code 1975, § 13-51; Ord. No. 99-229, 10-5-99)
 
Sec. 26-54. Repairing, redesigning, modifying or dismantling operations on public property or residential premises.
No repairing, redesigning, modifying or dismantling work or operations shall be allowed upon any motor vehicle or trailer or parts thereof upon any public right-of-way, public property or residential premises, except such as shall be accomplished within a fully enclosed building; provided, however, that such repair work may be done outdoors on such premises, if it consists of minor repairs and the repairs are completed within a 24-hour period, or, if not completed within such 24-hour period, the motor vehicle or trailer is kept in a fully enclosed building during such time as the minor repair work is not being actively done on the vehicle. In no event shall any such minor repair work continue for a period in excess of three days, including the day upon which it is started, and in no event shall any major repair work be done on the vehicle. No repair work of any type shall be done on any residential premises unless the work is done by an occupant of the premises on a motor vehicle or trailer owned solely by him or another occupant of the premises. 
(Code 1975, § 13-52)
 
Sec. 26-55. Variances from sections 26-53 and 26-54.
If the regulations set out in sections 26-53 and 26-54 create any special or peculiar hardship beyond the control of a particular person or because of unforeseen circumstances, the community development director is hereby given authority to grant written permission to an applicant to operate contrary to the provisions of such sections for a limited period, not to exceed 14 days, provided no adjoining property owner or other person is unreasonably adversely affected thereby and the spirit and purpose of the article are still substantially observed. 
(Code 1975, § 13-53)
 
Sec. 26-56. Violations, civil infractions.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be responsible for a civil infraction and shall be subject to a fine as follows: 
(1)	The fine for any first violation shall be $100.00; 
(2)	The fine for any violation which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of once before, shall be $250.00; 
(3)	The fine for any violation which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of twice before, shall be $500.00. 

(Code 1975, § 13-54; Ord. No. 96-151, 6-18-96)
 
Sec. 26-56.1. Each day a separate civil infraction.
A separate civil infraction shall be deemed committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 96-151, 6-18-96)
 
Sec. 26-56.2. Rights and remedies are cumulative.
The rights and remedies provided herein are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 96-151, 6-18-96)
 
Sec. 26-57. Removal and destruction or sale; notice.
(a)	The community development director, any police officer of the county or the state, any peace officer of the township, or any such other officer as the township board may designate may cause any vehicle, trailer or part thereof which violates the provision of this article to be removed from the premises and impounded and destroyed or sold for junk, in the discretion of such officer, the cost thereof to be assessed against the owner of the vehicle, trailer or parts thereof, or of the premises upon which the same are located. Any sums realized on the sale of the same may be retained by the township to reimburse it for the costs incurred in such removal and sale, to the extent of such costs. Any balance of such sums remaining after such reimbursement shall be returned to the owner of such vehicle, trailer or parts thereof. 
(b)	No motor vehicle, trailer or parts thereof shall be removed from any premises until the community development director has given a written notice to the owner or occupant thereof, informing him that such vehicle, trailer or parts thereof will be so removed, unless the owner or occupant remedies the violation within five days of the date of the notice. Service of such notice shall be made either personally, by tacking the notice on the premises or by sending it to the address of any residence thereon addressed to the "owner or occupant." If service is made by mail, service shall be considered as having been made when the envelope containing same is deposited in a United States Postal Service mail receptacle with the necessary postage thereon. 
(Code 1975, § 13-55)
 
Sec. 26-58. Construction of article.
This article shall not prevent the operation of any licensed junkyard, salvage yard, garage, body or paint shop or automobile service station within a proper zone, as defined in the township zoning ordinance, and shall be in addition to any other laws, ordinances and regulations of the township, county and state. 
(Code 1975, § 13-56)
 
Secs. 26-59—26-80. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. NOISE
 
Sec. 26-81. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Plainly audible sound means any sound of which the information content is unambiguously communicated to the listener such as, but not limited to, understandable spoken speech, comprehension of whether a voice is raised or normal, or comprehensible musical rhythms. 
(Code 1975, § 13-4(c))
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 26-82. Violations.
Any person violating section 26-83 and/or section 26-84 is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by not more than a $500.00 fine or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 13-4(d); Ord. No. 96-151, 6-18-96; Ord. No. 2001-270, 6-5-01)
 
Sec. 26-83. Unlawful creation or permitting.
It shall be unlawful for any person himself, or knowingly to permit another person in any place owned and/or controlled by him, to create, assist in creating, permit, continue, or permit the continuance of any unreasonably loud, disturbing, or unnecessary noise, which either injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others within the limits of the township. 
(Code 1975, § 13-4(a))
 
Sec. 26-84. Enumeration of prohibited acts.
The following acts among others, are declared to be unreasonably loud, disturbing, or unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but said enumeration shall not be deemed exclusive, namely: 
(1)	The sounding of any horn or signal device, emanating from a motor vehicle, except as a danger signal, so as to create any loud or harsh sound plainly audible within any dwelling unit or residence. A motor vehicle as used in this subsection means every vehicle that is self-propelled. 
(2)	The playing or operation of any device designed for sound reproduction including, but not limited to, any radio, television set, musical instrument, audio system, including cassette tape players, compact disc players, and speakers, or loud speaker, in such a manner or with such volume as to be plainly audible in any dwelling unit or residence which is not the source of the sound, or to operate any such device on public property or on a public right-of-way so as to be plainly audible 50 feet or more from such device. 
(Code 1975, § 13-4(b); Ord. No. 98-188, § I, 4-21-98)
 
Sec. 26-85. Registered owner of a motor vehicle responsible for noise violations.
In a prosecution for a violation of section 26-84(1), proof that the particular motor vehicle described in the citation, complaint, or warrant was used in the violation, together with proof that the defendant named in the citation, complaint or warrant was the registered owner of the motor vehicle at the time of the violation, constitutes in evidence a presumption that the registered owner of the motor vehicle was the person who operated or controlled the motor vehicle when the noise violation occurred. The person in whose name the motor vehicle is registered with the secretary of state is presumed to be the registered owner of the motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 98-188, § II, 4-21-98; Ord. No. 2001-270, 6-5-01)
 
Chapter 30 FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 30-1. Cost recovery for hazardous/toxic material incidents and hazardous conditions of extended duration.
The Ypsilanti Township fire department shall be entitled to recover all costs and damages incurred in conjunction with emergency incidents involving hazardous/toxic materials or hazardous conditions of extended duration. Such costs and damages shall include, but not be limited to, those associated with incident abatement, cleanup, and mitigation, including any related third party costs, which were necessary to ensure the safety of the township and its populace. 
(1)	Such costs and damages shall be the joint and several responsibility of the owner(s) and/or operator(s) of the property, equipment, vehicle, or container causing or contributing to any emergency incident or hazardous condition of extended duration. All such costs and damages shall be paid within 30 days of demand by the fire department unless otherwise approved by the township board. 
(2)	The township shall have a lien for all unpaid costs and damages incurred by the fire department as above-described and may enforce such lien in the manner prescribed by the general laws of the state providing for the enforcement of tax liens. 
(Ord. No. 2006-366, 11-21-06)
 
Secs. 30-2—30-25. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
 
Sec. 30-26. Adoption by reference.
A certain document, copies of which are on file with the office of the township clerk and the bureau of fire prevention, being marked and designated as the "International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, International Code Council," is adopted by reference, including appendix chapters A through N, and all references therein printed, except those section and appendices herein amended, deleted or added. This document shall be known and may be cited as the "Fire Prevention Code of the Charter Township of Ypsilanti," regulating and governing conditions hazardous to life and property from the standpoint of fire and explosion and for defining the scope of authority of the chief of the fire department and the bureau of fire prevention. 
( Ord. No. 2019-488 , § A, 7-16-19)
 
Sec. 30-27. Purpose of article.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the prevention of fires and the protection of persons and property from exposure to the dangers of fire and explosion; to authorize the investigation of fires and the discovery of crime or other offenses in relation thereto; to require the razing, repair and alterations of building, and the clearing and improvement of premises which constitute a fire hazard or a menace to the peace, security or safety of persons or property; to control the use and occupancies of such premises; to provide for the transportation, use and storage of inflammable liquids, compressed gases, and corrosive liquids; to prohibit the use of certain fire extinguishers and fire extinguishing agents; to provide for the administration of this article; and to fix penalties for violation of the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2019-488 , § B, 7-16-19)
 
Sec. 30-28. Code available for public use and inspection.
Complete printed copies of the Fire Prevention Code of the Charter Township of Ypsilanti and supplements, therein adopted, are available for public use and inspection at the office of the township clerk and at the office of the bureau of fire prevention. 
( Ord. No. 2019-488 , § C, 7-16-19)
 
Sec. 30-29. References in code.
References in the Fire Prevention Code of the Charter Township of Ypsilanti and supplements to the word "state" shall mean the State of Michigan; reference to the word "municipality" shall mean the Township of Ypsilanti; references to the term "corporation counsel" shall be held to mean the attorney for the township; reference to the term "bureau of fire prevention" shall mean the township fire department; and reference to the term "fire official" shall be held to mean the chief of the fire department or his authorized designee. 
( Ord. No. 2019-488 , § D, 7-16-19)
 
Sec. 30-30. Code revisions.
The following sections of the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, International Code Council, are hereby revised. 
Section 101.1 Insert Charter Township of Ypsilanti 
Section 110.4 Delete in its entirety and replace with the following provision: 
Section 110.4 Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate used under the infraction, and shall be subject to a fine as follows: 
a.	The fine for any first violation of Article II shall be $100.00. 
b.	The fine for any violation which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of once before, shall be $250.00. 
c.	The fine for any violation which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of twice before, shall be $500.00. 
The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violations or permit it to continue. All such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such situation or defects within a reasonable time, and, when not otherwise specified, each act or violation and every day upon which such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
The application of the penalties of this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions by injunctive or other relief. 
Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate violation. 
Section 112.4 Insert $100 or more than $500. 
Section 901.2 Fire Sprinkler Plan Submittal (Added to read) 
All fire sprinkler plans shall be submitted to the fire official for review. The fire official may request review of the sprinkler plans by a third party. The third party shall be included on a list of companies approved by the Charter Township of Ypsilanti Fire Prevention Bureau. The Charter Township of Ypsilanti Fire Prevention Bureau shall witness all required tests and field inspections of all fire sprinkler systems. 
a.	A list of approved companies will be available in the Fire Prevention Bureau and the Office of Community Standards. 
b.	No company will be allowed to review its own plans. 
Section 906.1. Residential Fire Extinguisher Requirements Rental Units. *2015 Property Maintenance Code language (Added to read) 
a.	It shall be the responsibility of the owner(s) of single family and multiple family rental units to provide each living unit with a portable fire extinguisher. 
b.	The fire extinguisher shall have a minimum 1A-10BC rating or higher, and shall be mounted in a readily accessible location within each dwelling unit. Each extinguisher shall be tagged to include a maintenance and inspection record and must be operable at all times. 
c.	It shall be the owner's responsibility to maintain the extinguisher in accordance with NFPA 10, and such maintenance shall include, but is not limited to, recharging the extinguisher of the unit which was discharged when attempting to extinguish a documented fire. For the purpose of this section, a documented fire shall mean any fire that the Ypsilanti Township Fire Department has responded to and/or has a record of. In all other cases it shall be the responsibility of the resident to recharge the extinguisher. 
d.	The resident of a single family or multiple family rental unit shall be responsible to advise the building owner, or his designated agent, whenever a required fire extinguisher is missing, damaged, discharged or in need of service. 
e.	Anyone tampering with, damaging or interfering with the effectiveness of a fire extinguisher shall be in violation of this code. 
Section 907.2 Minimum Smoke Detection Requirements Rental Units. *2015 Property Maintenance Code language (Added to read) 
a.	Each apartment, suite, or sleeping area of every single or multiple dwelling units shall be provided with a minimum of one smoke detector capable of sensing visible or invisible products of combustion. 
b.	The smoke detector shall be approved or listed by recognized or independent testing laboratories and, when actuated, shall provide an alarm suitable to warn the occupants within the individual dwelling unit. 
c.	A minimum of one smoke detector shall be located in the immediate area of all sleeping quarters. 
d.	All single family and multiple dwelling units, including duplexes, shall comply with this section. 
e.	It shall be the responsibility of the owner(s) of each rental unit to install and maintain in operating condition smoke detectors in each dwelling unit as herein provided. 
f.	All devices, combination of devices and equipment required herein are to be installed in conformance with the Michigan Building and Residential Codes and this section. 
g.	At least one smoke detector shall be installed to protect each sleeping area. A sleeping area is defined as the area or areas of the family living unit in which the bedrooms or sleeping rooms are located. When bedrooms ordinarily used for sleeping are separated by other used areas, such as kitchens or living rooms, but not bathrooms or closets, they shall be considered as separate sleeping areas for the purpose of this section. 
( Ord. No. 2019-488 , § E, 7-16-19)
 
Sec. 30-31. Geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the code.
The geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2018 International Fire Code are hereby established as follows: 
Section 5704.2.9.6.1 (geographic limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground storage tanks outside of buildings is prohibited): Storage of greater than 50 gallons is prohibited within 50 feet of a structure. 
Section 5706.2.4.4 (geographic limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground ground storage tanks is prohibited): Amend to add the following language: 
a.	An above ground storage tank shall not be erected less than 300 feet (92 meters) from any of the following: 
i.	a mineshaft. 
ii.	an air escape shaft for a mine. 
iii.	a school. 
iv.	a church. 
v.	a hospital. 
vi.	a theater. 
vii.	assembly occupancies for 50 or more persons. 
b.	The above ground storage tank, loading operation, or unloading operation shall not be installed closer than 25 feet (7.6 meters) plus 1 inch (25 millimeters) per 1,000 volts, measured horizontally from the nearest conductor or power lines, except that a service entrance and service line may be closer than 25 feet (7.6 meters), but shall not be over a tank loading or unloading area. 
Section 5806.2 (geographic limits in which the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited): Amend to add the following language: 
a.	Stationary containers with storage greater than 45 gallons is prohibited within 50 feet of the following: 
i.	Places of public assembly. 
ii.	Non-ambulatory patient areas. 
b.	Stationary containers with storage greater than 45 gallons is prohibited within 15 feet of the following: 
i.	Combustible materials such as paper, leaves, weeds, dry grass or debris exposure hazards. 
c.	Stationary containers with storage greater than 45 gallons is prohibited within 10 feet of the following: 
i.	Air intakes. 
d.	Stationary containers with storage greater than 45 gallons is prohibited within 5 feet of the following: 
i.	Lot lines. 
Section 6104.2 (geographic limits in which the storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas): Amend to add the following language: 
For the protection of heavily populated and congested areas, the maximum aggregate capacity of any installation of liquefied petroleum gas shall not exceed a water capacity of 2,000 gallons within 50 feet (15.2 meters) of a structure. 
( Ord. No. 2019-488 , § F, 7-16-19)
 
Sec. 30-32. Rights and remedies are cumulative.
The rights and remedies provided herein are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
( Ord. No. 2019-488 , § G, 7-16-19)
 
Chapter 34 FLOODS 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Secs. 34-1—34-25. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 34-26. Statutory authorization of article.
This article is adopted to secure the public health, welfare, and safety under the combined authority of Act No. 246 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1945 (MCL 41.181 et seq., MSA 5.45(1) et seq.), as amended, Act No. 167 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1968 (MCL 323.2a, MSA 3.522(1) et seq.) (Flood Plain Control Act), an amendment to Act No. 245 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1929 (MCL 323.1 et seq., MSA 3.521 et seq.), as amended, (Water Resource Commission Act), the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended, and the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973. 
(Code 1975, § 8½-1)
 
Sec. 34-27. Findings of fact.
(a)	The flood hazard areas of the township are subject to periodic inundation which could result in potential loss of life, property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which would adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)	These potential flood loses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damages. 
(Code 1975, § 8½-2)
 
Sec. 34-28. Statement of purpose of article.
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and 
(5)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Code 1975, § 8½-3)
 
Sec. 34-29. Objectives of article.
The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)	Protect human life and health; 
(2)	Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)	Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)	Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)	Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)	Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)	Provide a means whereby potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Code 1975, § 8½-4)
 
Sec. 34-30. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Appeal means a request for a review of the community development director's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance. 
Applicant means the owner, agent or legal representative of property for which and by whom an application for a town development permit is made. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland waters; or 
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood boundary-floodway map means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the area of special flood hazard and the floodway. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood hazard boundary-floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodproofing means those construction standards identified in the floodproofing regulations, publication No. EP-1165-2-314, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including the basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this article. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term "manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. 
New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter. 
Start of construction, for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act [Pub. L. 97-348], includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the state of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include the excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial improvement means, for a structure built prior to the enactment of this article, any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration effects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions, or any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
(Code 1975, § 8½-5)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 34-31. Construction of language.
The following rules of construction apply to the text of this article: 
(1)	The particular shall control the general. 
(2)	In case of any difference of meaning and implication between the text of this article and any caption, preamble or illustration, the text shall control. 
(3)	The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. 
(4)	Words used in the present tense shall include the future, and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(5)	A building or structure includes any part thereof. 
(6)	The phrase "used for" may include the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for" or "occupied for." 
(7)	The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association or any other similar entity. 
(8)	Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunctions "and," "or," and "either…or" the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
a.	The conjunction "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
b.	The conjunction "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
c.	The conjunction "either…or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
(Code 1975, § 8½-6)
 
Sec. 34-32. Violations, civil infractions.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any section of this chapter shall be responsible for a civil infraction, and shall be subject to a fine as follows: 
(1)	The fine for any first violation shall be $100.00; 
(2)	The fine for any violation which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of once before, shall be $250.00; 
(3)	The fine for any violation which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of twice before, shall be $500.00. 
(Code 1975, § 8½-22; Ord. No. 96-151, 6-18-96)
 
Sec. 34-32.1. Each day a separate civil infraction.
A separate civil infraction shall be deemed committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 96-151, 6-18-96)
 
Sec. 34-32.2. Rights and remedies are cumulative.
The rights and remedies provided herein are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 96-151, 6-18-96)
 
Sec. 34-33. Lands to which this article applies.
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the township. 
(Code 1975, § 8½-7)
 
Sec. 34-34. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
(a)	Designation of regulated floodprone hazard areas. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS) Entitled "Washtenaw County, Michigan (All Jurisdictions)" and dated April 3, 2012, and the flood insurance rate map(s) (FIRMS) panel number(s) of 26161C; 0268E, 0269E, 0288E, 0406E, 0407E, 0410E, 0420E, 0426E, 0430E, 0435E, 0440E, and 0445E and dated April 3, 2012, are adopted by reference for the purposes of administration of the Michigan Construction Code, and declared to be a part of Section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code, and to provide the content of the "flood hazards" section of Table R301.2(1) of the Michigan Residential Code. 
(b)	Flood hazard areas in addition to those areas described in the flood insurance study may exist in the township. The location of these areas shall be designated by the community development director upon determination by the township engineer. 
(Code 1975, § 8½-8; Ord. No. 2012-423, § 3, 3-26-12)
 
Sec. 34-35. Development permit required.
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article. Application for such permit shall be on forms furnished by the community development director. The applicant shall supply all information required by the form. 
(Code 1975, § 8½-9)
 
Sec. 34-36. Compliance with article and other applicable regulations required.
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Code 1975, § 8½-10)
 
Sec. 34-37. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 1975, § 8½-11)
 
Sec. 34-38. Interpretation of article.
In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: 
(1)	Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)	Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)	Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 1975, § 8½-12)
 
Sec. 34-39. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the township or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made under this article. 
(Code 1975, § 8½-13)
 
Secs. 34-40—34-50. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
 
Sec. 34-51. Designation of community development director as administrator.
The community development director is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 8½-14)
 
Sec. 34-52. Duties and responsibilities of the community development director.
Duties of the community development director shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)	Reviewing all development permits to ensure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)	Advising the permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permits are known, requiring that copies of such permits, or a letter of no authority, be provided and maintained on file with the development permit. 
(3)	Notifying adjacent communities and the state flood control coordinator at the state development office prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submitting evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration; requiring that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portions of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(4)	Verifying through acceptance of the applicant's engineering certificate, the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including the basement, of all new or substantially improved structures and retaining same as a community development department record. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with this section, the community development director shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer this article. 
(5)	Verifying, through acceptance of the applicant's engineering certificate, the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which the new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed and retaining same as a community development department record. 
(6)	When floodproofing is utilized for a particular nonresidential structure, the community development director shall obtain certification from a registered professional engineer or architect. Floodproofing standards for construction in special flood hazard areas are identified as, "Flood-Proofing Regulations," publication No. EP-1165-2-314, U.S. Army Corp of Engineers. 
(7)	Making the necessary interpretation, where interpretation is needed, as to the location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in section 34-54. Where the applicant seeks to substitute construction standards required and referenced by this article, the applicant may file with the construction board of appeals for relief. 
(8)	Maintaining all records pertaining to the provisions of this article in the office of the community development director, which records shall be open for public inspection. 
(9)	The community development director shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements or other development in zone A. 
(Code 1975, § 8½-15)
 
Sec. 34-53. Permit procedures.
(a)	Application; contents. Application for a development permit shall be made to the community development director on forms furnished by him and may include, but not be limited to, the following plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill storage of materials; drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)	Elevation in relation to the mean sea level of the lowest floor, including the basement, of all structures. 
(2)	Elevation in relation to the mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure has been floodproofed. 
(3)	Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the floodproofing criteria in section 34-67(2). 
(4)	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. 
(5)	Base flood elevation data where the proposed development is subject to Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.), as amended, or greater than five acres in size. 
(6)	Additional information which may be reasonably necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)	Determination by community development director; issuance or denial. The community development director shall: 
(1)	Determine if the area is potentially in a special flood hazard area. 
(2)	Obtain the base flood elevation from the flood profile in the flood insurance study. 
(3)	Obtain information on the ground elevation at the building site as referenced by subsection (a)(6) of this section. 
(4)	Compare base flood and building site elevation and determine if it is in or near special flood area based on the criteria in section 34-67(1) and 34-67(2). 
(5)	Using his best judgment, determine if area is in or near flood area; and if so send applicant to DNR for a permit. 
(6)	Check to see if the project needs a permit from another agency as stated in section 34-52(2). 
(7)	Check for hazardous buoyant or polluting material prohibited by this article. 
(8)	Check building plan for compliance with this article. 
(9)	Check the application for completeness and make sure the site drawing has everything required by this article as referenced in subsection (a) of this section. 
(10)	If the applicant meets all the requirements, issue a permit. If not, the director shall inform the applicant that the permit must be denied until the problem is corrected. 
(11)	Make an inspection before any filling or placement of obstruction is done. 
(12)	Make an inspection when the filling is completed or the first floor is ready to be commenced. 
(13)	Make a final inspection when the project is completed. If the project has been completed according to approved plans, he shall issue a certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1975, § 8½-16)
 
Sec. 34-54. Variance procedures.
(a)	The zoning board of appeals, as established by the township, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)	The board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination of administration of this article. 
(c)	Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of appeals or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the circuit court or court of like jurisdiction, as provided by the state public law. 
(d)	Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state register of historic places without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section. 
(e)	In passing upon such applications, the board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this article and: 
(1)	The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others. 
(2)	The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage. 
(3)	The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to the flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner. 
(4)	The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community. 
(5)	The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable. 
(6)	The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(7)	The compatability of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development. 
(8)	The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area. 
(9)	The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
(10)	The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site. 
(11)	The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and bridges. 
(12)	Reserved. 
(13)	Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items (1) through (12) of this subsection have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(f)	Upon consideration of the factors listed in subsection (e) of this section and the purposes of this article, the board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(g)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(h)	Conditions for variances are as follows: 
(1)	Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)	Variances shall only be issued upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)	The community development director shall maintain the records of appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. 
(Code 1975, § 8½-17)
 
Sec. 34-55. Agency designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the Building Director of the Charter Township of Ypsilanti is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the Charter Township of Ypsilanti under Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan. The Charter Township of Ypsilanti assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act through out the corporate limits of the community adopting this ordinance [from which this section is derived]. 
(Ord. No. 2012-423, § 1, 3-26-12)
Editor's note(s)—Section 1 of Ord. No. 2012-423, adopted March 26, 2012, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 34-55 was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 34-56. Code appendix enforced.
Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code shall be enforced by the enforcing agency within the Charter Township of Ypsilanti. 
(Ord. No. 2012-423, § 2, 3-26-12)
Editor's note(s)—Section 2 of Ord. No. 2012-423, adopted March 26, 2012, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 34-56 was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Secs. 34-57—34-65. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
 
Sec. 34-66. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)	All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(3)	All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(4)	All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(5)	New and replacement sanitary sewer systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(6)	Onsite waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(7)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure on which the start of construction was begun after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, shall meet the requirements of new construction as contained in this article. 
(8)	Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(9)	For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(Code 1975, § 8½-18)
 
Sec. 34-67. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 34-34 or section 34-52(4), the following provisions are required: 
(1)	Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated to or above base flood elevation. 
(2)	Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated to the level of the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in subsection 34-53(a)(3). 
(3)	Mobile homes. Standards for mobile homes shall be as follows: 
a.	No mobile home shall be placed in a floodway or coastal high hazard area. 
b.	All mobile homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors. Specific requirements shall be that: 
1.	Over-the-top ties are provided at each of the four corners of the mobile home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations and mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side; 
2.	Frame ties are provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points and mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side; 
3.	All components of the anchoring system are capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; and 
4.	Any additions to the mobile home are similarly anchored. 
c.	For new mobile home parks and subdivisions; for expansions to existing mobile home parks and subdivisions; for existing mobile home parks and subdivisions where the repair, reconstruction or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement has commenced; and for mobile homes not placed in a mobile home park or subdivision the following are required: 
1.	Stands or lots elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of the mobile home will be at or above the base flood level; 
2.	Provision for adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler; and 
3.	In the instance of elevation on pilings: lots large enough to permit steps, piling foundations placed in stable soil no more than ten feet apart, and reinforcement provided for pilings more than six feet above the ground level. 
(4)	Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 34-34, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectile and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.	Prohibition of encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
b.	If subsection (4)a of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division. 
c.	Prohibition of the placement of any mobile homes. 
(Code 1975, § 8½-19)
 
Sec. 34-68. Standards for subdivision proposals.
(a)	All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)	All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)	All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Code 1975, § 8½-20)
 
Chapter 37 LIQUOR 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 37-1. Liquor committee.
The township liquor committee is comprised of members recommended by the township supervisor and appointed by the township board. The purpose of the liquor committee is to receive and review applications for new and transferred on-premise liquor licenses and associated permits; to receive recommendations from township departments regarding such applications; and to make recommendations to the township board for approval or denial of such licenses. The liquor committee shall seek to meet with qualified applicants and obtain any information it deems appropriate in order to determine the applicant's suitability to be granted a township liquor license, the suitability of the proposed location and facilities where the license would be used, and the long term viability of the applicant's business plan. The liquor committee shall act in the best interests of the community to promote and preserve public health, safety and welfare; to promote economic development and prevent the economic loss of transferable liquor licenses; and to make recommendations for the equitable use of quota-restricted on-premise liquor licenses and permits available for use in the township through the state liquor control commission. 
( Ord. No. 2021-494 , 3-2-21)
 
Secs. 37-2—37-20. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. LICENSES
 
Sec. 37-21. Title.
This article shall be known and cited as the Charter Township of Ypsilanti Liquor License Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 2021-494 , 3-2-21)
 
Sec. 37-22. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and preserve the public peace, health, safety and welfare through the local regulation of the application, transfer, relocation, review, issuance, renewal, and revocation of liquor licenses for liquor establishments to the fullest extent permissible under state law, based upon a recognition of the impact of liquor licenses upon the well being of the community as a whole. 
( Ord. No. 2021-494 , 3-2-21)
 
Sec. 37-23. Required.
No person, firm, corporation, association or partnership (hereinafter "person") shall sell alcoholic liquor or any other beverage defined in section 37-24 below, whether for consumption on or off the premises, within the Charter Township of Ypsilanti (Township), without first obtaining a license as provided by state law. Furthermore, such person shall, in addition to compliance with the requirements of state law, establish compliance with all local building, property maintenance, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, fire, zoning and public health regulations, and obtain a special conditional use permit if required. This shall not apply to special licenses granted by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission for one day events allowed by statute, the procedures for which shall be governed by such statutes. 
( Ord. No. 2021-494 , 3-2-21)
 
Sec. 37-24. Definitions.
(a)	Alcoholic liquor means any spirituous, vinous, malt, or fermented liquor, powder, liquids, and compounds, whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented, and by whatever name called, containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume that are fit for use for food purposes or beverage purposes as defined and classified by the state liquor control commission. 
(b)	Beer means any beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or other cereal in potable water. 
(c)	Wine means the product made by the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juice of sound, ripe grapes, or any other fruit with the usual cellar treatment, and containing not more than 21 percent of alcohol by volume, including cider made from apples or pears, or both, which contains at least one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, or mead, or honey wine made from honey, fermented fruit juices other than grapes, and mixed wine drinks. 
(d)	Spirits means any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with potable water or other substances, or both, in solution, and includes wine containing an alcoholic content of more than 21 percent by volume, except sacramental wine and mixed spirit drink. 
(e)	Alcohol means the produce of distillation of fermented liquid, whether or not rectified or diluted with water, but does not mean ethyl or industrial alcohol, diluted or not, that has been denatured or otherwise rendered unfit for beverage purposes. 
(f)	Sacramental wine means wine containing not more than 24 percent of alcohol by volume which is used for sacramental purposes. 
(g)	Brandy means alcoholic liquor as defined in Federal Regulations, 27 CFR 5.22d (1980). 
(h)	Mixed wine drink means a drink or similar product marketed as a wine cooler and containing less than seven percent alcohol by volume, consisting of wine and plain, sparkling, or carbonated water and containing any one or more of the following: 
(1)	Nonalcoholic beverages. 
(2)	Flavoring. 
(3)	Coloring materials. 
(4)	Fruit juices. 
(5)	Fruit adjuncts. 
(6)	Sugar. 
(7)	Carbon dioxide. 
(8)	Preservatives. 
(i)	Mixed spirit drink means a drink produced and packaged or sold by a mixed spirit drink manufacturer or an outstate seller of mixed spirit drink which contains ten percent or less alcohol by volume consisting of distilled spirits mixed with nonalcoholic beverages or flavoring or color materials and which may also contain water, fruit juices, fruit adjuncts, sugar, carbon dioxide, or preservatives. 
(j)	Alcohol vapor device means any device that provides for the use of air or oxygen bubbled through alcoholic liquor to produce a vapor or mist that allows the user to inhale this alcoholic vapor through the mouth or nose. 
( Ord. No. 2021-494 , 3-2-21)
 
Sec. 37-25. Application for new "on-premises" license.
(a)	In addition to such application as may be required by the state liquor control commission for licensing or permitting by the state, applications shall also be made to the township board for a township license to sell or sample alcoholic liquor, beer, wine, or spirits, etc., for all types of on-premises consumption. Such separate application shall be filed in writing and submitted to the township clerk's office with all required fees. It shall be signed by the applicant if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent if a partnership or corporation, verified by oath, or affidavit, and shall contain, at a minimum the following information: 
(1)	The name, birth date and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; or in the case of any type of partnership, the partners thereof (anyone entitled to share in the profits); in the case of a corporation, the object for which organized, the names and addresses of the officers and directors and of all shareholders holding directly or indirectly five percent or more of the voting stock or shares of the corporation. 
(2)	The citizenship and place of birth of the applicant, and, if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of naturalization. 
(3)	The nature of business that the applicant is engaged in; and in the case of a corporation, the object for which it was formed. 
(4)	The length of time said applicant has been in business of that nature, or, in the case of a corporation, the date when its charter was issued. 
(5)	The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license. 
(6)	A statement whether applicant has ever operated or made application for a similar or other license or permit on any premises other than described in this application, and the disposition of such operation or application. 
(7)	A statement indicating whether the applicant has ever had a similar or other license suspended, revoked, or was found responsible for regulatory violations, and the disposition of such suspension, revocation, or regulatory non-compliance. 
(8)	A statement indicating whether the applicant has ever been found guilty, pled guilty, or pled no contest to a criminal charge or any local ordinance violations, and to list any such relevant information; that the applicant is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this division or the laws of the State of Michigan. Such statements shall be verified, to the extent possible, by the township's designated liquor enforcement officials who shall report the results of such investigation to the township liquor committee prior to any final decision by the township board upon the application. 
(9)	A statement that the applicant will not violate any laws of the State of Michigan or of the United States or any ordinances of the township in the conduct of its business. 
(10)	The application shall be accompanied by building and site plans showing the entire structure and premises and, in particular, the specific areas where the license is to be utilized. The plans shall demonstrate zoning and building code compliance including adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities, landscaping, and where appropriate, adequate plans for screening and noise control. 
(11)	The application shall be accompanied by a general area plan encompassing a one-quarter mile area showing the proximity of churches and schools (giving distances in lineal feet) to the proposed building. 
(12)	Authorization shall be provided to the township for access to any and all files which may be in the possession of the Michigan Liquor Control Commission regarding that commission's investigation of the transferee as a present licensee, as a previous licensee, or with regard to any license which the transferee has held a partial interest in. 
(13)	A statement that all personal property taxes, all real property taxes, business registration, code enforcement, and inspection fees, and all other obligations due and payable to the township have been paid with regard to the premises for which a license is sought or from which it is being transferred. 
(14)	The liquor committee may require any additional information it deems appropriate in order to make a fully informed recommendation to the township board. 
(b)	Restrictions on licenses. No license shall be issued to: 
(1)	A person whose license, under this division, has been revoked for cause. 
(2)	A person who, at the time of application or renewal of any license issued herein, would not be eligible for such licenses upon a first application. 
(3)	A partnership, regardless of type, unless all of the members of such co-partnership shall qualify to obtain a license. 
(4)	A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or a stock owner or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason. 
(5)	A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless such manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the licensee. 
(6)	A person who has been convicted or found responsible for a violation of any federal or state law or administrative rule of the state liquor control commission concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance. 
(7)	A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought or does not have a lease therefore for the full period for which the license is issued, or to a person, corporation, or partnership (of any type) that does not have sufficient financial assets to carry on or maintain the business. 
(8)	Any law enforcing public official or any member of the township board, and no such official shall be interested in any way either directly or indirectly in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor. 
(9)	For premises where there exists a violation of applicable building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, fire, or zoning codes, or public health regulations, or any other applicable township ordinance. 
(10)	For any premises not having obtained a special conditional use permit as required by the zoning code. 
(11)	A person who is in default of any personal property taxes, property taxes, real property taxes, or any other obligations due and payable to the township. 
(12)	For premises where it is determined by a majority of the township board that the premises does not, or will not reasonably soon after commencement of operations, fully comply with zoning and site plan requirements including having adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities, screening, landscaping, noise, or nuisance control; or where a nuisance exists or will exist as a result of approval of a liquor license at the location. 
(13)	Where the township board determines, by majority vote, that the proposed location is inappropriate considering the character of the area; the attitude and perspective of adjacent residents and property owners who would be impacted by issuance of a license; traffic safety; accessibility to the site from abutting roads; capacity of abutting roads to accommodate the new commercial activity; distance from public or private schools for minors; proximity of the inconsistent zoning classification; and accessibility from primary roads or state highways. 
(c)	Recommendation from the liquor committee and township departments. Following receipt of a fully completed application, fees and other information as may be required by the township, such application shall be forwarded to the township liquor committee, the office of community standards, the applicable law enforcement agency, the fire department, the building department, the township treasurer, and such other departments as may be required by the particular case. The applicable departments shall fully investigate the applicant, inspect the site and building where the requested license would be used, and submit recommendations to the liquor committee. The liquor committee, upon receipt and review of all applicable reports and recommendations, shall make an informed final recommendation to the township board for its consideration. The township board may request from the applicant other pertinent information as it deems necessary in order to make a determination. For license applications that also require local governmental approval for a state license, the township clerk's office shall submit the township board's approval or disapproval to the Michigan Liquor Control Commission as required by state law. 
(d)	Application fees. At the time of filing an application for any type of license or permit required in this division, the applicant shall pay all required fees established by resolution of the township board, some or all of which may be nonrefundable. 
The established fees shall be charged for each license requested; provided, however, that individuals making applications for more than one license for use concurrently at the same location may seek consideration for fee reductions from the township board at the time of deliberation. 
All fees shall be paid in full at the time application is made and prior to dissemination of the application for investigation and recommendation by the liquor committee and applicable township departments. 
(e)	Term of license. Approval of a license shall be for no more than a period of one year and shall conform to requirements and expiration cycles of state law. Furthermore, approval of a license by the township shall be with the understanding that any necessary remodeling or construction for the use of the license shall be commenced pursuant to required building permits within six months of the action of the township board or final approval by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission. Any unreasonable delay in the completion of such remodeling or construction, or any unreasonable delay in placing the subject license into active use for any reason, as well as any other violation of state or local law, may subject the license to revocation upon notice and hearing as detailed elsewhere herein. 
(f)	License renewal. Each license approved under this article shall expire each year concurrent with the expiration of the required state license or permit. Each license holder shall apply to the office of community standards to renew their license no later than 90 days prior to its expiration date and shall pay all required license renewal fees in advance. The office of community standards shall review the licensee's regulatory compliance history, public safety response history, and account status for applicable taxes and fees. The office of community standards and the fire marshal shall inspect the licensed premises for compliance with all applicable codes and regulations, shall cite the licensee for code deficiencies, and shall verify compliance prior to the expiration date of the license. The office of community standards shall determine whether there is cause to object to the renewal of the license in accordance with the criteria for nonrenewal or revocation described elsewhere herein. If necessary, the office of community standards shall initiate the procedure for objections as described elsewhere herein. When there is no cause to object, then the license shall automatically renew for a period not to exceed one year. The office of community standards shall report the renewal status of each active township license to the township liquor committee and the township board on an annual basis. 
(g)	Reservation of authority. No such applicant for a liquor license has the right to the issuance of such license, and the township board reserves the right to exercise reasonable discretion to determine who, if anyone, shall be entitled to the issuance of such license. Additionally, no applicant for a liquor license has the right to have such application processed and the township board further reserves the right to take no action with respect to any application filed with the township board. The township board further reserves the right to maintain a list of all applicants and to review the same when, in its discretion, it determines that the issuance of an additional liquor license is in the best interest of the township at large and for the needs and convenience of its citizens. 
(h)	License hearing. The township board shall grant a public hearing upon the license application when, in its discretion, the township board determines that the issuance of an additional liquor license is in the best interests of the township at large and for the needs and convenience of its citizens. Following such hearing, the township board shall submit to the applicant a written statement of its findings and determination. The township board's determination will be at a minimum based upon satisfactory compliance with the appropriate requirements and restrictions set forth in subsections (a) and (b) above. 
(i)	Application denied—Reapplication. No person whose application is denied regardless of the reason, may re-apply for a period of a minimum of one year from the date of such denial, regardless of the proposed location. 
( Ord. No. 2021-494 , 3-2-21)
 
Sec. 37-26. Inspection required.
All licensees, whether "on-premises" or "off-premises" shall make the licensed premises available for inspection and search by either a state liquor control commission investigator or a local law enforcement officer designated by either the state or the township, during regular business hours or when the licensed premises are occupied by a licensee or a clerk, servant, agent or employee of the licensees. Evidence of a violation discovered pursuant to this subsection may be seized and used in an administrative or court proceeding. Furthermore, all prospective licensees and applicants shall make the premises available for inspection by the township's representatives so as to establish compliance with all applicable building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, fire, zoning, public health regulations, or any other applicable township ordinance or regulation. 
( Ord. No. 2021-494 , 3-2-21)
 
Sec. 37-27. Revocation/nonrenewal authorized.
Each establishment within the township for which a license or permit is granted, whether for consumption of alcohol "on-premises" or "off-premises" shall be operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable state laws, local ordinances, laws and regulations (in addition to the provisions contained in this article), and in a clean and sanitary manner meeting the approval of applicable township departments and policing agencies. Upon any violation of this division, or such other applicable laws, ordinances and regulations, the township board may, after notice and hearing described below, request the state liquor control commission to refuse renewal, revoke, or take such other action as may be required with regard to such licenses. 
( Ord. No. 2021-494 , 3-2-21)
 
Sec. 37-28. Procedure for objections and request for revocation.
(a)	Procedure. If the township receives information that any licensee has committed a violation of state or local law, including but not limited to, the terms and provisions of this article, the liquor enforcement officer involved shall prepare a report in writing specifying (i) the specific factual details of such violation(s); (ii) the particular law or ordinance violated; and (iii) any other information or recommendation relevant to a proper determination by the township board as to the nature of such violation(s) and the appropriate action to be taken by the township. 
(b)	The liquor enforcement officer shall file the original report prepared under subsection (a) above with the township board, and serve a copy of such report upon the licensee or its authorized agent or employee, personally or by registered mail. 
(c)	Within 20 days from the date such report has been filed with the township board, the township clerk shall set a date for a hearing before the township board on the alleged violation(s) for a determination by the township board as to whether or not the township board shall require and recommend to the state liquor control commission that the commission revoke, or deny the renewal of, any license. Notice of this hearing shall be served by the township clerk upon the licensee or its authorized agent or employee, personally or by registered mail, not less than ten days before the scheduled hearing date, and such notice shall contain the following: 
(1)	Notice of proposed action; 
(2)	Reason for the proposed action; 
(3)	Date, time and place of the hearing; 
(4)	A statement that the license holder may present evidence and testimony and confront adverse witnesses; 
(5)	A statement that the license holder has the right to be represented by legal counsel at the hearing. 
(d)	At all such hearings, the licensee shall have the legal right to defend against the allegations made by way of confronting any adverse witnesses, by being allowed to present live witnesses in its own behalf, by being allowed to present other evidence in its own behalf, and by being allowed to present arguments personally or through legal counsel in its own behalf. 
(e)	The township board shall prepare a written statement of its findings, which may be formal or informal in nature within a reasonable time, not to exceed 60 days, after the conclusion of all such hearings. Such statement of findings may be embodied in a resolution as described in subsection (f) below, if the township board determines that objections to renewal, or request for revocation of, a license or related permit is appropriate. 
(f)	If the township board determines after due notice and proper hearing that competent, material and substantial evidence exists that a violation of state or local law has been committed by a licensee or that, even if no violation has been demonstrated, nevertheless the interests of public health, safety or welfare warrant that the township board object to renewal or request revocation of any existing license issued to such licensee, the township board may adopt a resolution recommending to the state liquor control commission that it deny renewal or revoke any such license to such licensee. 
(g)	Within ten days of the township board's final approval of any such resolution, the township clerk shall forward a copy thereof to the state liquor control commission pursuant to MCL 436.1501 as amended, as the township board's official notice of objection to renewal or request for revocation of any existing license or related permit, a copy of which shall be sent by registered or first class mail to the licensee. 
(h)	Criteria for nonrenewal or revocation. The township board may recommend nonrenewal or revocation of a license to the state liquor control commission upon a determination by the township board that based upon competent material and substantial evidence presented at the public hearing, any of the following exists: 
(1)	Violation of any of the restrictions of licenses set forth in, or any provision of, this article or any other law, ordinance, or state statute or the administrative rules or provisions of the State Liquor Control Act. 
(2)	Maintenance of a nuisance upon the premises, including, but not limited to, any of the following: 
a.	Existing violations of building, property maintenance, zoning, health, fire or regulatory codes. 
b.	A pattern of patron conduct upon or in the neighborhood of the licensed establishment which is a violation of the law or which disturbs the peace, order, and tranquility of the neighborhood including, but not limited to, on-street parking congestion, diminished traffic and pedestrian safety, litter, and unreasonable noise. 
c.	Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of the licensed establishment, including litter, debris, or blowing refuse, or any of these being deposited upon adjoining properties. 
d.	Failure to maintain the safety and security of the licensed premises and exterior grounds free from dangerous or unlawful activity. 
e.	Any advertising, promotions or activity which by its nature causes, creates or contributes to disorder, disobedience to rules, ordinances or laws, or contributes to the disruption of normal activities of those in the neighborhood of the licensed establishment. 
(3)	Any condition of delinquency or default in the payment of any tax, fee, charge, utility bill, special assessment, other debt, or unpaid judgment to the township, whether owed by licensee, establishment or property owner. 
(4)	Perjury or any material misrepresentation of information in any application required or hearing held pertaining to the grant, renewal, or revocation of any license or permit. 
(5)	Any other appropriate reason as determined by the township board. 
( Ord. No. 2021-494 , 3-2-21)
 
Sec. 37-29. Transfer of existing licenses.
The transfer of any existing "on premise" liquor license covered hereunder shall be subject to each of the requirements, criteria and procedure, including fees, set forth in this article for the granting of a new liquor license. Notwithstanding the above, where the requested transfer is for the purpose of transferring the ownership of an existing facility, and no changes or renovations are proposed for the site or to the building, the applicant is not required to provide the building and site information which would otherwise be required for a new license applicant. In addition, the transferee or applicant shall furnish any necessary authorization to permit the township access to any and all files which may be in the Michigan Liquor Control Commission's possession regarding that commission's investigation of the transferee as a present licensee, or as a previous licensee, or with regard to any licensee in which the transferee has held a partial interest. 
( Ord. No. 2021-494 , 3-2-21)
 
Sec. 37-30. Transfer of existing location.
No existing "on premise" license location shall be transferred within or without the township boundaries without proper application to and approval of the township board. 
( Ord. No. 2021-494 , 3-2-21)
 
Sec. 37-31. Penalties.
Any person, whether licensed or not, who furnishes those substances defined in section 37-24 "Definitions" without having obtained the appropriate license therefore as required, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 plus court costs, or both, in the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 2021-494 , 3-2-21)
 
Secs. 37-32—37-50. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. LIQUOR INSPECTIONS
 
Sec. 37-51. Title.
This article shall be known as and cited as the Charter Township of Ypsilanti Liquor Inspection Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 2021-494 , 3-2-21)
 
Sec. 37-52. Definitions.
Those definitions enumerated in section 37-24 of this Code shall be and hereby are specifically incorporated herein by reference as if each and every one were more particularly set forth. 
( Ord. No. 2021-494 , 3-2-21)
 
Sec. 37-53. Liquor Control Act of the State of Michigan.
All alcoholic liquor traffic, including but not limited to, the manufacture, sale, offer for sale, consumption, storage for sale, possession and/or transportation thereof within Township of Ypsilanti shall comply within the provision of the Michigan Liquor Control Act, being Public Act 8 of 1933, as amended, and the provisions of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 2021-494 , 3-2-21)
 
Sec. 37-54. Enforcement.
The township ordinance department officers are authorized to enforce the provisions of the Michigan Liquor Control Act, being Public Act 8 of 1933; the rules and regulations of the Michigan Liquor Control Commission adopted pursuant to said Act; and the provisions of this chapter. Any duly sworn law enforcement officer with proper jurisdiction is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2021-494 , 3-2-21)
 
Sec. 37-55. Inspection.
The township ordinance department officers shall inspect, on a regular basis, all liquor establishments licensed under the Liquor Control Act of the State of Michigan, and report the results of all inspections promptly to the township board. The township ordinance department officers shall further promptly investigate all complaints received by it concerning violations of the Michigan Liquor Control Act or improper operations and practices concerning alcoholic liquor traffic within the township and report the same to the township board and, where appropriate under the Michigan Liquor Control Act, to the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, for appropriate proceedings against the violator. 
All ordinance department officers enforcing the Michigan Liquor Control Act shall carry appropriate identification issued by the township identifying them as township liquor control inspectors and shall present said identification to the owner or manager of every place inspected by them when making an inspection upon demand for identification by such owner or manager. 
Inspectors have the right to inspect any place in the township where alcoholic liquor is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, kept for sale, possessed, or transported, or where the inspector has a reasonable suspicion that the same is being thus manufactured, sold, offered for sale, kept for sale, possessed or transported. Whenever possible, all inspection reports shall be made on liquor law enforcement forms furnished by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission or on forms similar to the forms furnished by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission. 
( Ord. No. 2021-494 , 3-2-21)
 
Sec. 37-56. Penalties.
Any person, whether licensed or not, who shall violate any of the provisions of the Michigan Liquor Control Act or any rule or regulation of the Michigan Liquor Control Commission promulgated thereunder, or who shall violate any of the township's ordinances pertaining to the regulation of alcohol traffic, or any person who shall prohibit or interfere with the authorized inspection by a member of the township ordinance department shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in the county jail not more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500.00 or both, in the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 2021-494 , 3-2-21)
 
Chapter 38 MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 38-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure. 
Mobile home lot means any plot of ground within a mobile home park set aside for the storage or parking of a mobile home. 
Mobile home park means a parcel or tract of land under the control of a person upon which three or more mobile homes are located on a continual, nonrecreational basis and which is offered to the public for that purpose regardless of whether a charge is made therefor, together with any building, structure, enclosure, street, equipment, or facility used or intended for use incident to the occupancy of a mobile home. 
Owner means any recorded or unrecorded owner, partner, corporation or any designated representative including, but not limited to, managers, maintenance managers, operators or other representatives of any person, partnership or corporation or other combine, which owns the real estate or the business of a mobile home park. 
(Code 1975, § 14-1)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 38-2. Minimum size.
All mobile home parks established within the township after June 20, 1972, shall contain a minimum of 15 acres of land. 
(Code 1975, § 14-2)
 
Sec. 38-3. Failure to repair streets, driveways, curbs, gutters or surfaces.
It shall be unlawful for any mobile home park owner to fail to repair any street, driveway, curbing, gutter, or paved or concrete surface that becomes in a state of disrepair, within a reasonable time after notice. 
(Code 1975, § 14-6)
 
Sec. 38-4. Metering or resale of electricity, gas, or other source of power or fuel.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any mobile home park to provide any metering system for gas, electricity or other source of power or fuel, except that each mobile home shall have its individual meters. The park owner shall in no way engage in the resale of gas or electricity to the individual mobile home owners within the park at rates in excess of the standard rates applied to customers outside the park. 
(Code 1975, § 14-7)
 
Sec. 38-5. Service charges; uniformity of rent.
It shall be unlawful for any mobile home park owner to levy any fees or charges against mobile home owners or occupants within the park for any servicing of the mobile home or mobile home lot except such as are included in the rent charged for all mobile home lots, which rent shall be uniform within the park for all lots of the same size. 
(Code 1975, § 14-8)
 
Sec. 38-6. Charging occupants excessive rates for products and services.
It shall be unlawful for any mobile home park owner or other person to charge mobile home owners or renters within a park rates or fees for products or services including, but not limited to, dairy products, bakery products, utilities and the like, that are in excess of the standard rates that are established for other customers outside the mobile home park. 
(Code 1975, § 14-9)
 
Sec. 38-7. Owner not to charge entrance fee or receive rebate from sale of mobile home.
It shall be unlawful for any mobile home park owner to charge an entrance fee or to receive a rebate from the sale of any mobile home by the owner thereof or any authorized dealer. 
(Code 1975, § 14-10)
 
Secs. 38-8—38-30. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. LICENSE
 
Sec. 38-31. Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a mobile home park within the township without first obtaining a license so to do from the community development department. 
(Code 1975, § 14-21)
 
Sec. 38-32. Application; inspection and approval prerequisite to issuance.
In order to obtain a mobile home park license, the owner of the park shall make application therefor to the community development department. No such license shall be issued until the park has been inspected and approved by the community development department as conforming to the requirements and regulations of this chapter and the regulations of the zoning ordinance under which the mobile home park was originally constructed or will be constructed. 
(Code 1975, § 14-22)
 
Sec. 38-33. Fee.
The fee for a mobile home park license shall be set by the township board. 
(Code 1975, § 14-23)
 
Sec. 38-34. Contents.
Each mobile home park license shall set forth the name and address of the owner of the park and the name and address of the park itself. 
(Code 1975, § 14-24)
 
Sec. 38-35. Term.
A mobile home park license shall be issued for a 12-month period. 
(Code 1975, § 14-25)
 
Chapter 40 MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Secs. 40-1—40-25. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS
 
Sec. 40-26. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Municipal Civil Infraction Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 96-150, § 1, 6-18-96)
 
Sec. 40-27. Definitions.
For the purpose of the provisions of this article, the following words and phrases shall be construed to have the meanings herein set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
Act means Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended. 
Authorized official means a Washtenaw County Sheriff's Department law enforcement officer or other personnel of the Township of Ypsilanti authorized by this article or any ordinance to issue municipal civil infraction citations. 
Municipal civil infraction action means a civil action in which the defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
Municipal civil infraction citation means a written complaint prepared by an authorized official, directing a person to appear in court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction violation by the person cited. 
(Ord. No. 96-150, § 1, 6-18-96)
 
Sec. 40-28. Designation of authorized officials.
The following persons have the authority to issue municipal civil infraction citations pursuant to this article: 
(1)	Washtenaw County Sheriff's Department deputized law enforcement officers; 
(2)	Ypsilanti Township fire chief; 
(3)	Ypsilanti Township fire marshall; 
(4)	Ypsilanti Township Fire Department incident commander; 
(5)	Ypsilanti Township community development director; 
(6)	Ypsilanti Township plumbing inspector; 
(7)	Ypsilanti Township mechanical inspector; 
(8)	Ypsilanti Township electrical inspector; 
(9)	Ypsilanti Township building inspector; 
(10)	Ypsilanti Township ordinance enforcement officer; 
(11)	Ypsilanti Township animal control officer; 
(12)	Ypsilanti Township community service officers; 
(13)	Ypsilanti Township field inspector; 
(14)	Ypsilanti Township residential services director; 
(15)	Ypsilanti Township park superintendent; 
(16)	Ypsilanti Township recreation superintendent; 
(17)	Ypsilanti Township recreation director; 
(18)	Ypsilanti Township park rangers; 
(19)	Ypsilanti Township police services administrator; 
(20)	Ypsilanti Township recreation supervisor; 
(21)	Ypsilanti Township environmental specialist; 
(22)	Ypsilanti Township planning director; 
(23)	Ypsilanti Township planning and development coordinator; 
(24)	Reserved; 
(25)	Ypsilanti Township building director; 
(26)	Ypsilanti Township public services superintendent; 
(27)	Humane Society of Huron Valley animal cruelty investigators; 
(28)	Ypsilanti Township quality assurance specialist; 
(29)	Ypsilanti Township recreation services manager; 
(30)	Ypsilanti Township executive coordinator; 
(31)	Ypsilanti Township firefighters. 
(Ord. No. 96-150, § 1, 6-18-96; Ord. No. 96-153, 9-17-96; Ord. No. 2000-239, 2-1-00; Ord. No. 2004-338, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 2005-361, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 2006-365, 4-25-06; Ord. No. 2008-387, 10-7-08; Ord. No. 2009-399, 10-6-09; Ord. No. 2015-452 , 9-15-15)
 
Sec. 40-29. Municipal civil infraction action; commencement.
A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an authorized township official of (1) a municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to appear in court. 
(Ord. No. 96-150, § 1, 6-18-96)
 
Sec. 40-30. Municipal civil infraction citations; issuance and service.
Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized township officials as follows: 
(1)	The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a reasonable time after the citation is issued. 
(2)	The place of appearance specified in a citation shall be the 14B district court. 
(3)	Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form approved by the state court administrator. The original citation shall be filed with the 14B district court within five business days of its issuance. A copy of the citation shall be issued to the alleged violator as provided by § 8705 of the Act. 
(4)	A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized township official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the complaint and if the citation contains the following statement immediately above the date and signature of the official: "I declare under the penalties of perjury that the statements above are true to the best of my information, knowledge and belief. 
(5)	An authorized township official who witnesses a person commit a municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and as completely as possible, an original and required copies of a citation. 
(6)	An authorized township official may issue a citation to a person if: 
a.	Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction; or 
b.	Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for an infraction and if the township attorney approves in writing the issuance of the citation. 
(7)	Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an authorized township official as follows: 
a.	Except as provided by subsection 40-30(7)b, an authorized township official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator. 
b.	If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use or occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator, but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by posting the copy of the citation on the land or attaching the copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent, by first class mail to the owner of the land, building or structure at the owner's last known address. 
(Ord. No. 96-150, § 1, 6-18-96)
 
Sec. 40-31. Municipal civil infraction citations; contents.
(a)	A municipal civil infraction citation shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged to have been violated, the place where the allegedviolator shall appear in court, the telephone number of the court, and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made. 
(b)	Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that he or she may do one of the following: 
(1)	Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for appearance. 
(2)	Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction "with explanation" by mail by the time specified for appearance or, in person, or by representation. 
(3)	Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing either of the following: 
a.	Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is requested by the township. 
b.	Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge, with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(c)	The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the following: 
(1)	That if the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility "with explanation" in person or by representation, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time for an appearance. 
(2)	That if the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on the citation. 
(3)	That a hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing is requested by the alleged violator or the township. 
(4)	That at an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(5)	That at a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(d)	The citation shall contain a notice in boldface type that the failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance will result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged violator on the municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 96-150, § 1, 6-18-96)
 
Sec. 40-32. Failure to appear; penalty.
A person served with a municipal civil infraction citation as provided in subsection 40-30(7) who fails to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance shall have a default judgment entered against them in the amount provided by this Code or any ordinance, plus any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions, as authorized under Chapter 87 of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended, including an order to show cause why the defaulted person should not be held in civil contempt. 
(Ord. No. 96-150, § 1, 6-18-96)
 
Chapter 42 OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 42-1. Reserved.
 
Sec. 42-2. Abolition of distinction between accessory and principal.
Every person concerned with the commission of an offense under this Code, whether he directly commits the act constituting the offense or procures, counsels, aids or abets in its commission may be prosecuted, tried and, on conviction, shall be punished as if he had directly committed such offense. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-1)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 767.39, MSA 28.979. 
 
Sec. 42-3. Loitering near place of illegal occupation or business.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to knowingly loiter in or about any place where an illegal occupation or business is being conducted. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-2)
State law reference(s)—Such person deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(j), MSA 28.364(1)(j). 
 
Sec. 42-4. Attempts to commit offenses; penalty for violation.
Any person who shall attempt to commit an offense prohibited by this chapter and, in such attempt, shall do any act towards the commission of such offense, but shall fail in the perpetration or shall be intercepted or prevented in the execution of the same, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a maximum fine of $250.00 and/or 45 days in jail. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-7)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.92, MSA 28.287. 
 
Sec. 42-5. Replacement of employees engaged in labor dispute.
(a)	No person involved in a strike or lockout shall knowingly employ, in place of an employee involved in the strike or lockout, any person who customarily and repeatedly offers himself for employment in the place of employees involved in a strike or lockout. 
(b)	No person who customarily and repeatedly offers himself for employment in place of employees involved in a strike or lockout shall take or offer to take the place of employment of employees involved in a strike or lockout. 
(c)	No person involved in a lawful strike or lockout shall hire and import, or contract or arrange with any other person to hire and import, from another state or country, for the purpose of strikebreaking, persons for employment in place of employees involved in the strike or lockout. 
(d)	No person shall recruit, solicit or advertise for employees, or refer persons to employment, in place of employees involved in a lawful strike or lockout, without adequate notice to the person, and in the advertisement, that there is a strike or lockout at the place at which employment is offered and that the employment offered is in place of employees involved in the strike or lockout. 
(Code 1975, § 13-2)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 423.251, MSA 17.456(1) et seq. 
 
Sec. 42-6. Vessels moored by buoys prohibited.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to moor or fasten a vessel to a lawfully placed buoy or beacon, except mooring buoys, or willfully move, remove or damage such a buoy or beacon. 
(b)	Registered owner of a vessel responsible for buoy violations. In a prosecution for a violation of subsection (a), proof that the particular vessel described in the citation, complaint, or warrant was used in the violation, together with proof that the defendant named in the citation, complaint or warrant was the register owner of the vessel at the time of the violation, constitutes in evidence a presumption that the register owner of the vessel was the person who operated or controlled the vessel when the buoy violation occurred. The person in whose name the vessel is registered with the secretary of state is presumed to be the registered owner of the vessel. 
(Ord. No. 2004-346, 5-17-05)
 
Sec. 42-7. [Bait containers.]
(a)	Definitions. As used in this section: 
(1)	A container means glass, metal or plastic cans or jars or other receptacles that contain fishing bait. 
(2)	Degradable means capable of being broken down by biodegradation, photo degradation or chemical degradation into component parts within 360 days under exposure to the elements. 
(b)	A person shall not sell or offer for sale, possess or use in the township a disposable container for live fishing bait unless the bait container is degradable and bears a distinguishing symbol indicating that it is degradable. 
(c)	Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate this section shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, as provided in chapter 40, article II, of this Code, and shall be subject to a fine as follows: 
(1)	The fine for any first violation shall be $25.00. 
(2)	The fine for any violation which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of once before, shall be $100.00. 
(3)	The fine for any violation which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of twice before, shall be $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 2011-420, 4-9-12)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2011-420, adopted April 9, 2012, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 42-7 was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Secs. 42-8—42-25. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. OFFENSES AFFECTING GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS 
 
Sec. 42-26. False alarm of fire.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to knowingly and wilfully commit any one or more of the following actions: 
(1)	Raise a false alarm of fire at any gathering or in any public place; 
(2)	Ring any bell or operate any mechanical apparatus, electrical apparatus or combination thereof for the purpose of creating a false alarm of fire; or 
(3)	Raise a false alarm of fire orally by telephone or in person. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-3)
 
Sec. 42-27. Unauthorized wearing of police badge or uniform.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to wear, exhibit, display or use for any purpose a badge or uniform substantially identical to that worn by the county sheriff deputies or state police, unless he is a member of the county sheriff's department or the state police. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-4)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.216, MSA 28.413. 
 
Sec. 42-28. Impersonating a police officer.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to falsely assume or pretend to be a justice of the peace, sheriff, deputy sheriff, conservation officer, coroner, constable, police officer or member of the state police or to require any person to aid and assist him in any matter pertaining to the duty of a justice of the peace, sheriff, deputy sheriff, conservation officer, coroner, constable, police officer, or member of the state police or to falsely take upon himself to act or officiate in any office or place of authority. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-5)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.215, MSA 28.412. 
 
Sec. 42-29. Interference with police authority.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to resist any deputy sheriff or any person duly empowered with police authority while in the discharge or apparent discharge of his duty or in any way to interfere with or hinder him in the discharge of his duty. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-16)
State law reference(s)—Obstruction of police officer, MCL 750.479, MSA 28.747. 
 
Sec. 42-30. Disguising with intent to obstruct law or intimidate officer.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to disguise himself with the intent to obstruct the due execution of the law or with the intent to intimidate, hinder or interrupt any officer or any other person in the legal performance of his duty or the exercise of his rights under the constitution and laws of this state, whether such intent be affected or not. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-17)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.217, MSA 28.414. 
 
Sec. 42-31. Obstructing and disobeying firefighters in line of duty.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to knowingly and wilfully hinder, obstruct or interfere with any firefighter in the performance of his duties or while in the vicinity of any fire to wilfully disobey any reasonable order, rule or regulation of the officer commanding any fire department at such fire. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-18)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.241, MSA 28.438. 
 
Sec. 42-32. False alarms.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to summon, as a joke or prank or otherwise, without any good reason therefor, by telephone or otherwise, the police or the fire department or any public or private ambulance to go to any address where the service called for is not needed. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-19)
State law reference(s)—False fire alarms, MCL 750.240, MSA 28.437. 
 
Sec. 42-33. False report of crime.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to make or file with the county sheriff's department any false, misleading or unfounded statement or report concerning the commission or alleged commission of any crime occurring within the township. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-20)
State law reference(s)—False report on crime, MCL 750.411a, MSA 28.643(1). 
 
Sec. 42-34. Providing alcoholic liquor or tools to confined persons.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to make available to, present to or place within the reach of any person confined under the authority of the township any alcoholic liquor or any tool, implement or other thing calculated to aid the escape of such person so confined under the authority of the township. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-21)
State law reference(s)—Escapes, rescues, jail and prison breaking, MCL 750.183 et seq.,; liquors in jail prohibited, MCL 801.116, 801.117. 
 
Secs. 42-35—42-55. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON
 
Sec. 42-56. Assault and assault and battery; domestic assault.
(a)	A person who assaults or assaults and batters an individual, if no other punishment is prescribed by law, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both. 
(b)	A person who assaults or assaults and batters his or her spouse, an individual with whom he or she has had a child in common, a resident or former resident of his or her household, or an individual with whom he or she has or has had a dating relationship, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500.00 or both. As used in this section, "dating relationship" means frequent, intimate associations primarily characterized by the expectation of affectional involvement. This term does not include a casual relationship or an ordinary fraternization between two individuals in a business or social context. 
(Ord. No. 99-214, 6-15-99; Ord. No. 99-230, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 2002-296, §§ 1, 2, 2-19-02)
 
Sec. 42-57. Reserved.
 
Sec. 42-58. Misuse of communications common carrier.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to maliciously use any service provided by a communications common carrier with intent to terrorize, frighten, intimidate, threaten, harass, molest or annoy any other person, or to disturb the peace and quiet of any other person by any of the following: 
(1)	Threatening physical harm or damage to any person or property in the course of a telephone conversation. 
(2)	Falsely and deliberately reporting by telephone or telegraph message that any person has been injured, has suddenly taken ill, has suffered death or has been the victim of a crime or of an accident. 
(3)	Deliberately refusing or failing to disengage a connection between a telephone and another telephone or between a telephone and other equipment provided for the transmission of messages by telephone, thereby interfering with any communications service. 
(4)	Using any vulgar, indecent, obscene or offensive language or suggesting any lewd or lascivious act in the course of a telephone conversation. 
(5)	Repeatedly initiating a telephone call and, without speaking, deliberately hanging up or breaking the telephone connection as or after the telephone call is answered. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-34)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.540e. 
 
Sec. 42-59. Arrest without warrant; assault and battery or infliction of serious injury within household.
A peace officer may arrest an individual for violating section 42-56(b) of the township Code, regardless of whether the peace officer has a warrant or whether the violation was committed in his/her presence if the peace officer has reasonable cause to believe both of the following: 
(1)	The violation occurred or is occurring; 
(2)	The individual has had a child in common with the victim, resides or has resided in the same household as the victim, has a dating relationship with the victim, or is a spouse or former spouse of the victim. 
(Ord. No. 99-215, 6-15-99; Ord. No. 2002-296, § 3, 2-19-02)
 
Sec. 42-60. Domestic disputes; notice; advising of availability of shelter programs or other resources; request for personal protection order; reports by peace officer.
(a)	After investigating or intervening in a domestic dispute as described in Ordinance No. 91-12 [chapter 42, art. III], as amended by Ordinance No. 99-214 [section 42-56], of the Township Code, a peace officer shall provide the victim with a copy of the notice in this section. The notice shall be written and shall include all of the following: 
(1)	The name and telephone number of the responding police agency; 
(2)	The name and badge number of the responding police officer; 
(3)	The following statement: "You may obtain a copy of the police incident report for your case by contacting this law enforcement agency at the telephone number provided. 
The domestic violence shelter program and other resources in your area are (include local information) 
Information about emergency shelter, counseling services, and the legal rights of domestic violence victims is available from these resources. 
Your legal rights include the right to go to court and file a petition requesting a personal protection order to protect you or other members of your household from domestic abuse which could include the following: 
a.	An order restraining or enjoining the abuser from entering onto premises; 
b.	An order restraining or enjoining the abuser from assaulting, attacking, beating, molesting or wounding you; 
c.	An order restraining or enjoining the abuse from threatening to kill or physically injure you or another person; 
d.	An order restraining or enjoining the abuser from removing minor children from you, except as otherwise authorized by a custody or parenting time order issued by a court of competent jurisdiction; 
e.	An order restraining or enjoining the abuser from engaging in stalking behavior; 
f.	Beginning April 1, 1996, an order restraining or enjoining the abuser from purchasing or possessing a firearm; 
g.	An order restraining or enjoining the abuser from interfering with your efforts to remove your children or personal property from premises that are solely owned or leased by the abuser; 
h.	An order restraining or enjoining the abuser from interfering with you at your place of employment or engaging in conduct that impairs your employment relationship or environment; 
i.	An order restraining or enjoining the abuser from engaging in any other specific act or conduct that imposes upon or interferes with your personal liberty or that causes a reasonable apprehension of violence. 
(b)	The peace officer shall prepare a domestic violence report after investigating or intervening in a domestic dispute or an incident involving domestic violence as described in subsection (a). The report shall contain, but is not limited to containing, all of the following: 
(1)	The address, date and time of the occurrence or incident being investigated; 
(2)	The victim's name, address, home and work telephone numbers, race sex and date of birth; 
(3)	The suspect's name, address, home and work telephone numbers, race, sex, date of birth, and information describing the suspect and whether an injunction or restraining order covering the suspect exists; 
(4)	The name, address, home and work telephone numbers, race, sex, date of birth of any witness, including a child of the victim or suspect, and the relationship of the witness to the suspect or victim; 
(5)	The following information about the occurrence of incident being investigated: 
a.	The name of the person that called the law enforcement agency; 
b.	The relationship of the victim and suspect; 
c.	Whether alcohol or controlled substance use was involved in the occurrence or incident, and by whom it was used; 
d.	A brief narrative describing the dispute or incident and the circumstances that led to it; 
e.	Whether and how many times the suspect physically assaulted the victim and a description of any weapon or object used; 
f.	A description of all injuries sustained by the victim and an explanation of how the injuries were sustained; 
g.	If the victim sought medical attention, information concerning where and how the victim was transported, whether the victim was admitted to a hospital or clinic for treatment, and the name and telephone number of the attending physician; 
h.	A description of any property damage reported by the victim or evident at the scene; 
(6)	A description of any previous domestic disputes or incidents involving domestic violence between the victim and the suspect; 
(7)	The date and time of the report and the name, badge number, and signature of the peace officer completing the report. 
(c)	The law enforcement agency shall retain the completed domestic violence report in its files. The law enforcement agency shall also file a copy of the completed domestic violence report with the prosecuting attorney within 48 hours after the dispute or incident is reported to the law enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 99-216, 6-15-99)
 
Sec. 42-61. Domestic violence calls; establishment of written policies by police agency.
(a)	The township's police agency, currently the Washtenaw County Sheriff's Dept., shall immediately develop, adopt and implement written policies for police officers responding to domestic violence calls. The policies shall reflect that domestic violence is criminal conduct. 
(b)	Each police agency shall consult with the prosecuting attorney and with an area shelter for victims of domestic violence in the development, implementation, including training, and evaluation of the policies and standards. 
(c)	The policies shall address, but not be limited to addressing, all of the following: 
(1)	Procedures for conducting a criminal investigation with specific standards for misdemeanor and felony arrests; 
(2)	Procedures for making a criminal arrest. The procedures shall emphasize all of the following: 
a.	In most circumstances, an officer should arrest and take an individual into custody if the officer has probable cause to believe the individual is committing or has committed domestic violence and his or her actions constitute a crime; 
b.	When the officer has probable cause to believe spouses, former spouses, individuals who have had a child in common, or individuals who reside together or formerly resided together, or individuals who have had or have a dating relationship, are committing or have committed crimes against each other, the officer, when determining whether to make an arrest of one or both individuals, should consider the intent of this section to protect victims of domestic violence, the degree of injury inflicted on the individuals involved, the extent to which the individuals have been put in fear of physical injury to themselves or other members of the household, and any history of domestic violence between the individuals, if that history can reasonably be ascertained by the officer. In addition, the officer should not arrest an individual if the officer has reasonable cause to believe the individual was acting in lawful self-defense or in lawful defense of another individual; 
c.	A police officer's decision as to whether to arrest an individual should not be based solely on the consent of the victim to any subsequent prosecution or on the relationship of the individuals involved in the incident; 
d.	A police officer's decision not to arrest an individual should not be based solely upon the absence of visible indications of injury or impairment. 
(3)	Procedures for denial of interim bond, as provided in Act No. 44 of the Public Acts of 1961, being sections 780.581 to 780.588 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
(4)	Procedures for verifying a personal protection order issued under section 2950 or 2950a of the revised judicature act of 1961, Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, being sections 600.2950 and 600.2950a of the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
(5)	Procedures for making an arrest for violation of a personal protection order. 
(6)	Procedures for providing or arranging for emergency assistance to victims including, but not limited to, medical care, transportation to a shelter, or remaining at the scene of an alleged incident of domestic violence for a reasonable time until, in the reasonable judgment of police officer, the likelihood of further imminent violence has been eliminated. 
(7)	Procedures for informing the victim of community services and legal options that are available. 
(8)	Procedures for preparing a written report, whether or not an arrest is made. 
(9)	Training of peace officers, dispatchers and supervisors. 
(10)	Discipline for noncompliance with the policy. 
(11)	Annual evaluations of the policy. 
(d)	The local policies developed, adopted, and implemented pursuant to this section shall be in writing and shall be available to the public upon request. 
(Ord. No. 99-217, 6-15-99; Ord. No. 2002-296, § 4, 2-19-02)
 
Sec. 42-62. Reporting domestic assaults to department of state police.
The Charter Township of Ypsilanti police agency, currently the Washtenaw County Sheriff's Department, shall report to the department of state police, in a manner prescribed by the department, the following information related to crimes of domestic assault: 
(1)	The number of assaults reported which involve an adult and a minor and the disposition of those offenses. 
(2)	The number of assaults reported which involve two male adults or two female adults and the disposition of those offenses. 
(3)	The number of assaults reported which involve one male and one female adult and the disposition of those offenses. 
(4)	The number of assaults reported which involve a person and his or her spouse and the disposition of those offenses. 
(5)	Other statistics the director of the department of state police considers necessary to obtain accurate and reliable data on the incidence of domestic assault in this state. 
(Ord. No. 99-221, 8-17-99)
 
Sec. 42-63. Deferral of proceedings following guilty determination, probation; violation of probation; counseling program; entry of adjudication of guilt, conditions; discharge and dismissal, limits.
(a)	When an individual who has not been convicted previously of a violation of section 42-56, as amended, of the Charter township of Ypsilanti Code of Ordinances, a similar ordinance of any other community, or Section 91 of 91a of the Michigan Penal Code, Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931, as amended, being MCL §§ 750.81 and 750.81a, pleads guilty to, or is found guilty of a violation of section 42-56, as amended, and the person assaulted is the offender's spouse or former spouse, an individual who has had a child in common with the offender, an individual residing or having resided in the same household as the offender, or an individual with whom he or she has or has had a dating relationship, the court, without entering a judgment of guilt and with the consent of the accused and of the prosecuting attorney in consultation with the victim, may defer further proceedings and place the accused on probation as provided in this section. However, before deferring proceedings under this subsection, the court shall contact the department of state police and determine whether, according to the records of the department of state police, the accused has previously been convicted of a violation of section 42-56, as amended, or similar ordinance of any other community, or section 81 or 81a of the Public Acts of 1931, or has previously availed himself or herself of this section. If the search of records reveals an arrest for a violation of section 42-56, as amended, a similar ordinance of any other community, or section 81 or 81a of Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931 but no disposition, the court shall contact the arresting agency and the court that had jurisdiction over the violation to determine the disposition of that arrest for purposes of this section. 
(b)	Upon a violation of a term or condition of probation, the court may enter an adjudication of guilty and proceed as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(c)	An order of probation entered under subsection (a) may require the accused to participate in a mandatory counseling program. The court may order the accused to pay the reasonable costs of the program. 
(d)	The court shall enter an adjudication of guilt and proceed as otherwise provided in this chapter if any of the following circumstances exist: 
(1)	The accused commits an assaultive crime during the period of probation. As used in this subdivision, "assaultive crime" means one or more of the following: 
a.	That term as defined in MCLA 770.9a. 
b.	A violation of Ordinance No. 99-214 [section 42-56], a similar ordinance of any other community, or Chapter XI of the Michigan penal code, Act No. 328 of the Public acts of 1931, being sections 750.81 to 750.90 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
(2)	The accused violates an order of the court that he or she receive counseling regarding his or her violent behavior. 
(3)	The accused violates an order of the court that he or she have no contact with a named individual. 
(e)	Upon fulfillment of the terms and conditions, the court shall discharge the person and dismiss the proceedings against the person. Discharge and dismissal under this section shall be without adjudication of guilt and is not a conviction for purposes of this section or for purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon conviction of a crime. 
(f)	There may be only 1 discharge and dismissal under this section with respect to any individual. The department of state police shall retain a nonpublic record of an arrest and discharge or dismissal under this section. This record shall be furnished to a court or police agency upon request pursuant to subsection (a) for the purpose of showing that a defendant in a criminal action under Ordinance No. 99-214 [section 42-56], a similar ordinance of any other community, or section 81 or 81a of Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931, as amended, has already once availed himself or herself of this section. 
(Ord. No. 99-222, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 2002-296, § 5, 2-19-02)
 
Secs. 42-64—42-80. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 42-81. Reserved.
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2005-353, adopted Feb. 15, 2005, deleted § 42-81 in its entirety. Former § 42-81 pertained to littering with dangerous substances and derived from Code 1975, § 13½-45. 
 
Sec. 42-82. Trespass upon lands or premises of another.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to wilfully enter upon the lands or premises of another without lawful authority after having been forbidden so to do by the owner, occupant or agent or servant of the owner or occupant. It shall be unlawful for any person being upon the land or premises of another, upon being notified to depart therefrom by the owner, occupant or the agent or servant of either, to, without lawful authority, neglect or refuse to depart therefrom. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-46)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.552. 
 
Sec. 42-83. Unlawful presence in school buildings, on school grounds.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to enter or remain in any building or on any grounds owned, occupied or otherwise used by any public, private or parochial school for any purpose other than a purpose related to school business unless authorized in writing by a duly empowered official of such public, private or parochial school or unless he is a student or employee thereof or a parent or guardian of any student enrolled therein. The term "student," as used in this section, is hereby defined as a person of school age and enrolled in the school at which he is present. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-47)
 
Sec. 42-84. Recreational trespass.
(a)	A person shall not enter or remain upon the property of another person, other than farm property or a wooded area connected to farm property, to engage in any recreational activity or trapping on that property without the consent of the owner or his or her lessee or agent, except as provided in subsection (d), if either of the following circumstances exist: 
(1)	The property is fenced or enclosed and is maintained in such a manner as to exclude intruders. 
(2)	The property is posted in a conspicuous manner against entry. The minimum letter height on the posting signs shall be one inch. Each posting sign shall be not less than 50 square inches and the signs shall be spaced to enable a person to observe not less than one sign at any point of entry upon the property. 
(b)	On fenced or posted property or farm property, a fisherman wading or floating a navigable public stream may, without written or oral consent, enter upon property within the clearly defined banks of the stream or walk a route as closely proximate to the clearly defined banks as possible when necessary to avoid a natural or artificial hazard or obstruction, including, but not limited to, a dam, deep hole, fence, or other exercise of ownership by the riparian owner. 
(c)	A person other than a person possessing a firearm may, unless previously prohibited in writing or orally by the property owner or his or her lessee or agent, enter on foot upon the property of another person for the sole purpose of retrieving a hunting dog. The person shall not remain on the property beyond the reasonable time necessary to retrieve the dog. 
(d)	Consent to enter or remain upon the property of another person pursuant to this section may be given orally or in writing. The consent may establish conditions for entering or remaining upon that property. Unless prohibited in the written consent, a written consent may be amended or revoked orally. If the owner or his or her lessee or agent requires all persons entering or remaining upon the property to have written consent, the presence of the person on the property is prima facie evidence of unlawful entry. 
(e)	As used in this section, "hunting dog" means a dog allowed to range freely to engage in or aid in hunting on the day the dog enters the property of another person. 
(f)	Penalty: If a person is convicted of violating subsection (a), the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a maximum penalty of 90 days in jail and/or a fine of $1,000.00 or both. 
(Ord. No. 98-194, 7-22-98)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 98-194, adopted July 22, 1998, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of its provisions as § 42-84 herein was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 42-85. Trespass on railroad tracks or rights-of-way.
(a)	A person shall not walk, ride, drive, or be upon or along the right-of-way or yard of a railroad company operating its lines within this state, or go upon or cross the right-of-way or yard at a place other than a public or private crossing, unless having first obtained written permission from the owner or occupant railroad, its agent or servant. This section shall not apply in the case of a right-of-way designated as a demonstration snowmobile trail pursuant to 82126 of part 821 (snowmobiles) of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Act No. 451 of Public Acts of 1994 (MCL 324.82126). 
(b)	The term right-of-way as used in section (a) means the track or roadbed owned by a railroad and that property owned by a railroad which is located on either side of its tracks and which is readily recognizable to a reasonable person as being railroad property or is reasonably identified as such by fencing, the existence of railroad tracks, or appropriate signs. 
(c)	A person shall not be upon, enter or damage any buildings, rolling stock, or equipment of any railway company operating its lines within the township. This section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)	Passengers on trains or employees of a railroad company while engaged in the performance of their duties as railroad employees; 
(2)	Authorized representatives of the railroad employee; 
(3)	Persons going upon the right-of-way or tracks to save human life or to protect property; 
(4)	Persons having written permission to go upon the right-of-way or tracks granted by the railroad company, a person using officially abandoned rights-of-way for recreational purposes, the Michigan Public Service Commission, the State Transportation Department, the Interstate Commerce Commission, or the Federal Railroad Administration; 
(5)	A registered land surveyor or his or her employees for the purpose of making land surveys. 
(d)	A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or by a fine of not more than $100.00, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2000-248, 7-18-00)
 
Sec. 42-86. Definitions.
As used in this section: 
Litter means all rubbish, refuse, waste material, garbage, offal, paper, glass, cans, bottles, trash, debris, or other foreign substances. 
Public or private property or water includes, but is not limited to, any of the following: 
(1)	The right-of-way of a road or highway, a body of water or watercourse, or the shore or beach of the body of water or watercourse, including the ice above the water. 
(2)	A park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area. Residential or farm properties or timberlands. 
Vehicle means every motor vehicle registered under the Michigan Vehicle Code, Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, being sections 257.1 to 257.923 of the Michigan Complied Laws. 
Vessel means a vessel registered under the Marine Safety Act, Act No. 303 of the Public Acts of 1967, being sections 281.1001 to 281.1199 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
(Ord. No. 2005-353, § 1, 2-15-05)
 
Sec. 42-87. Littering on property or water prohibited; removal of injurious substances dropped on highway as result of accident.
(a)	A person shall not knowingly, without the consent of the public authority having supervision of public property or the owner of private property, dump, deposit, place, throw, or leave, or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of, litter on public or private property or water other than property designated and set aside for such purposes. 
(b)	A person who removes a vehicle that is wrecked or damaged in an accident on a highway, road, or street shall remove all glass and other injurious substances dropped on the highway, road, or street as a result of the accident. 
(Ord. No. 2005-353, § 2, 2-15-05)
 
Sec. 42-88. Presumptions.
In a proceeding for a violation of this section involving litter from a motor vehicle or vessel, proof that the particular vehicle or vessel described in the citation, complaint, or warrant was used in the violation, together with proof that the defendant named in the citation, complaint, or warrant was the registered owner of the vehicle or vessel at the time of the violation, constitutes an evidentiary presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle or vessel was the driver of the vehicle or vessel at the time of the violation. 
In a proceeding for a violation of this section involving litter from a leased motor vehicle or leased vessel, proof that the particular vehicle or vessel described in the citation, complaint, or warrant was used in the violation, together with proof that the defendant named in the citation, complaint, or warrant was the lessee of the vehicle or vessel at the time of the violation, constitutes an evidentiary presumption that the lessee of the vehicle or vessel was the driver of the vehicle or vessel at the time of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2005-353, § 3, 2-15-05)
 
Sec. 42-89. Violations as municipal civil infractions; civil fines; default remedies; exception.
(a)	A person who violates this part where the amount of the litter is less than one cubic foot in volume is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and is subject to a civil fine of not more than $800.00. 
(b)	A person who violates this part where the amount of the litter is one cubic foot or more but less than three cubic feet in volume is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and is subject to a civil fine of not more than $1,500.00. 
(c)	A person who violates this part where the amount of the litter is three cubic feet or more in volume is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and is subject to a civil fine of not more than $2,500.00. A person found to have violated this subsection in a subsequent proceeding is subject to a civil fine of not more than $5,000.00. 
(d)	A default in the payment of a civil fine or costs ordered under this part or an installment of the fine or costs may be remedied by any means authorized under the revised Judicature Act of 1961, 1961 PA 236, MCL 600.101 to 600.9947. 
(Ord. No. 2005-353, § 4, 2-15-05)
 
Sec. 42-90. Additional penalties or sanctions; community service.
(a)	In addition to any other penalty or sanction provided in this part for a civil action brought under this part, the court may require the defendant to pay the cost of removing all litter which is the subject of the violation and the cost of damages to any land, water, wildlife, vegetation, or other natural resource or to any facility damages by the violation of this part. Money collected under this subsection shall be distributed to the governmental entity bringing this enforcement action. 
(b)	In addition to any other penalty or sanction provided for in this part, the court shall impose, under the supervision of the court, community service in the form of litter gathering labor, including, but not limited to, litter connected with the particular violation. 
(Ord. No. 2005-353, § 5, 2-15-05)
 
Secs. 42-91—42-95. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY
 
Sec. 42-96. Malicious destruction of property.
(a)	A person who willfully and maliciously destroys or injures the personal property of another person causing destruction or injury in an amount of less than $200.00 is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both a fine and imprisonment. 
(b)	A person who willfully and maliciously destroys or injures another person's house, barn, or other building or its appurtenances causing destruction or injury of the structure or appurtenances in the amount of less than $200.00 is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both a fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-58; Ord. No. 2002-297, 6-18-02)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.377a, MSA 28.609(1). 
 
Sec. 42-97. Destroying; removing; defacing.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to wilfully destroy, remove, damage, alter or in any manner deface any property not his own, including any public school building, bridge, fire hydrant, alarm box, streetlight or street sign; to destroy, damage or convert any property belonging to the township; and to remove the same from the building or place where it may be kept, placed and/or stored without proper authority or to disturb, tamper with, disconnect or damage any community utilities authority water meter without proper authority. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-59)
 
Sec. 42-98. Tampering with township property.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to tamper with, injure, deface, destroy or remove any sign, notice, marker, fire alarm box, fire hydrant, topographical survey instrument, water meter, water stop box or any other personal property erected or placed by the township or to make unauthorized taps into the water lines or any unauthorized use of fire hydrants. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-60)
 
Sec. 42-99. Wilfully destroying or damaging tombs and memorials of the dead.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to wilfully destroy, mutilate, deface, injure or remove any tomb, monument, gravestone or other structure or thing placed or designated for a memorial of the dead, any fence, railing, curb or other thing intended for the protection or for the ornament of any tomb, monument, gravestone or other structure before mentioned or of any enclosure for the burial of the dead or to wilfully destroy, mutilate, remove, cut, break or injure any tree, shrub or plant, placed or being within any such enclosure. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-61)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.387, MSA 28.619. 
 
Sec. 42-100. Damaging or defacing school property.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to damage, destroy or deface any public, private or parochial school building or any building owned, occupied or otherwise used by any public, private or parochial school or the grounds, outbuildings, fences, trees or other appurtenances or fixtures belonging thereto. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-62)
 
Sec. 42-101. Throwing missiles at trains or motor vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to throw any stone, brick or other missile at any motor vehicle, passenger train, sleeping car, passenger coach, express car, mail car, baggage car, locomotive, caboose or freight train. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-63)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.394, MSA 28.626. 
 
Sec. 42-102. Damaging or tampering with motor vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to intentionally and without authority from the owner start or cause to be started the motor of any motor vehicle; maliciously shift or change the starting device or gears of a standing motor vehicle to a position other than that in which it was left by the owner or driver of the motor vehicle; intentionally cut, mark, scratch or damage the chassis, running gear, body, sides, top, covering or upholstering of any motor vehicle which is the property of another; intentionally cut, mash, mark, destroy or damage such motor vehicle or any of the accessories, equipment, appurtenances or attachments thereof or any spare or extra parts thereon being or thereto attached without the permission of the owner thereof; or intentionally release the brake upon any standing motor vehicle with intent to injure the machine or cause the same to be removed without the consent of the owner; provided, however, that this section shall not apply in case of moving or starting of motor vehicles by the police under authority of local ordinances or by members of fire departments in case of emergency in the vicinity of a fire. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-64)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.416, MSA 28.648. 
 
Secs. 42-103—42-115. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. THEFT
 
Subdivision I. In General
 
Secs. 42-116—42-125. Reserved.
 
Subdivision II. Burglary and Related Offenses
 
Sec. 42-126. Breaking and entering—Outside showcase or counter.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to break and enter or enter without breaking at any time any outside showcase or other outside enclosed counter used for the display of goods, wares or merchandise with intent to commit the crime of larceny. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-85)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.114, MSA 28.309. 
 
Sec. 42-127. Same—Buildings, tents, boats, railroad cars, public buildings when expressly denied.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to break and enter or enter without breaking any dwelling, house, tent, hotel, office, store, shop, warehouse, barn, granary, factory or other building; boat, ship, railroad car or structure used or kept for public or private use; any private apartment therein; any cottage, clubhouse, boathouse, hunting or fishing lodge, garage or the outbuildings belonging thereto; or any other structure whether occupied or unoccupied without first obtaining permission to enter from the owner or occupant, agent or person having immediate control thereof; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to entering without breaking any place which at the time of such entry was open to the public, unless such entry has been expressly denied. This section shall not apply in cases where the breaking and entering or entering without breaking were committed by a peace officer or someone under his direction in the lawful performance of his duties as such peace officer. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-86)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.115, MSA 28.310. 
 
Sec. 42-128. Opening coinbox or depository box.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to maliciously and wilfully by, and with the aid and use of, any key, instrument, device or explosive blow, attempt to blow, force or attempt to force an entrance into any coinbox, depository box or other receptacle established and maintained for the convenience of the public or of any person in making payment for any article or merchandise or service, wherein is contained any money or thing of value, to extract, obtain or attempt to extract or obtain therefrom any such money or thing of value so deposited or contained therein. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-87)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.113, MSA 28.308. 
 
Sec. 42-129. Possession of burglar's tools with knowledge and intent to use.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to knowingly have in his possession any nitroglycerine or other explosive, thermite, engine, machine, tool or implement, device or chemical or substance adapted and designed for cutting or burning through, forcing or breaking open any building, room, vault, safe or other depository in order to steal therefrom any money or other property, knowing the same to be adapted and designed for such purpose with intent to use or employ the same for such purpose. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-88)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.116, MSA 28.311. 
 
Sec. 42-130. Receiving or concealing stolen property.
A person shall not buy, receive, possess, conceal, or aid in the concealment of stolen, embezzled, or converted money, goods, or property with a value of less than $200.00, knowing the money, goods, or property is stolen, embezzled, or converted. A person who violates this provision is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both a fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-89; Ord. No. 2002-297, 6-18-02)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.535, MSA 28.803. 
 
Secs. 42-131—42-140. Reserved.
 
Subdivision III. Larceny
 
Sec. 42-141. Retail fraud.
A person who does any of the following in a store or in its immediate vicinity is guilty of retail fraud, a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both a fine and imprisonment: 
(1)	While a store is open to the public, alters, transfers, removes and replaces, conceals, or otherwise misrepresents the price at which property is offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property or to pay less than the price at which the property is offered for sale, if the resulting difference in price is less than $200.00. 
(2)	While a store is open to the public, steals property of the store that is offered for sale at a price of less than $200.00. 
(3)	With intent to defraud, obtains or attempts to obtain money or property from the store as a refund or exchange for property that was not paid for and belongs to the store, if the amount of money, or the value of the property, obtained or attempted to be obtained is less than $200.00. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-100; Ord. No. 2002-297, 6-18-02)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.356d, MSA 28.588(4). 
 
Sec. 42-142. Larceny from libraries.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to procure or take in any way from any public library or the library of any literary, scientific, historical or library society or association, whether incorporated or unincorporated, any book, pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper, magazine, manuscript or exhibit or any part thereof with intent to convert the same to his own use or with intent to defraud the owner thereof. It shall be unlawful for any person who has procured or taken any such book, pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper, magazine, manuscript or exhibit or any part thereof to thereafter convert the same to his own use or fraudulently deprive the owner thereof. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-101)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.364, MSA 28.596. 
 
Sec. 42-143. Larceny from vacant dwellings.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to steal or unlawfully remove or in any manner damage any fixture, attachment or other property belonging to, connected with or used in the construction of any vacant structure or building, whether built or in the process of construction, or who shall break into any vacant structure or building with the intention of unlawfully removing, taking therefrom or in any manner damaging any fixture, attachment or other property belonging to, connected with or used in the construction of such vacant structure or building whether built or in the process of construction. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-102)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.359, MSA 28.591. 
 
Sec. 42-144. Larceny by conversion.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to whom any money, goods or other property, which may be the subject of larceny, shall have been delivered to embezzle or fraudulently convert to his own use or to secrete with the intent to embezzle or fraudulently use such goods, money or other property or any part thereof. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-103)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.362, MSA 28.594. 
 
Sec. 42-145. Failure to return rented property.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to whom a motor vehicle, trailer or other tangible property is delivered on a rental or lease basis under any agreement in writing providing for its return to a particular place at a particular time to refuse or wilfully neglect to return such vehicle, trailer or other tangible property after the expiration of the time stated in a notice in writing proved to have been duly mailed by registered or certified mail addressed to the last known address of the person who rented or leased the motor vehicle, trailer or other tangible property with intent to defraud the lessor. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-104)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.362a, MSA 28.594(1). 
 
Sec. 42-146. Larceny from motor vehicles or trailers.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to commit the offense of larceny by stealing or unlawfully removing or taking any wheel, tire, radio, heater or clock in or on any motor vehicle, house trailer or semitrailer and entering or breaking into any motor vehicle for the purpose of stealing or removing goods, property or chattels. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-105)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.356a, MSA 28.588(1). 
 
Sec. 42-147. Use of motor vehicle without authority.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to wilfully and without authority take or use any motor vehicle without intent to steal the motor vehicle or to assist in or be a party to such unauthorized taking or using of any motor vehicle, belonging to another. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-106)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.414, MSA 28.646. 
 
Secs. 42-148—42-160. Reserved.
 
Subdivision IV. Fraud and Related Offenses
 
Sec. 42-161. Defrauding keepers of lodging for hire; restaurants.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to stop, put up, board or lodge at any boardinghouse as a guest or boarder by the day, week or month or to procure any food, entertainment or accommodation without paying therefor, with intent to defraud such owner, proprietor or keeper out of the pay for such board, lodging, food, entertainment or accommodations unless there is a distinct and express agreement made by such person with the owner, proprietor or keeper of such boardinghouse for credit. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to put up at any hotel, motel, inn, restaurant or cafe as a guest and to procure any food, entertainment or accommodation without paying therefor, with intent to defraud such keeper thereof out of the pay for the same, except when credit is given therefor by express agreement. 
(c)	Obtaining such food, lodging or accommodation by false pretense; by refusal or neglect to pay therefor on demand or make payment thereof with check, draft or order upon a bank or other depository on which payment was refused; or by absconding without paying or offering to pay therefor or by surreptitiously removing or attempting to remove baggage shall be prima facie evidence of such intent to defraud as mentioned in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-117)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.291 et seq., MSA 28.502 et seq. 
 
Secs. 42-162—42-180. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
 
Sec. 42-181. Disturbance in business, public place and lawful meetings.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to make or excite any disturbance or contention in any tavern, store or grocery, manufacturing establishment or any other business; or any street, lane, alley, highway, public building, grounds or park at any election or other public meeting where citizens are peaceably and lawfully assembled. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-128)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.170, MSA 28.367. 
 
Sec. 42-182. Disorderly intoxication.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to be under the influence of any intoxicating liquor or controlled substance in any public place or to be intoxicated in a public place and to either endanger directly the safety of another person or of property or to act in a manner that causes a public disturbance. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-129)
State law reference(s)—Intoxicated person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(e), MSA 28.364(1)(e). 
 
Sec. 42-183. Jostling.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to jostle or roughly crowd people unnecessarily in a public place. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-130)
State law reference(s)—Disorderly persons, MCL 750.167(1)(l), MSA 28.364(1)(l). 
 
Secs. 42-184—42-205. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VI. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 42-206. Throwing objects from or at motor vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to throw or propel any snowball, missile or object from or at any motor vehicle. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-141)
 
Sec. 42-207. Failing to cover or fence excavations.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to dig or cause to be dug an excavation or a partially constructed basement for any building or structure and to fail to cover or safely fence the same within a period of 90 days after the excavation has been commenced. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-142)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.493c, MSA 28.761(3). 
 
Sec. 42-208. Trespass—Hunting.
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain in or upon the waters of Ford Lake, the islands within Ford Lake, or any Township land abutting Ford Lake, for the purpose of hunting any wild bird, wild game or animal. 
(Ord. No. 96-149, 4-16-96)
 
Sec. 42-209. Firearms.
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, carry, or possess a firearm while in or upon the waters of Ford Lake, the islands within Ford Lake, or any Township land abutting Ford Lake, unless said person is a law enforcement officer engaged in performing his or her lawful duties. 
(Ord. No. 96-149, 4-16-96)
 
Sec. 42-210. Fireworks.
(a)	Definitions. As used in this section; 
(1)	Consumer fireworks means fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States Consumer Produce Safety Commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5. Consumer fireworks does not include low-impact fireworks. 
(2)	Firework or fireworks means any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun, or a flare, designated for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks, and special effects. 
(3)	Low-impact fireworks means ground and handheld sparking devices as that phrase is defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.3, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8 and 3.5. 
(4)	Novelties means that term as defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.2, 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.4, and 3.2.5 and all of the following: 
a.	Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets, strips, rolls, or individual caps containing not more than .25 or a grain of explosive content per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum explosive content per cap. 
b.	Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick noisemakers, and toy guns in which toy caps as described in subparagraph (a) are used, that are constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion, and that are not designed to break apart or be separated so as to form a missile by the explosion. 
c.	Flitter sparklers in paper tubes no exceeding one-eighth-inch in diameter. 
(b)	Prohibition on use of consumer fireworks. A person shall not ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks within the township on any day of the year, except for the following days after 11:00 a.m. 
(1)	December 31 until 1:00 a.m. on January 1. 
(2)	The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Memorial Day until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days. 
(3)	June 29 to July 4 until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days. 
(4)	July 5, if that date is a Friday or Saturday, until 11:45 p.m. 
(5)	The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Labor Day until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days. 
(Ord. No. 2012-425, 9-24-12; Ord. No. 2013-430, 7-22-13 ; Ord. No. 2019-485 , 4-2-19)
 
Secs. 42-211—42-220. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. DANGEROUS WEAPONS
 
Sec. 42-221. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Billy club means a bludgeon in the form of a club made of wood, plastic or metal. 
Blackjack means a short bludgeon consisting of a heavy head, such as of metal, on an elastic shaft or with a flexible handle or a lead slug attached to a leather thong or a leather-covered club or billy, weighted at the head and having an elastic shaft. 
Cane sword means a cane or swagger stick having concealed within it a blade that may be used as a sword or stiletto. 
Mace means a club of wood, plastic or metal with a rope, chain, leather or wire attached to one end and weighted at the opposite end with a weighted object. 
Manrikigusari means a length of chain with weighted ends. 
Metallic knuckles (also known as knuckles, brass knuckles, made of any substance which could be put to the same use with the same or similar effect as metallic knuckles) means a weapon to be worn on the hand for the purpose of offense or defense. 
Nunchaku or zoobow (also known as klackers or kung fu sticks) means two sticks of wood, plastic or metal, connected at one end by a length of rope, chain, wire or leather. 
Shuriken means a pointed star-like object or sharp blades bound together, intended to injure a person when thrown. 
Switchblade or self-opening knife means a knife containing a blade which can be opened by depressing a button, pressure on the handle, release of a spring or other mechanical contrivance. 
Umbrella sword means an umbrella having concealed within it a blade that may be used as a sword or a stiletto. 
(Code 1975, §§ 13½-153(a), 13½-155(a))
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 42-222. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to sell, offer for sale, keep, possess, use or loan any blackjack; billy club; metallic knuckles or knuckles of any substance which could be put to the same use with the same or similar effect as metallic knuckles; cane sword; umbrella sword, nunchaku, zoobow, also known as klackers or kung fu sticks or any similar weapon consisting of two sticks of wood, plastic or metal connected at one end by a length of rope, chain, wire or leather; shuriken or other similar pointed starlike object, intended to injure a person when thrown; manrikigusari or similar length of chain having weighted ends; mace; or any other dangerous weapon designed to inflict bodily harm upon another person. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-153(b))
State law reference(s)—Firearms and weapons, MCL 750.421 et seq., 750.222 et seq., MSA 28.91 et seq., 28.419 et seq. 
 
Sec. 42-223. Possession or control of firearm while intoxicated or under influence of drugs.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township while under the influence of an alcoholic liquor or any controlled substance to carry, have in possession or control or use in any manner or discharge any firearm. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-154)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.237, MSA 28.434. 
 
Sec. 42-224. Prohibition of switchblade or self-opening knives; exemption.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to sell, offer for sale, keep, possess, use or loan any switchblade or self-opening knife; provided, however, that the prohibition of this section shall not apply to any one-armed person in possession of a switchblade or self-opening knife in connection with his living requirements. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-155(b))
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.226a, MSA 28.423(1). 
 
Sec. 42-225. Discharge of firearm.
(a)	Discharge of firearm. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm within 150 yards of an occupied building, dwelling, house, residence or cabin, or any barn or other building used in connection with a farm operation. 
(b)	Exception. The following are exceptions to subsection (a): 
(1)	Law enforcement officers in the performance of their duties. 
(2)	A person acting in lawful self defense or lawful defense of others. 
(3)	Military functions such as parades, funerals, firing blank charges. 
(4)	An established and lawfully permitted educational program properly supervised. 
(c)	[Arrows.] It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge an arrow from a bow, crossbow, compound bow, longbow, recurve bow or similar device in a manner that can reasonably be expected to result in the impact of the arrow upon the property of another without the express permission of the property owner. This section exempts bow and arrows considered as toys and intended to release arrows incapable of penetrating a target or surface. 
(d)	Penalty. A person who violates subsection (a) is guilty of a misdemeanor with a maximum penalty of 93 days in jail and/or $500.00 fine. 
(Ord. No. 2009-398, §§ 1—4, 10-6-09)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2009-398, §§ 1—4, adopted Oct. 6, 2009, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence inclusion as § 42-225 was at the editor's discretion. 
 
Secs. 42-226—42-245. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VII. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 42-246. Reserved.
 
Sec. 42-247. Indecent exposure.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to knowingly make any open or indecent exposure of his person or of the person of another. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-166)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.335a, MSA 28.567(1). 
 
Sec. 42-248. Indecent or obscene conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to engage in any indecent or obscene conduct in any public place. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-167)
State law reference(s)—Such person deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(f), MSA 28.364(1)(f). 
 
Sec. 42-249. Window peeping.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to look into the windows or doors of any house, apartment or other residence in the township in such a manner that would be likely to interfere with the occupant's reasonable expectation of privacy. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-168)
State law reference(s)—Such person deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(c), MSA 28.364(1)(c). 
 
Secs. 42-250—42-270. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. PROSTITUTION
 
Sec. 42-271. General prohibitions.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to commit or offer or agree to commit a lewd act or an act of prostitution. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to secure or offer another for the purpose of committing a lewd act or an act of prostitution. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to knowingly transport any person to any place for the purpose of committing a lewd act or an act of prostitution. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to knowingly receive or offer to or agree to receive any person into any place or building for the purpose of performing a lewd act or an act of prostitution, or to knowingly permit any person to remain in any place or building for any such purpose. 
(e)	It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to direct or offer to direct any person to any place or building for the purpose of committing any lewd act or act of prostitution. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-179)
 
Sec. 42-272. Keeping or maintaining houses of ill fame.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to keep or maintain a building or residence for the purpose of engaging in acts of prostitution. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-180)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.452, MSA 28.707. 
 
Sec. 42-273. Soliciting and accosting.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township, male or female, 17 years of age or older, to accost, solicit or invite another in any public place or in or from any building or vehicle by word, gesture or any other means to commit prostitution or to do any other lewd or immoral act. This section shall not apply to a law enforcement officer while in the performance of his duties as an enforcement officer. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-181)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.448, MSA 28.703. 
 
Secs. 42-274—42-285. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES, TOXIC CHEMICALS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
 
Sec. 42-286. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Drug paraphernalia means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of state or local law. It includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)	Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived. 
(2)	Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substances. 
(3)	Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance. 
(4)	Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances. 
(5)	Scales or balances used, intended for use or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances. 
(6)	Dilutents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for use in cutting controlled substances. 
(7)	Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana. 
(8)	Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances. 
(9)	Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances. 
(10)	Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances. 
(11)	Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body. 
(12)	Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
a.	Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls; 
b.	Water pipes; 
c.	Smoking carburetion masks; 
d.	Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning materials, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
e.	Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials; 
f.	Chamber pipes; and 
g.	Carburetor pipes. 
(Code 1975, § 13-81(a))
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 42-287. Reserved.
 
Sec. 42-288. Determination whether object is drug paraphernalia.
In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
(1)	Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the objects concerning its use. 
(2)	Reserved. 
(3)	Reserved. 
(4)	The proximity of the object to controlled substances. 
(5)	The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object. 
(6)	Direct circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of state or local law or of this act; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of state, local law or this act, shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use or designed for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(7)	Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use. 
(8)	Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use. 
(9)	National and local advertising concerning its use. 
(10)	The manner in which the object is displayed for sale. 
(11)	Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products. 
(12)	Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the objects to the total sales of the business enterprise. 
(13)	The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community. 
(14)	Expert testimony concerning its use. 
(Code 1975, § 13-81(b))
 
Sec. 42-289. Loitering near places where controlled substances and drug paraphernalia are illegally kept.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to knowingly loiter about, frequent or live in any building, apartment, house, store, automobile, boat, boathouse, airplane or other place of any description whatsoever where controlled substances, hypodermic syringes, needles, other instruments or implements or empty gelatin capsules are used, sold, dispensed, furnished, given away, stored or kept illegally. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-192)
 
Sec. 42-290. Possession of drug paraphernalia.
It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of state or local law. 
(Code 1975, § 13-82)
 
Sec. 42-291. Manufacture, delivery or sale.
It is unlawful for any reason to deliver, sell, possess with intent to deliver or sell, or manufacture with intent to deliver or sell drug paraphernalia, knowing that it will be used to plant, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of state or local law. 
(Code 1975, § 13-83)
 
Sec. 42-292. Advertisement.
It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, sign, poster or other publication any advertisement, knowing that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(Code 1975, § 13-84)
 
Sec. 42-293. Exceptions.
This division shall not apply to manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers, licensed medical technicians, technologists, nurses, hospitals, research teaching institutions, clinical laboratories, medical doctors, osteopathic physicians, dentists, chiropodists, veterinarians, pharmacists and embalmers in the normal legal course of their respective business or profession, nor to persons suffering from diabetes, asthma or any other medical condition requiring self-injection. 
(Code 1975, § 13-85)
 
Sec. 42-294. Civil forfeiture.
Any drug paraphernalia used, sold, possessed with intent to use or sell, or manufactured with intent to sell in violation of this division shall be seized and forfeitured to the township. 
(Code 1975, § 13-86)
 
Secs. 42-295—42-315. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VIII. OFFENSES CONCERNING UNDERAGED PERSONS
 
DIVISION 1. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES, CURFEWS, SPRAY PAINT, BEEPERS
 
Sec. 42-316. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage means any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by weight. The percentage of alcohol by weight shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of Act No. 8 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (MCL 436.1 et seq., MSA 18.971 et seq.), as amended. 
Control means any form of regulation or dominion including a possessory or management right or duty. 
Drug means a controlled substance as defined now or hereafter by the Public Acts of the State of Michigan. Currently, such controlled substances are defined by Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 333.1101 et seq., MSA 14.15(1101) et seq.), as amended. 
Minor means a person not legally permitted by reason of age to possess alcoholic beverages pursuant to Act No. 8 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (MCL 436.1 et seq., MSA 18.971 et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1975, § 13-100)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 42-317. Reserved.
 
Sec. 42-318. Owners of premises permitting minors to consume alcoholic beverages or drugs guilty of misdemeanor; defense.
A person who has the ownership, possession or control of any premises in the township and who permits the consumption or use of alcoholic beverages or drugs in any form by any minor on such premises, or who fails to make diligent inquiry as to whether such person is a minor, is guilty of a misdemeanor. In an action for violation of this section, proof that the defendant demanded and was shown, before permitting such minor to consume such alcoholic beverages, a motor vehicle operator's license, or other bona fide documentary evidence that such person is not a minor, shall be a defense to an action under this division. 
(Code 1975, § 13-101)
 
Sec. 42-319. Owners of premises storing or displaying alcoholic beverages or drugs to prevent minors from obtaining.
A person who has the ownership, possession or control of any premises in the township and who stores or displays, or allows to be stored or displayed, alcoholic beverages or drugs in any form on such premises shall take reasonable steps to prevent any minor on such premises from obtaining possession of such alcoholic beverages or drugs for any purpose whatsoever. Any such person who fails to take such reasonable steps shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1975, § 13-102)
 
Sec. 42-320. Exceptions.
The provisions of this division shall not apply to a person related to a minor as a parent or guardian, or to a person placed in the position of a parent by a parent or guardian of the minor, or to legally protected religious observances, educational activities or medical treatments. 
(Code 1975, § 13-103)
 
Sec. 42-321. Furnishing alcoholic beverages to persons under 21 years of age.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to knowingly give or furnish any alcoholic beverage to a person under 21 years of age except upon the authority of and pursuant to a prescription of a duly licensed physician. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-203)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 436.33, 750.28, MSA 18.1004, 28.216(1) et seq. 
 
Sec. 42-322. Permitting minors to remain in places where alcoholic liquor is sold.
It shall be unlawful in the township for any minor under 17 years of age to be permitted to remain in any dancehall, saloon, barroom or any place where any alcoholic liquor is sold, given away or furnished for a beverage, unless the minor is accompanied by parent or guardian. It shall be unlawful for the proprietor, keeper or manager of any such place to permit such minor to remain in any such place, and it shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly encourage or induce in any way such minor to enter such place or to remain therein. 
(Code 1975, § 13½-204)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 750.141. 
 
Sec. 42-323. Reserved.
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2009-393, § 1, adopted June 16, 2009, repealed § 42-323 in its entirety. Former § 420-323 pertained to purchase, consumption, and possession of alcohol by minor, and derived from Code 1975, § 13½-205, and Ord. No 96-146, adopted March 5, 1996. 
 
Sec. 42-324. Curfew for minors and parental responsibility.
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases when used in this section shall have the following meanings: 
Curfew hours means 10:00 p.m. to 5:30 a.m. on any day of the week (Monday through Sunday inclusive). 
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Guardian means: 
(1)	A person who, under court order, is the guardian of a minor; or 
(2)	A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
Minor means any person under 18 years of age. 
Parent means a person who is: 
(1)	A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of a minor; or 
(2)	At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
Outdoor public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks, playgrounds, vacant lots or other outdoor areas open to the public. 
Remain means to: 
(1)	Linger or stay; or 
(2)	Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a law enforcement officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises. 
Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(b)	Curfew and parental responsibility.
(1)	A minor commits an offense remaining in any outdoor public place within the township during curfew hours. 
(2)	A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense by knowingly permitting or by insufficient control allowing a minor to remain in any outdoor public place within the township during curfew hours. 
(c)	Defenses.
(1)	It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b) that the minor was: 
a.	Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
b.	On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
c.	In a motor vehicle travelling on a public or private street or highway; 
d.	Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
e.	Involved in an emergency; 
f.	On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to law enforcement about the minor's presence; 
g.	Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults, sponsored by the township, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults, sponsored by the township, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
h.	Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or 
i.	Married or had been married or emancipated in accordance with state law. 
(d)	Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a law enforcement officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the outdoor public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in subsection (c) is present. 
(e)	Penalties. A person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00 and/or 90 days in jail. 
(Ord. No. 2010-405, 5-18-10)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2010-405, adopted May 18, 2010, repealed the former § 42-324, and enacted a new § 42-324 as set out herein. The former § 42-324 pertained to curfew for minors, parental responsibility and penalties and derived from Code 1975 and an amendment adopted May 2, 1995. 
 
Sec. 42-325. Purchase, possession or transfer of spray paint containers by minors; penalty.
(a)	Definitions. The term "spray paint" as used in this section shall mean any container of paint, varnish, lacquer stain, or similar substance commonly used in painting and applied by a spraying method or other similar technique. 
(b)	Purchase, possession or transfer of spray paint by a minor. A person under 18 years of age shall not, in the township, purchase, possess or transfer to another any spray paint. 
(c)	Exception. Subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to minors under the age of 18 years who have in their possession written consent from their parent, legal guardian, or other person who has legal custody to possess spray paint. 
(d)	Sale of spray paint. No person shall sell spray paint to a person in the township under the age of 18 years unless they are furnished with written consent from the minor's parent, legal guardian, or other person having legal custody which authorizes the minor to possess spray paint. The seller shall record the name, address, sex and date of birth of all minors who purchase spray paint in accordance with this subsection. This record of spray paint sales shall be made available for inspection by law enforcement officers upon request. A seller is responsible to retain spray paint sales records for three months from the date of purchase. 
(e)	Penalty. Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a maximum penalty of a $100.00 fine and/or 90 days in jail. 
(Amd. of 5-2-95)
 
Sec. 42-326. Reserved.
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2014-442 , adopted Jan. 20, 2015, repealed former § 42-326 which pertained to purchase, possession and transfer of beepers by minors; penalty, and derived from an amendment adopted May 2, 1995. 
 
Secs. 42-327—42-335. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. TOBACCO
 
Sec. 42-336. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the following meanings: 
Chewing tobacco means loose tobacco or a flat compressed cake of tobacco that is inserted into the mouth to be chewed or sucked. 
Tobacco snuff means shredded, powdered or pulverized tobacco that may be inhaled through nostrils, chewed, or placed against the gums. 
(Ord. No. 97-168, § 1, 6-17-97)
 
Sec. 42-337. Possessing or using tobacco products in a public place by a person under 18.
A person under 18 years of age shall not possess or smoke cigarette or cigars; or possess, chew, suck, or inhale chewing tobacco or tobacco snuff; or possess or use tobacco in any other form, on a public highway, street, alley, park or other lands used for public purposes, or in a public place of business or amusement. 
(Ord. No. 97-168, § 2, 6-17-97)
 
Sec. 42-338. Penalty misdemeanor, participation in a health program, community service.
(a)	A person who violates this division is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not more than $500.00 for each offense, and/or court ordered participation in a health promotion and risk reduction assessment program, and/or community service in a hospice, nursing home or long-term care facility. A person who is ordered to participate in a health promotion and risk reduction assessment program is responsible for the costs of participating in the program. 
(b)	This division does not interfere with the rights of a parent or legal guardian in raising his or her minor children within the bounds of his or her own private premises. 
(Ord. No. 97-168, § 3, 6-17-97)
 
Secs. 42-339—42-350. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. LASER POINTER DEVICES
 
Sec. 42-351. Definitions.
For the purposes of this division: 
Laser pointer means any device that emits light amplified by the simulated emission of radiation that is visible to the human eye. 
Public place means a place to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, and includes, but is not limited to, any street, highway, lake, parking lot, plaza, place of amusement, park, playground, school, including grounds and facilities, and any hallway, lobby and other portion of an apartment house or hotel not constituting a room or apartment designed for actual residence. 
(Ord. No. 99-208, § 1, 5-20-99)
 
Sec. 42-352. Selling or offering to sell a laser pointer to a person under 18.
It shall be unlawful for any person to give, sell or offer to sell a laser pointer to any person under the age of 18 years. 
(Ord. No. 99-208, § 2, 5-20-99)
 
Sec. 42-353. Possession of a laser pointer while in a public place.
It shall be unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to possess a laser pointer while in a public place or to direct light emitted from a laser pointer into or through a public place. Nothing in this section shall preclude the possession of a laser pointer by a person under 18 years of age as a necessary tool in his or her lawful employment where such laser pointer is used under the supervision of the employer or employer's agent. 
(Ord. No. 99-208, § 3, 5-20-99)
 
Sec. 42-354. Directing light from a laser pointer at uniformed officers.
It shall be unlawful for any person to direct light from a laser pointer at a uniformed police officer, uniformed security guard, uniformed school safety officer, uniformed traffic enforcement agent, uniformed member of a paid or volunteer fire department, uniformed emergency medical service worker or uniformed ambulance worker, or other uniformed township, state or federal peace officer, investigator, or emergency service worker, or the marked service vehicle of any such individual. 
(Ord. No. 99-208, § 4, 5-20-99)
 
Sec. 42-355. Affirmative defenses to possession while in a public place.
When a person is found to possess a laser pointer while in a public place in violation of section 42-353, it is an affirmative defense that: 
(1)	Such person was traveling to or from school premises, where the laser pointer would have been or was used for a valid instructional, school-related or employment purpose under the supervision of a school staff person, other authorized instructor, employer or employer's agent, and such person had not turned on the laser pointer or displayed it in a menacing or threatening manner; or 
(2)	Such person was traveling to or from his or her place of employment where the laser pointer would have been or was used during such person's hours of employment, for a valid employment purpose, under the supervision of the employer or employer's agent, and such person had not turned on the laser pointer or displayed it is a menacing or threatening manner. 
(Ord. No. 99-208, § 5, 5-20-99)
 
Secs. 42-356—42-470. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 4. TRUANCY
 
Sec. 42-371. Truancy from school.
(a)	It is unlawful for a minor under the age of 18 years who is enrolled in a public, private or charter educational program to be absent from school when the school he or she is enrolled in is in session. 
(b)	Exceptions. The provisions of subsection (a) shall not apply when: 
(1)	The minor has in his or her possession a written excuse from the minor's parent, legal guardian, or other adult person having the legal care or custody of the minor; 
(2)	The minor is accompanied by his or her parent, legal guardian or other adult person having the legal care or custody of the minor; 
(3)	The minor is on an emergency errand directed by his or her parent, legal guardian or other person having legal care or custody of the minor; 
(4)	The minor is going directly to or returning from a medical, dental or orthodontic appointment; 
(5)	The minor has permission to leave school and has in his or her possession a valid school excuse to be absent from school; 
(6)	The minor is going directly to or returning from a public meeting or place of entertainment, such as a movie, play, sporting event, dance or school activity, provided such meeting, event or activity is a school approved activity or is otherwise supervised by school personnel; 
(7)	The presence of the minor in such place is connected with or required by a school approved or school related business, trade, profession or occupation in which the minor is lawfully engaged; 
(8)	The minor has graduated from high school or has fulfilled all requirements for high school graduation; 
(9)	The minor is in attendance at religious instruction classes in accordance with section 156(3)(d) of Public Act 451 of 1970 (MCL 380.1561(3)(d); or 
(10)	The minor is being educated in an organized educational program at the minor's home by his or her parent or legal guardian in accordance with Public Act No. 451 of 1976 (MCL 380.1 et seq.). 
(d)	Violation of subsection (a) shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a maximum fine in the amount of $50.00 for a first offense and $100.00 for a second or subsequent offense during a calendar school year. 
(Ord. No. 2006-370, § I, 1-16-07; Ord. No. 2014-434 , 4-15-14)
Editor's note(s)—At the request of the township, the title of § 42-371 was changed from "Truancy in public places and motor vehicles" to read as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 42-372. Enforcement procedure; parental responsibility.
(a)	A minor cited for a violation under this section shall attend a court hearing and must be accompanied at the hearing by his or her parent, legal guardian or other adult person have legal care or custody of the minor. 
(b)	It is the responsibility of the parent, legal guardian or other adult person having the legal care or custody of the minor, upon receiving notification from the court or the township, to appear for a court hearing as described in subsection (a). Failure to attend a court hearing is a misdemeanor punishable by a maximum sentence of 90 days in jail and/or $500.00 fine. 
(c)	It is the responsibility of the parent, legal guardian or other adult person having the legal care or custody of the minor to monitor the school attendance of the minor as required by law. Failure to monitor school attendance of the minor constitutes a misdemeanor punishable by a maximum sentence of 90 days in jail and/or $500.00 fine. 
(Ord. No. 2006-370, § II, 1-16-07)
 
Sec. 42-373. Parental responsibility for school attendance.
(a)	Purpose. The purpose of this section is to aid local public, private and charter schools in educating children ages six through 13 inclusive, who are enrolled in schools by requiring parents and legal guardians exercise sufficient supervisory control over their minor children to require their attendance in school classrooms on a regular basis. The section is premised on the belief that the academic achievement of a chronically absent minor from school without justifiable excuse undermines his or her academic achievement and the teachers' ability to teach. This section is intended to apply to parents and legal guardians who are unwilling to exercise their authority over their children by requiring regular school attendance unless excused due to illness, medical/dental/orthodontic appointments, family emergencies, religious observances or other similar reasons commonly recognized by schools as justified, excused absences. 
(b)	Definitions. As used in this section: 
Chronically absent means the minor accumulated the following number of unexcused absences from the public, private, or charter school during the academic school year in which the minor is enrolled: 
(1)	Ten or more days unexcused absences; or 
(2)	The equivalent of ten or more days of unexcused absences calculated by adding the total number of unexcused class hours missed and dividing the sum by the number of hours per day the minor is scheduled to be in school. 
Parent means a biological parent, adoptive parent or step parent of a minor. 
Legal guardian means a person who, under court order, is the guardian of a minor. 
Minor means a person at least six years old through 13 years of age. 
(c)	Parental responsibility for chronically absent students. It is unlawful for the parent or legal guardian residing with a minor ages six through 13 years of age enrolled in a public, private or charter school, to permit the minor to be chronically absent from school. 
(d)	Penalty. A person who violates subsection (c) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a maximum sentence of 90 days in jail and/or a fine of not less than $5.00 nor more than a $50.00 fine. 
( Ord. No. 2014-436 , §§ 1—4, 7-15-14)
 
Chapter 46 PARKS AND RECREATION 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 46-1. Fund.
(a)	The township hereby creates a special fund known as the parks and recreation fund, which shall be supervised and maintained by the township board. 
(b)	The parks and recreation fund shall be the recipient of all monies obtained under section 46-2 for payment in lieu of the transfer of property to the township for parks and recreation purposes. 
(c)	The parks and recreation fund shall be the recipient of any funds or monies received from the sale of property transferred to the township for parks and recreation purposes under the provisions of section 46-2. 
(d)	The funds and monies referred to in this section are to be used by the township for the sole purpose of parks and recreation and are not to be used for any other purposes whatsoever. The township board shall be, in its sole discretion, responsible for determining where such monies and funds are to be spent for parks and recreation and, further, as to what projects such monies and funds shall be used for. 
(Code 1975, § 15-1)
 
Sec. 46-2. Conveyances of property or payment of money to township by subdividers and other developers for park purposes.
(a)	Definition of terms. For the purposes of this section, the word "developer" means the owner, financial backer or any other person responsible for the building of homes, apartments or other types of structures upon previously vacant property. The term "parcel," as used in this section means any parcel in excess of five acres for single-family residential development and 3,000 square feet for all other type developments. 
(b)	Required portion of land for public purposes. The township hereby requires, as a condition of approval of the final plat for any subdivision, or the final approval for any site plan for development of properties other than subdivided lands, that the developer transfer to the township, from each parcel of land developed, an amount equal to three percent of the land used for subdivision or for other site plan development for public purposes other than highways. 
(c)	Money in lieu of land permitted. The owner or developer of land coming under the provisions of this section may, in lieu of the conveyance to the township for public purposes other than highways, extend to the township money to the value of such land required to be conveyed and the township board may, at its discretion, accept the money to be placed in the township parks and recreation fund created by section 46-1 or may require, at its discretion, the actual conveyance of the land required in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)	Land to be used for park or sold. Land conveyed to the township under this section shall be held and used by the township for park purposes or the township may, at any time, sell such property; provided, however, that development of the conveyed properties for park purposes must commence within one year from the date of conveyance, or the township is obligated to place the conveyed property on the market for sale at fair market value with the previous owner having a right of first refusal to purchase. Once the property is sold, the funds must be deposited in the parks and recreation fund and must be used in accordance with the requirements of that fund. 
(e)	Enforcement. Responsibilities for enforcement of this section shall be such that the planning commission shall not issue any approval of plans, nor shall the township issue any approval of plans or subdivisions until the provisions of this section have been complied with. The department of community development shall determine that the provisions of this section have been complied with prior to the issuance of any building permits. 
(f)	Penalty for violation of section. For violation of the provisions of this section, the developer shall be subject to a fine of not less than $250.00 per day nor more than $500.00 per day for each day such violation continues. Each day that the violation continues shall be deemed a new offense. 
(Code 1975, § 15-2)
 
Sec. 46-3. Purpose.
This chapter has been enacted to provide persons with an opportunity to use and enjoy township parks, recreational areas and open space areas; to further the safety, health, enjoyment and welfare of all persons in the use thereof, and to protect park, recreational areas, and open space resources. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. I, § A, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-4. Definitions.
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Board shall mean and refer to the township board of trustees. 
Dawn shall mean and refer to sunrise according to the National Weather Service. 
Department shall mean and refer to the township parks and recreation department. 
Director shall mean and refer to the township director of recreation or an authorized designee. 
Dusk shall mean and refer to 15 minutes after sunset according to the National Weather Service. 
Employee shall mean any full-time, part-time, permanent or temporary ranger or worker in the employ of the department. "Employee" shall also include unpaid volunteers and any person employed or hired by a contractor, concessionaire, or other person or firm to perform work on park property at the request of or under contract with the Charter Township of Ypsilanti. 
Ford Lake shall mean and refer to the waters of Ford Lake or any public shoreline owned by or under the authority of the board, including those waters abutting park lakeshore. 
Law enforcement officer shall be as defined in MCL 28.602(k). 
Motor vehicle means a self-propelled vehicle or vehicle propelled or drawn by a self-propelled vehicle which is operated on a highway, on the ground, in water, or in the air. 
Motorized recreation vehicle means any self-propelled, off the road or all-terrain vehicle including, but not limited to, snowmobile, mini-bike, amphibious vehicle, go-cart, trail bike, dune buggy, motorized scooter or all-terrain cycle. 
Natural resources shall mean all flora and fauna within a park and the physical factors on which they depend, including air, water, soil and minerals. 
Park shall mean and refer to any park, open space, pavilion, golf course, special-use area, bike trail or any other area owned, improved, maintained, operated or otherwise controlled by the board for recreation or natural resource preservation purposes. 
Permit shall mean the written permission that must be obtained from the department to carry out certain activities. 
Person or persons shall mean individuals, firms, corporations, societies, or any group or gathering whatsoever. 
Pet means any animal that is domesticated or kept as a companion. 
Roller-skate is the act of riding or propelling oneself by human power or gravity on wheeled devices that are worn on a person's feet or stood upon by a person. "Roller-skates" specifically includes, but is not limited to, traditional roller-skates, in-line roller-skates, roller-skis, skateboards and scooters. 
Special event or special events means any event or activity in which 50 people or more are in attendance; merchandise or a service is offer for sale or sold; or any form of monetary remuneration is required to attend or participate in the activity. The term "special event(s)" specifically includes, but is not limited to, regattas, motorboat or other boat races, marine parades, ice boat races, snowmobile races, tournaments, and exhibitions. 
Wildlife shall mean any living creature, not human, wild by nature, including but not limited to mammals, birds, fish, amphibians, insects, reptiles, crustaceans and mollusks. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. I, § B, 5-4-04)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 46-5. Director authority to establish rules and regulations.
The director shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations as are necessary to maintain and preserve parks. The director shall maintain copies of such rules and regulations on file at the township clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. VI, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-6. Enforcement.
(a)	Law enforcement officers. Law enforcement officers, township park superintendent, director and park rangers shall have the authority to seize, confiscate and impound any substance, plant, animal, vehicle or other article, which, upon probable cause, are found to be used or possessed in violation of this chapter. 
(b)	Fines and penalties. A person guilty of violating any provisions of this chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, with a fine of not more than $500.00, together with taxable costs. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. VII, 5-4-04)
 
Secs. 46-7—46-25. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. REGULATIONS OF PUBLIC USE
 
Sec. 46-26. Park hours.
(a)	Parks shall be open to the public from dawn to dusk. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain in a park at any other time without a use permit, except when otherwise designated by the director, or when being used as part of an authorized department program. 
(b)	Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by the director at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals, and either entirely or for certain uses as the director shall find necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. II, § A, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-27. Permits.
(a)	Permits shall be required for the exclusive use of any portion of a park and for conducting special events. Any person, group or association of persons required to obtain a permit shall file an application for such permit with the department. 
(b)	Permit applications shall be filed with the department not less than 14 days prior to the date of the proposed special event. 
(c)	The grant or denial of permit applications shall be determined by consideration of the following criteria: (a) whether the proposed special event is in conformity with the township ordinances and state law pertaining to use of parks; and (b) whether the proposed special event will unreasonably interfere or detract from the general public health, safety, use, and enjoyment of the park or Ford Lake. 
(d)	Persons granted special event permits shall be bound by this chapter and any department rules and regulations in force as though the same were inserted in said permit. 
(e)	Persons granted special event permits shall indemnify the township for any and all loss, damage or injury sustained by persons, and/or park property caused by persons who attend or participate in said special event. Adequate insurance as determined by the township attorney's office shall be provided by persons granted special events permits listing the township and its officials as additional insureds. 
(f)	Persons granted special event permits shall not transfer or relinquish said permit to another person or group of persons without written authorization from the director. 
(g)	The director shall have the authority to revoke a permit. 
(h)	It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb, harass or interfere with the grantee of a valid permit, or with any of the grantee's property or equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. II, § B, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-28. [Smoking prohibited.]
It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or use tobacco products, including smokeless tobacco, within a township park. 
( Ord. No. 2016-467 , 10-18-16)
 
Secs. 46-29—46-55. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. GENERAL CONDUCT
 
Sec. 46-56. Destruction/defacement of park property/signs.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, vandalize or remove park property, buildings, equipment or facilities; or deface, destroy, cover, damage or remove any placard notice, or sign or parts thereof, whether permanent or temporary, posted or exhibited by the department. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. III, § A, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-57. Disturbance of natural resources.
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Intentionally remove, alter, injure or destroy any natural resource without written authorization from the director; 
(2)	Dig trenches, holes or other excavation in a park without written authorization from the director; 
(3)	Plant or cultivate any plant, or release any animal into a park without written authorization from the director; or 
(4)	Remove any device, apparatus or material installed for the protection, support or preservation of any tree, shrub or plant without authorization from the director. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. III, § B, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-58. Littering.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, scatter, drop or abandon in any park, any paper, bottles, cans, sewage, yard waste (including leaves, grass clippings and brush) waste, trash or other debris, except in receptacles provided by the department for such purpose. No person shall deposit in any receptacle in any park, any accumulation of waste or trash generated outside the boundaries of the park. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. III, § C, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-59. Alcohol.
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Serve, possess, or consume any alcoholic beverage including liquor, beer or wine within a park. 
(2)	Enter or be present in a park while intoxicated. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. III, § D, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-60. Gambling.
It shall be unlawful for any person to gamble or participate in any game of chance for a consideration of items of value, except as may be permitted by the board in accordance with state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. III, § E, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-61. Possession and use of firearms; dangerous weapons; fireworks.
It shall be unlawful for any person within park property to: 
(1)	Possess, carry, fire or discharge, or cause to be fired or discharged across, in or into any portions of the park, any spear, bow and arrow, crossbow, or sling shot, except for the purposes designated by the board in an area and at times designated by the board; 
(2)	Possess, set off or attempt to set off or ignite any firecracker, fireworks, smoke bombs, rockets, black powder guns or other pyrotechnics without authorization from the director; or 
(3)	Discharge or cause to be discharged, a firearm, pistol, pellet gun, air rifle, air or shot gun, or paint ball gun, as defined by Michigan law, MCL 750.222, as amended, in or into any portion of a township park. 
Any unauthorized or illegal weapon, explosive, or other pyrotechnic within a park shall be subject to seizure by a law enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. III, § F, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 2014-440 , 1-20-15; Ord. No. 2018-479 , 8-21-18)
 
Sec. 46-62. Audio devices.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or play any musical instrument, radio, television, record or tape player, loudspeaker, public address system or sound amplifying equipment of any kind in any park in such a manner that the sound emanating there from is clearly audible beyond 50 feet of the point of origin of the sound, and which interferes with use of the park by others or disturbs the residents of adjacent properties. This section does not apply to persons receiving written authorization from the director to operate sound amplification equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. III, § G, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-63. Parades; entertainment; public meetings.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct processions, parades, pageants, ceremonies, exhibitions, entertainment or other public gatherings through or in any park, except with written authorization of the director. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. III, § H, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-64. Commercial use; solicitation; advertising; photography.
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Solicit, sell or otherwise peddle any goods, ware, merchandise, services, liquids or edibles in a park, except by authorized concession or written authorization from the director; 
(2)	Operate a still, motion picture, video or other camera for commercial purposes in a park without written authorization from the director; or 
(3)	Expose, distribute or place any sign, advertisement, notice, poster or display in a park without written authorization from the director; or 
(4)	Distribute or disseminate any commercial leaflets, pamphlets, circulars, handbills, advertisements or other commercial printed material without the written authorization of the director in a park. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. III, § I, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-65. Fires.
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Start or maintain a fire in any park, except small (not larger than three feet in diameter) recreational fires in fireplaces or fire rings provided for that purpose; 
(2)	Start or maintain cooking fires, except in grills provided for that purpose. Private grills may be used in designated areas provided that all ashes and residue there from are disposed of in containers provided for such disposal; 
(3)	Leave a fire unattended or fail to fully extinguish a fire; or 
(4)	Scatter or leave unattended lighted matches, ashes, tobacco, paper or other combustible material. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. III, § J, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-66. Aviation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use park property for a starting or landing field for aircraft, hot air balloons, parachutes, hang gliders without written authorization from the director. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. III, § K, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-67. Amusement contraptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring in, set up, construct, manage or operate any amusement or entertainment contraption, device or gadget without written authorization from the director. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. III, § L, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-68. Engine-powered models and toys.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fly or use any fuel or electric powered model aircraft, boat, car or rocket, or like-powered toy or model without written authorization from the director. This section shall not apply to models or toys, which are powered by hand-wound springs, rubber, or other elastic materials, or by inertial flywheels. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. III, § M, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-69. Unlawful occupancy.
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter in any way, any building, installation or area that may be under construction, locked or closed to public use; or to enter, remain in, or be upon any building, installation or area after the posted closing time or before the posted opening time, or contrary to the posted notice in any park. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. III, § N, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-70. Interference with employee performance of duty.
It shall be unlawful for any person to impersonate any employee or agent of the department or interfere with, harass or hinder any employee or agent in the discharge of duties. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. III, § O, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-71. Pets in parks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Bring a dog into a park unless on a leash; except in areas otherwise designated. 
(2)	Permit a pet to disturb, harass or interfere with any park visitor, park visitor's property or park employee; or have custody or control of any pet in a park without possessing and using an appropriate device for cleaning up pet feces and disposing of the feces in a sanitary manner. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. III, § P, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-72. Law enforcement officers and employees.
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Willfully resist, refuse or fail to comply with any order, direction or request lawfully given by any law enforcement officer, director, department employee or agent acting under the authority of the board and in accordance with this chapter; or 
(2)	Interfere with or, in any manner, hinder a director, department employee, agent or law enforcement officer during the performance of assigned duties. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. III, § Q, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-73. Posted regulations, directional signs and graphics.
No person shall disregard or fail to comply with any posted regulations, directional signs and graphics, barriers or other control devices located within any park. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. III, § R, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-74. Trespass.
(a)	The department may eject a person from a park for a period of time, if that person violates park rules, township ordinances, or state law. 
(b)	No person ejected from a park for a period of time by the department shall reenter the park until the period of time has elapsed. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. III, § S, 5-4-04)
 
Secs. 46-75—46-95. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. REGULATION OF RECREATION ACTIVITY
 
Sec. 46-96. Picnicking.
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Assume exclusive use of a reservation picnic site or shelter without a permit; 
(2)	Use a portion of a reservation picnic area or shelter without a permit if the area is reserved by a permitted group; 
(3)	Conduct picnic activity at reservation picnic sites contrary to a permit, or otherwise violate provisions of a permit; or 
(4)	Set up temporary shelters, tarps, canopies and other such devices without a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. IV, § A, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-97. Bicycling.
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Operate a bicycle, except on paved bike trails and roadways, and except as close to the right hand side of the paved bike trail or roadway as conditions permit; 
(2)	Operate a bicycle on unpaved trails, except at areas and times designated for that purpose; 
(3)	Ride or operate a bicycle, except in a prudent and careful manner or at a speed faster than is reasonable and safe with regard to the safety of the operator and other persons in the immediate area. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. IV, § B, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-98. Camping.
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or maintain any camp or other temporary lodging or sleeping place in any park, except by written authorization from the director, and then only in areas specifically designated for such use. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. IV, § C, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-99. Roller-skating.
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Roller-skate in a park, except in areas specifically designated for such use. 
(2)	Roller-skate in a park, except in a prudent, careful manner and at a speed that is reasonable and safe with regard to the safety of the operator and other persons in the immediate area; 
(3)	Roller-skate in any park building or shelter, except by written authorization from the director; or 
(4)	Roller-skate in any parking lot, except incidental travel between a motor vehicle and an authorized use area. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. IV, § D, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-100. Snowmobiling.
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Operate a snowmobile in any park or on any public trail under the jurisdiction of the board, except in areas and on trails specifically designated for such use. 
(2)	Operate a snowmobile in violation of any posted sign. 
(3)	Operate on any frozen surface of Ford Lake in violation of the provisions of Act No. 74 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1968 (MCL 257.1502 et seq.), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. IV, § E, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-101. Boating.
(a)	Every motorboat being operated on the waters of Ford Lake and being propelled by a permanently or temporarily attached motor shall be provided and equipped with a stock factory muffler, underwater exhaust or other modern device capable of adequately muffling the sound of the exhaust of the engine of such motorboat. The mufflers shall be kept closed and the exhaust or device kept in proper working order by any person operating or in charge of the motorboat at all times when the engine is in operation. The term "capable of adequately muffling the sound of the exhaust engine" means the motor's exhaust at all times shall be so muffled or suppressed as not to create excessive or unusual noise. 
(b)	No person shall put, throw or deposit any loose or anchored floating, partially floating or sinkable heavy objects of metal, wood, stone, concrete, ceramic or other materials, such as garbage, waste, peelings of vegetables or fruit, rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, oil or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature in the waters of Ford Lake. This subsection shall not apply to scientific studies approved by the director. 
(c)	No person shall operate a vessel at high speed on Ford Lake during the period beginning one hour after sunset and ending one hour after sunrise. 
(d)	No person shall operate a vessel on Ford Lake (a) within 300 feet in any direction from the dam on the east line of Section 23, Township 3 South, Range 7 East, or (b) underneath any foot bridge on Ford Lake and specifically the North Bay Park foot bridges as well as upon waters enclosed by foot bridges which are a hazard to boaters or contain wildlife. 
(e)	No motor vehicles admitted into Ford Lake Park may transport more than two jet skis per one motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. IV, § F, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-102. Golf.
No person shall drive, putt or in any other manner play or practice golf, except in areas specifically designated for such use. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. IV, § G, 5-4-04)
 
Secs. 46-103—46-125. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. REGULATION OF MOTORIZED VEHICLES, TRAFFIC AND PARKING
 
Sec. 46-126. Motorized recreation vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motorized recreational vehicle within a park, except in such areas and times as designated by the board. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. V, § A, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-127. Vehicle operation.
No person shall: 
(1)	Operate a motor vehicle within a park, except on roadways, parking areas, parkways or other areas designated for such use. 
(2)	Operate a vehicle at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour or posted speed limits. 
(3)	Operate a vehicle within a park in violation of posted regulations. 
(4)	Drive or operate a vehicle on or along any roads, drives or parking lots which have been restricted, closed or posted with appropriate signs or barricades. The superintendent shall have the authority to order roads, drives or parking lots within any park closed during the process of construction, reconstruction or repair, or when, in the opinion of the director, weather conditions render travel unsafe or unduly destructive. 
(5)	Fail to yield right-of-way to pedestrians and other trail users. 
(6)	Wash, grease, change oil, service or repair any vehicle in a park, except disabled vehicles which shall be expeditiously made operational and removed. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. V, § B, 5-4-04)
 
Sec. 46-128. Parking vehicles.
No person shall: 
(1)	Park or leave a vehicle standing, except in a designated area and then only in a manner so as not to restrict normal traffic flow; 
(2)	Leave a vehicle standing after posted closing hours, except by written authorization from the director; 
(3)	Park a vehicle adjacent to any curb painted yellow in any park; 
(4)	Park in a space designated for handicapped parking only, except with handicapped vehicle license or permit; 
(5)	Park or leave a vehicle without a trailer in a parking space designated for vehicles with boat trailers; or 
(6)	Park a vehicle with a boat trailer, except in designated boat trailer parking areas. 
Vehicles illegally parked, disabled or abandoned may be towed away and impounded at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 2004-339, ch. V, § C, 5-4-04)
 
Secs. 46-129—46-155. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VI. DOCKS
 
DIVISION 1. CONSTRUCTION
 
Sec. 46-156. Intent and purpose.
In its deliberations leading to the adoption of this division, the township board has recognized and concluded that the use of Ford Lake water resources should be considered within a framework of long-term costs and benefits to the township, and that it is desirable to retain and maintain the physical, recreational and aesthetic characteristics of Ford Lake in the township. It is recognized that, as the shore lines of Ford Lake become further developed with docks and other similar structures, the demands placed upon the carrying capacity of Ford Lake increases. It is recognized that regulations of docks and other similar structures are needed in order to preserve and protect the rights of persons who live on and persons who enjoy the recreational use of Ford Lake. It is the intent and purpose of the township board to adopt reasonable regulations governing the construction, enlargement, expansion of docks and similar structures upon the waters of Ford Lake. The township board understands that the long term effect of reasonable regulations regarding the use of Ford Lake will enhance and protect the health, safety and welfare of all persons who use Ford Lake for recreational pursuits. 
(Ord. No. 2004-332, art. I, § 1.1, 3-16-04)
 
Sec. 46-157. Short title.
This division shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the Ypsilanti Township Dock Ordinance, and shall hereinafter be referred to as "this division." 
(Ord. No. 2004-332, art. I, § 1.2, 3-16-04)
 
Sec. 46-158. Scope and application.
(a)	The terms and provisions of this division shall be interpreted and applied as minimum standards and requirements for the promotion and protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and for the public peace and preservation of natural resources, water quality, and public and private property within the township. 
(b)	This division shall not interfere with, abrogate, annul nor repeal any other law, ordinance, rule or regulation previously in effect. In instances where this division specifically imposes a greater restriction or higher standard than other ordinances, the provisions of this division shall govern. 
(c)	This division is not intended to conflict with and/or pre-empt application of the Inland Lakes and Streams Act, as amended, but intended to supplement such Act in a compatible manner so as to enhance water usage in a manner consistent with the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 2004-332, art. II, 3-16-04)
 
Sec. 46-159. Definitions.
For the purpose of construction and application of this division, the following definitions shall apply: 
Ford Lake means the land area of Ford Lake owned by the township that lies below the ordinary high-water mark and that may or may not be covered by water. 
Frontage means that portion of a lot or parcel of land existing on documentation recorded within the Washtenaw County Register of Deeds, which abuts or intersects with the normal high-water mark of Ford Lake, whether such lot or parcel is owned by one or more persons, or commonly owned by several persons, or combinations of persons. 
Ordinary high-water mark means the line between upland and bottomland that persists through successive changes in water levels, below which the presence and action of water is so common or recurrent that the character of the land is marked distinctly from the upland and is apparent in the soil itself, the configuration of the surface of the soil, and the vegetation. On an inland lake that has a level established by law, it means the high established level. 
Person means a human being, partnership, corporation, association, including a condominium association, and any other entity to which the law provides or imposes rights or responsibilities. 
Structure means any type of dock, boat hoist, marina, wharf, pier, or other similar recreational structure extending from the shore meant for the mooring of a vessel or vessels that is permanently or seasonally placed into Ford Lake. 
Upland means the land area that lies above the ordinary high-water mark. 
Vessel means any watercraft used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water. 
(Ord. No. 2004-332, art. III, 3-16-04)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 46-160. Permits.
(a)	Required. From and after the effective date of this division, no person shall construct, enlarge or expand a structure on the waters of Ford Lake except in accordance with a permit issued by the township community development department. 
(b)	Exception. No permit shall be required to maintain a structure which was erected either permanently or seasonally upon the waters of Ford Lake prior to the effective date of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2004-332, art. IV, 3-16-04)
 
Sec. 46-161. Permit applications.
Applications for a permit shall be made upon forms provided by the community development department. The following information shall be provided with the application and the applicant may be required to provide such additional information as is determined necessary for the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the township's residents and those who use Ford Lake: 
(1)	A photograph or set of photographs shall be provided that depicts the proposed location of the structure and its proximity to the two parcels with lake frontage which abut the applicant's property. 
(2)	A diagram which includes the proposed location of the structure, its length and width, and the applicant's lake frontage measured in feet.
(Ord. No. 2004-332, art. V, 3-16-04)
 
Sec. 46-162. Permit criteria.
The township community and economic development department shall authorize the issuance of a permit to erect a structure upon the waters of Ford Lake if it finds that the following criteria are met: 
(1)	The parcel connected to the structure has a minimum of 30 feet of frontage on Ford Lake and a minimum of 100 feet of additional frontage on Ford Lake for each additional proposed structure. Frontage shall be measured by a straight line which intersects each side lot line at the water's edge. 
(2)	The length of the structure shall not extend more than 30 feet from the ordinary high water mark. 
Exception: For parcels with a water depth of three feet or less, the maximum dock length is 50 feet. The three feet water depth must extend for 30 linear feet into the lake. The measurement shall be taken from the ordinary high water mark of the parcel. The proposed dock may not create a safety hazard, unreasonably obstruct other recreational watercraft, or lake views of abutting parcels, in the area of the proposed dock. 
(3)	The width of the structure shall not exceed six feet unless it is designed and intended for use by a person in a wheelchair. The width of structures designed for wheelchair accessibility shall be the minimum width necessary to allow for the reasonable and safe accommodation of a person using a wheelchair. 
(4)	Notwithstanding subsections (2) and (3) above, "T", "L", and "U" shaped docks are permitted so long as the total width of the dock structure from outside edge to outside edge does not exceed two-thirds of the length of the dock. The length of the dock is measured from the edge of the dock nearest to the shoreline to the edge of the dock furthest from the shoreline. 
(5)	The structure does not unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of the waters of Ford Lake by adjacent property owners or the public. 
(6)	The structure does not create a risk to the health, safety and welfare of persons who use Ford Lake for recreational purposes. 
(7)	The structure is constructed of materials which will not impair the water quality, water flow, or water levels of Ford Lake. 
(8)	The applicant executes an agreement to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the township against and with respect to any and all actions, suits, proceedings, claims, demands, judgment, costs and expenses resulting from the erection of a structure pursuant to this division. 
(Ord. No. 2004-332, art. VI, 3-16-04)
 
Sec. 46-163. Penalties.
(a)	Fine. Any person who shall be convicted of a violation of this division shall be responsible of a municipal civil infraction and subject to a fine as follows: 
(1)	The fine for any first violation of this division shall be $100.00. 
(2)	The fine for any violation of this division which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of once before, shall be $200.00. 
(3)	The fine for any violation of this division which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of twice before shall be $500.00. 
(b)	Municipal civil infraction. A separate municipal civil infraction shall be deemed committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or continues. 
(c)	Abatement of violation. Addition to, or in lieu of, seeking to enforce this division by issuance of municipal civil infractions, the township may institute an appropriate action in a court of general jurisdiction seeking equitable relief which shall include, but not limited to, an order to remove the structure. 
(Ord. No. 2004-332, art. VII, 3-16-04)
 
Secs. 46-164—46-180. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. MAINTENANCE
 
Sec. 46-181. Intent and purpose.
In its deliberations leading to the adoption of this division, the township board has recognized and concluded that it is desirable to retain and maintain the physical, recreational and aesthetic characteristics of Ford Lake in the township. It is recognized that, as the shore lines of Ford Lake become further developed with docks and other similar structures that regulations of dock maintenance are needed in order to preserve and protect the rights of persons who live on and persons who enjoy the recreational use of Ford Lake. It is the intent and purpose of the township board to adopt reasonable regulations governing the maintenance of docks and similar structures upon the waters of Ford Lake. The township board understands that the long term effect of reasonable regulations regarding the use of Ford Lake will enhance and protect the health, safety and welfare of all persons who use Ford Lake for recreational pursuits and promote the ecological health of Ford Lake. 
(Ord. No. 2004-331, art. I, 3-16-04)
 
Sec. 46-182. Short title.
This division shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the Ypsilanti Township Dock Maintenance Ordinance, and shall hereinafter be referred to as "this division." 
(Ord. No. 2004-331, art. I, 3-16-04)
 
Sec. 46-183. Docks to remain in good repair.
(a)	All structures extending from the shore into Ford Lake shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(b)	The exterior surfaces of structures extending from the shore into Ford Lake shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective cover or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All metal surfaces subject to rust and corrosion shall be coated to eliminate such rust and corrosion. All surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. 
(Ord. No. 2004-331, art. I, 3-16-04)
 
Sec. 46-184. Penalties.
(a)	Fines. Any person who shall be convicted of a violation of this division shall be responsible of a municipal civil infraction and subject to a fine as follows: 
(1)	The fine for any first violation of this division shall be $100.00. 
(2)	The fine for any violation of this division which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of once before, shall be $200.00. 
(3)	The fine for any violation of this division which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of twice before shall be $500.00. 
(b)	Municipal civil infraction. A separate municipal civil infraction shall be deemed committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or continues. 
(c)	Abatement of violation. In addition to, or in lieu of, seeking to enforce this division by issuance of municipal civil infractions, the township may institute an appropriate action in a court of general jurisdiction seeking equitable relief which shall include, but not limited to, an order to remove the structure. 
(Ord. No. 2004-331, art. I, 3-16-04)
 
Secs. 46-185—46-205. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VII. SEAWALL
 
Sec. 46-206. Intent and purpose.
In its deliberations leading to the adoption of this article, the township board has recognized that regulations of seawall are needed in order to preserve, protect and enhance the health, safety and welfare of all persons who use Ford Lake for recreational enjoyment. 
(Ord. No. 2004-355, 3-16-04)
 
Sec. 46-207. Scope and application.
This article is not intended to conflict with and/or pre-empt application of the P.A. 451 of 1994, MI NREPA, Part 301, Inland Lakes and Streams, as amended, but intended to supplement such Act in a compatible manner so as to enhance water usage in a manner consistent with the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 2004-355, 3-16-04)
 
Sec. 46-208. Definition.
"Seawall" means a retaining structure used for shore protection or extension. 
(Ord. No. 2004-355, 3-16-04)
 
Sec. 46-209. Permit required.
Any person wishing to construct, or enlarge a seawall extending into the waters of Ford Lake shall make application to the community and economic development department for a permit to do so; such application to be accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the township board. No person shall construct or enlarge a seawall extending into Ford Lake without obtaining a seawall permit from the community development department. 
(Ord. No. 2004-355, 3-16-04)
 
Sec. 46-210. General requirements.
Each application for a seawall permit shall include: 
(1)	Property owner's name and address. 
(2)	Address and legal description of the property abutting the proposed seawall. 
(3)	A copy of seawall application (including all attachments and diagrams) and seawall permit issued by MDEQ pursuant to the P.A. 451 of 1994, MI NREPA, Part 301, Inland Lakes and Streams, as amended. 
(4)	A copy of seawall permit issued by MDEQ pursuant to the P.A. 451 of 1994, MI NREPA, Part 301, Inland Lakes and Streams, as amended. 
(5)	A copy of the grading permit issued by the township community and economic development department pursuant to section 24-81 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2004-355, 3-16-04)
 
Sec. 46-211. Permit display.
The permit grantee shall prominently display on the site the permit issued. Such display shall be continuous while work authorized under the permit is taking place, and for at least ten days after completion. Failure to allow entry for inspection by township representatives pursuant to condition attached to the grading permit shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-355, 3-16-04)
 
Sec. 46-212. Permit criteria.
The township community economic and development department shall consult with the state department of natural resources and the United States Fish and Wildlife Service when determining whether the criteria in subsection (1) through (6) are satisfied. The township community economic and development department shall not issue a permit to erect a seawall upon the waters of Ford Lake unless it finds the following criteria are met: 
(1)	The seawall does not encroach upon abutting properties. 
(2)	A seawall permit has been issued by MDEQ pursuant to the P.A. 451 of 1994, MI NREPA, Part 301, Inland Lakes and Streams, as amended. 
(3)	A grading permit has been issued by the community economic and development department pursuant to section 24-81. 
(4)	The seawall is constructed of material, which will not impair the water quality, water flow, or water levels of Ford Lake. 
(5)	The seawall is adequate to control erosion on the site. 
(6)	The seawall will not unduly impact fish, wildlife and other environmental attributes of Ford Lake. 
(Ord. No. 2004-355, 3-16-04)
 
Sec. 46-213. Penalties.
(a)	Municipal civil infraction. A separate municipal civil infraction shall be deemed committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or continues. 
(b)	Abatement of violation. In addition to, or in lieu of, seeking to enforce this article by issuance of municipal civil infraction(s), the township may institute an appropriate action in a court of general jurisdiction seeking equitable relief, which shall include, but not limited to, an order to remove the structure. 
(Ord. No. 2004-355, 3-16-04)
 
Secs. 46-214—46-225. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VIII. NO WAKE ZONE
 
Sec. 46-226. Definitions.
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Operate means to have physical control of a vessel. 
Slow—no wake speed means a very slow speed whereby the wake or wash created by the vessel would be minimal. 
Vessel means every description of watercraft used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water. 
(Ord. No. 2004-336, 3-16-04)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 46-227. Speed limit posted areas and near shoreline.
(a)	A person shall not operate a vessel on the waters of the Ford Lake at a speed greater than slow—no wake or the minimum speed necessary for the vessel to maintain forward movement when within designated areas posted "slow—no wake speed." 
(b)	A person shall not operate a vessel on the waters of the Ford Lake at a speed greater than slow—no wake or the minimum speed necessary for the vessel to maintain forward movement when within 100 feet of the shoreline where the water depth is less than three feet, as determined by vertical measurement. 
(c)	A person shall not operate a vessel on the Huron River in the area between Bridge Road and Rawsonville Road at a speed greater than slow—no wake or the minimum speed necessary for the vessel to maintain forward movement within designated areas posted "slow—no wake speed." 
(Ord. No. 2004-336, 3-16-04; Ord. No. 2011-413, 5-17-11)
 
Sec. 46-228. Penalties.
A violation of this article shall be a municipal civil infraction punishable as follows: 
(1)	The fine for any first violation of this article shall be $100.00; 
(2)	The fine for any violation of this article which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of once before, shall be $200.00; 
(3)	The fine for any violation of this article which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of twice before, shall be $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2004-336, 3-16-04)
 
Chapter 47 PRIVATE ROADS 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Secs. 47-1—47-25. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. PRIVATE ROADS
 
Sec. 47-26. Intent.
The intent of this article is to allow the use of private roads for access to residential areas. Unobstructed, safe, and continuous access to lots is necessary to promote and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. Such access is not only necessary for the convenience and safety of residents, but it is crucial to insure that emergency vehicles have safe and efficient access to private property. Therefore, when the use of private roads is permitted, it is essential that they meet minimum standards and specifications. The procedures, standards and specifications hereinafter set forth are provided to assure the even and fair application of requirements to meet the intent of this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-174, § 10, 12-16-97)
 
Sec. 47-27. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
Building: An enclosed structure used or intended for use for the housing, enclosure or shelter of people, animals or chattel. 
County drain commission: The Drain Commission of Washtenaw County, Michigan. 
County road commission: The Road Commission of Washtenaw County, Michigan. 
Lot: A parcel of land; real estate. 
Permit: A right-of-way permit issued pursuant to this article. 
Private driveways: A paved or gravel area directly behind the street curb providing vehicular access to a single-family residence. A private driveway that is shared by two single-family residences that have the appropriate lot width, pursuant to the current requirements of the zoning ordinance, on a public road or approved private road, are not considered private roads and are not regulated by this article. 
Private road: A route which provides vehicular access to a lot or lots and which has not been dedicated to public use. For the purposes of this article, the term private road shall include everything within a private road right-of-way. 
Road right-of-way: A strip of land reserved for the use of streets, walks, utilities, landscaping and other infrastructure. 
Street: The surface within a road right-of-way that is used primarily for the movement of motorized vehicles. 
Township board: The Board of the Charter Township of Ypsilanti. 
Township clerk: The Clerk of the Charter Township of Ypsilanti. 
Township attorney: A person or firm authorized by the township board to perform the duties of township attorney as set forth in this article. 
Township engineer: A person or firm authorized by the township board to perform the duties of township engineer as set forth in this article. 
Township planner: A person or firm authorized by the township board to perform the duties of township planner as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-174, § 20, 12-16-97; Ord. No. 2003-311, 3-4-03)
 
Sec. 47-28. General provisions.
(a)	Every lot in the Charter Township of Ypsilanti that is improved with a building shall have access for ingress and egress for all vehicular traffic including fire, police, and ambulance services and vehicles. 
(b)	Frontage on a private road which meets the requirements of this article may be used to satisfy the road frontage and lot width requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
(c)	No lot served by a private road shall be improved with a building subsequent to the date of adoption of this article, unless a permit in accordance with this article has been issued. 
(d)	No person shall construct, alter, or extend a private road without compliance with this article and obtaining a permit as hereinafter provided. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit normal maintenance of a non-conforming private road. 
(Ord. No. 97-174, § 30, 12-16-97)
 
Sec. 47-28.1. Private driveway design standards.
(a)	Only one house can be constructed using the private driveway standards; more than one house shall require an approved private road. 
(b)	A 12-foot wide driveway shall be constructed within a 66-foot wide private right-of-way/easement. 
(c)	The private right-of-way/easement shall provide for ingress, egress, stormwater drainage, installation and maintenance of public and private utilities. 
(d)	The parcel being served by the private driveway must meet the zoning ordinance requirements for lot width at the front yard setback line as measured from the end of the private driveway right-of-way/easement. 
(e)	The design and engineering of a private driveway shall be similar to that of a private road to insure that proper grading and stormwater management is achieved. 
(Ord. No. 2003-311, 3-4-03)
 
Sec. 47-29. Private road design standards.
(a)	All road construction shall be centered on the road right-of-way. 
(b)	All paved dead-end roads shall be provided with a cul-de-sac constructed to the following standards: 
(1)	A minimum external right-of-way diameter of 120 feet. 
(2)	Cul-de-sac roads shall terminate in circular pavement areas with a minimum diameter of 90 feet. 
(3)	Curbed, landscaped islands are required within any cul-de-sac circle. Such islands shall have a minimum radius of 20 feet. 
(c)	Right-of-way intersections shall have a radius of 15 feet. 
(d)	A boulevard cross section will be permitted at the main entrance to a development subject to the following standards: 
(1)	A minimum right-of-way width of 100 feet shall be provided for the entire length of the boulevard. 
(2)	A boulevard median shall not exceed 300 feet in length nor shall it be less than 100 feet in length. 
(3)	Sufficient taper of the right-of-way width, in accordance with design speed, must be provided adjacent to a boulevard section. 
(4)	Boulevard islands shall be curbed and shall be no less than ten feet and no greater than 20 feet in width. 
(5)	Boulevard islands shall not extend beyond the edge of the intersecting road, or its auxiliary lane. 
(6)	Sufficient taper of the roadway width must be provided, as per MDOT requirements, adjacent to the interior end of a boulevard. 
(e)	Horizontal curves in proposed streets which appear to be continuous shall be not less than 230 foot centerline radius. 
(f)	The radius of corners at all intersections shall be at least 35 feet to the edge of pavement. 
(g)	The intersecting angle of proposed center lines of roads shall be 90 degrees. 
(h)	The horizontal alignment of road intersections shall include at least a 100 foot long tangent in all directions. An exception will be allowed for a T-intersection on the outside of a curve, provided that adequate sight distance is assured. 
(i)	Intersections within a subdivision shall be spaced at least 125 feet apart from centerline to centerline. 
(j)	When possible, approaches of side roads from opposite sides of a through road should be in direct alignment. 
(k)	The road layout shall connect to existing outlots in adjacent developments, and shall provide outlots or other provisions for future connections to adjacent land that is presently undeveloped. 
(l)	The layout of roads in the proposed plan shall provide at least two points of access to an existing public road and shall provide a continuous circuit for travel. An exception will be considered when, in the opinion of the board, the lands to be subdivided are limited in area or are subject to a natural barrier. Private roads shall not exceed 600 feet in length unless connected to another road system providing a second means of access to the development. Connections to existing public road systems shall be subject to the review and approval of the county road commission. 
(m)	A minimum right-of-way width of 66 feet shall be provided. 
(n)	Unless more stringent standards are required by this or other Ypsilanti Township ordinances, the connection between the right-of-way and the public road shall conform to the standards and specifications of the county road commission. 
(o)	The right-of-way shall provide for ingress, egress, drainage and installation and maintenance of public and private utilities. 
(p)	All private roads serving five or more lots shall provide the following: 
(1)	Private roads providing ingress and egress to all two-lane, paved major or secondary thoroughfares shall be provided with paved acceleration and deceleration lanes and passing lanes. 
(2)	Private roads providing ingress and egress to all three-lane, paved major or secondary thoroughfares shall be provided with paved acceleration and deceleration lanes. 
(3)	Private roads providing ingress and egress to roads of four or more lanes shall be provided with paved tapers or turning lanes. 
(4)	Required lanes or tapers shall be indicated schematically on a site plan and shall be constructed in accordance with the standards for such facilities as established by the township engineer and/or the county road commission. 
(q)	All private roads shall meet the minimum design standards as set forth in Table 1 below. 

Table 1 
Requirements and Specifications for Private Roads 
		5 lots or more 
Improvement 	4 Lots or Less 	Lots 1 Acre or Greater 	Lots Less Than 1 Acre 
Minimum right-of-way width 	66 feet 	66 feet 	66 feet 
Street width 	18 feet 	24 feet from edge to edge 	29 feet from back of curb 
Street surface type 	gravel 	paved bituminous 	paved bituminous 
Drainage management 	ditch, no curb 	ditch 	full curb and gutter 
Sidewalks 	No 	No 	Yes 


(r)	The number of lots served by a private road cannot be increased to more than four unless said road meets the standards in Table 1 above. 
(s)	Lots that are one acre or greater in area and served by a private road cannot be divided to a size less than one acre unless said road meets the standards in Table 1 above. 
(t)	Private roads shall have a grade no greater than six percent. The grades within a street intersection shall not exceed three percent for a distance of 100 feet from the point of intersection. 
(u)	All private roads shall be built to meet or exceed Ypsilanti Township standards for private road construction. 
(Ord. No. 97-174, § 40, 12-16-97)
 
Sec. 47-30. Submittal of application.
Applications for approval of a plan for private road construction shall be delivered to the township clerk and shall include the following: 
(1)	A legal description of each lot to be served by the private road, a legal description of the right-of-way, the names and addresses of all persons or parties owning an interest in the title to the lots and right-of-way area. 
(2)	All plans shall be drawn on 24 inches by 36 inches sheets at a scale not smaller than one inch equals 40 feet horizontal, one inch equals four feet vertical. 
(3)	All elevations shall be related to the North American Datum, NAD, of 1988. 
(4)	All drawings shall be prepared by a civil engineer, registered in the State of Michigan. 
(5)	Drawings, shall be provided showing the following general information. 
a.	A map of existing conditions shall be provided showing at least the following information: 
1.	Adjoining subdivisions. 
2.	Adjoining roads. 
3.	Existing county or private drains, sewers and crossroad culverts on existing roads. 
4.	Railroads. 
5.	Adjoining parks and schools. 
6.	Easements for public access for construction and maintenance of drains, public utilities, etc., and their dimensions, in, over, and across private property within the development. 
7.	All trees with a diameter of eight inches or greater within 60 feet of centerline. 
8.	Existing buildings within 50 feet of the proposed right-of-way. 
9.	Existing topographic contours, at two-foot intervals. 
10.	Wetlands and water bodies inside of and within ten feet of the proposed right-of-way. 
11.	North arrow. 
b.	A location map not smaller than one inch equals 2000 feet with a north arrow. 
c.	The address, telephone number, seal and signature of the person who prepared the drawing. 
d.	Existing or proposed lot lines. 
e.	A map showing dimensions and bearings of the entire parcel 
f.	Proposed contours at two-foot intervals. 
g.	Two benchmarks in NAD that will not be affected by the construction of the private road. 
(6)	Plans for the private road including the following: 
a.	Plan view of each road showing the centerline, stations, edge of pavement and curb line if appropriate. 
b.	Location of proposed culverts, storm sewers and utilities. 
c.	Location of proposed traffic control and road-name signs. 
d.	Location of proposed street-light poles. 
e.	Intersection details (radius, auxiliary lanes, sight distance, curb tapers etc.). 
f.	All pertinent survey information (a minimum of two benchmarks, curve data, section comers, north arrow, etc.). 
g.	Soil boring logs at sufficient intervals to determine the sub-grade condition. Soil borings shall be at a minimum of seven feet below proposed centerline elevations. 
h.	Location of all proposed sidewalks and bike paths, and any proposed curb drops to accommodate sidewalks. 
i.	Proposed topographic contours, at two-foot intervals, of the right-of-way area and all adjacent land. 
j.	Names of existing and proposed roads. 
(7)	Drainage plan requirements for private roads with underground drainage systems. 
a.	The location, size and invert elevations of all underground structures used for road drainage including: 
1.	Location and type of inlets and clean-out points for underground drainage systems, including sumps in all catch basins. 
2.	Standard detail for all catch basins, inlets, manholes, etc. 
3.	Schedule of structure diameters, casting types, rim and invert elevations and sump notation where applicable. 
4.	Detention design per township standards. 
b.	Profile of centerline. 
c.	Profile of top-of-curb with corresponding profile of right-of-way line. 
d.	Percent of grade and vertical curve data. 
e.	Profile of centerline, ditch and proposed ditch of county road(s) intersecting with the proposed private road. 
f.	Curb elevations a minimum of every 25 feet and centerline elevations at a minimum of every 50 feet. 
g.	Show locations and profile of all drains outside of the roadway area that are going to be used for roadside drainage and contours to show how flow will be directed there. 
h.	Invert elevations at all structures. 
i.	Legend of profile lines shall be shown on each road according to illustrations. 
j.	Notations shall be included to require continuous under-drain behind all curbs. 
(8)	Drainage plan requirements for private roads with open ditch drainage systems. 
a.	The location, size and depth of all underground structures used for road drainage including the following: 
1.	Culvert size and lengths providing access to all lots in the development. 
2.	Sizes, lengths, classes or gauges, and locations of all crossroad culverts. 
3.	Detention/retention design information. 
b.	Each profile must be shown separately for the following: 
1.	Existing and proposed centerline. 
2.	Right ditch and right-of-way. 
3.	Left ditch and right-of-way. 
4.	Centerline, ditch and proposed ditch of county road(s) adjacent to proposed subdivision with proper outlet thereto. 
c.	Percent of grade of proposed centerline and independent ditches. 
d.	Numerical elevations of the existing and proposed centerline at each station (100 ft. or change in grade). 
e.	Vertical curve information. 
f.	Erosion control information (ditch bottom, slopes, sod, rip-rap, etc.). 
g.	Invert elevations of crossroad culverts. 
h.	Front slope and back slope information. 
i.	All drainage easements, including those in areas where the drainage outlet is not within control of a public agency. 
(9)	A complete statement of all terms, conditions and agreements related to the proposed private road. 
(10)	An agreement regarding the interconnection, access rights, maintenance and improvements of the right-of-way and roadway shall be submitted to the township for review. Such agreement shall include at least the following: 
a.	Said maintenance agreement shall be in a form that will allow it to be recorded with the Washtenaw County Register of Deeds. 
b.	The agreement shall run with the land and specifically address the liability and responsibility of the parties to said agreement to maintain the private road pursuant to the specifications of this article. This shall include but is not limited to provisions for annual maintenance, snow removal, and the eventual repair or reconstruction of the road. 
c.	The agreement shall include rules regarding voting rights and responsibilities of parties to the agreement in relation to road maintenance and improvements. 
d.	The agreement shall include detailed legal descriptions of the private road and all properties allowed to use the road. 
e.	The agreement shall state that "the private road system may be connected to future public or private road systems when stub streets are shown on the approved plan for private roads." 
(11)	A fee, as established by resolution of the township board, to defray the costs of inspection, plan review, administration and enforcement of this article, shall be collected with each application. 
(12)	The application shall be signed by the applicant or agent thereof, in which case, it shall be accompanied by a duly executed and notarized power of attorney and shall represent that the applicant is making the application on behalf of all persons having an interest in the right-of-way or the abutting lots and shall be made under penalties of perjury. 
(Ord. No. 97-174, § 50, 12-16-97)
 
Sec. 47-31. Plan approval and permit procedure.
(a)	Upon receipt of an application, the township clerk shall bring the application before the township board at its next regular meeting. The township board shall refer the application materials to the appropriate bodies for review including but not limited to: 
(1)	The township engineer who will review the plans to assure that the proposal is in keeping with construction standards of this and other township ordinances. 
(2)	The township planner who will review the plans to assure that the proposal is in keeping with the township master plan and appropriate provisions of this article. 
(3)	The township attorney who will review all agreements. 
(4)	The township traffic consultant, if requested by the township, who will make recommendations regarding the number and location of curb cuts to public roads, potentials for connections, the need for signage, and other issues generally related to traffic management. 
(5)	The township fire department who will review street names, hydrant locations, turn-arounds and other applicable provisions. 
The board may, at its discretion, refer the application to the township planning commission or other appropriate bodies for review and comment. 
(b)	The township board shall consider the application, the reports of all reviewing agencies and all other relevant information in determining whether to approve the plan. The township board may impose such conditions as it deems necessary to achieve the intent and objectives of this article, which may include, but need not be limited to, conditions suggested by the review agencies. The breach of any such condition proposed by the township board shall automatically invalidate the plan. 
(c)	Approval of a plan for a private road shall be valid for a period of one year, or such longer period as determined by the township board, from the date of approval. If an application has not been filed for a permit for private road construction within the allotted time frame, then the approval shall be null and void and of no force and effect. 
(d)	Upon receiving plan approval, the applicant may file for a permit for the private road's construction. At such time, the following must be submitted to the township clerk: 
(1)	The applicant shall deposit with the township treasurer a sum of money, bank letter of credit or certified check in the amount sufficient to guarantee that the applicant shall perform the terms and conditions of the permit, including the payment of required fees. Upon issuance of certificate of completion any unused portion of the deposit shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(2)	A fee to cover township costs including the cost for township inspections. If the applicant does not directly pay the costs of inspection, the same shall be paid from the deposit noted in subsection (1) above. 
(3)	Proof that the county road commission has reviewed the plan. Proof can be in the form of a letter or permit. 
(4)	Proof that the county drain commission has reviewed the plan. 
(5)	Proof that an agreement regarding the interconnection, access rights, maintenance and improvements of the right-of-way, has been recorded with the Washtenaw County Register of Deeds. 
Upon receipt of the required funds and information, the township clerk shall issue the permit pursuant to the terms established by the township board resolution approving the application. 
(e)	Only the township shall have the authority to approve or deny applications for permits for private road construction. Permits issued by other governmental entities shall not serve as a substitute. 
(f)	A permit for private road construction shall be valid for a period of one year, or such longer period as determined by the township board, from the date of issuance of the required improvements. If the improvements have not been completed within the allotted time frame, then the permit shall be null and void and of no force and effect and all deposits shall be forfeited to Ypsilanti Township. 
(Ord. No. 97-174, § 60, 12-16-97)
 
Sec. 47-32. Administration and enforcement.
(a)	All required improvements shall be inspected by the township engineer at various stages of construction. 
(b)	The applicant's engineer shall certify to the township engineer, before the final inspection and report thereon are made, that the required improvements were made in accordance with this article and all approved plans. 
(c)	Upon completion of construction of the leveling course the township engineer shall make a final inspection and shall report the results of the final inspection to the township clerk in writing. Upon favorable recommendation from the township engineer, the township clerk shall issue a tentative certificate of completion. 
(d)	No building permit shall be issued for any lot fronting on a private road unless a tentative certificate of completion has been issued by the township. 
(e)	Upon completion of construction of the wearing course the township engineer shall make a final inspection and shall report the results of the final inspection to the township clerk in writing. Upon favorable recommendation from the township engineer, the township clerk shall issue a final certificate of completion. 
(Ord. No. 97-174, § 70, 12-16-97)
 
Sec. 47-33. Variances.
When there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this article, such as topographical and other physical characteristics of a parcel, the township board shall have the power to vary or modify the application of the provisions of this article so that the intent and purpose of this article shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. 
(1)	Any applicant may apply for a variance from any provision of this article by filing an application for variance with the township clerk. 
(2)	The township board shall hold a public hearing upon such application within 45 days of its filing. 
(3)	The township clerk shall give notice of the hearing to the owners of all property abutting and/or having access for ingress and egress of traffic by means of the private road described in the variance application, as well as law enforcement officials, fire officials and ambulance companies known by the clerk to serve such property. The notice shall be mailed to each such party and published in a newspaper of general circulation in the township no later than seven days prior to the hearing. Any party may appear and comment at the hearing in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(4)	The township board shall keep a record of said hearing and shall render a decision not later than the next regular township board meeting held after the hearing date. 
(5)	The township board may attach reasonable conditions in granting any variance from any provision of this article, and the breach of any conditions or the failure of any applicant to comply with the conditions shall void the variance. 
(6)	If construction of the road has not commenced within two years from the date that a variance was granted, then the variance shall be null and void. The township board may grant a longer time frame and may grant an extension when so requested by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 97-174, § 80, 12-16-97)
 
Sec. 47-34. Nonconforming situations.
Private roads, legally constructed prior to the adoption of this article may continue in use subject to the following: 
(1)	No such road shall be enlarged or extended unless the entire road is brought into compliance with the standards of this article. 
(2)	No additional lots or home sites shall be created which are accessed by a nonconforming private road unless the entire road is brought into compliance with the standards of this article. 
(3)	Lots lawfully created prior to the adoption of this article, which are accessed by a nonconforming private road may be used in accordance with the requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 97-174, § 90, 12-16-97)
 
Sec. 47-35. Violation and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any access which is used in violation of the terms of this article may be abated, restrained, enjoined and prohibited upon the commencement of an appropriate action in the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 97-174, § 100, 12-16-97)
 
Sec. 47-36. General exceptions.
Parcels or projects that are over 70 dwelling units or over 700 feet from a major or secondary thoroughfare subject to site plan, planned development, condominium or site condominium review by the planning commission shall be prohibited from utilizing private roads as defined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-268, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 2003-310, 2-4-03)
 
Chapter 48 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Secs. 48-1—48-25. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
 
Sec. 48-26. Short title.
This article shall be known, and may be cited, as the "Property Maintenance Code of Ypsilanti Charter Township." 
(Ord. No. 96-155, § 1, 2-18-97)
 
Sec. 48-27. Adoption.
That a certain document, copies of which are on file in the office of the Ypsilanti Township Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the Charter Township of Ypsilanti, in the State of Michigan for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes prescribed in section 42-28 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-155, § 2, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 99-225, 10-5-99; Ord. No. 2001-283, § A, 11-20-01; Ord. No. 2004-344, § A, 9-21-04; Ord. No. 2007-376, § A, 2-5-08; Ord. No. 2013-431, § A, 7-22-13 ; Ord. No. 2016-465 , § A, 9-20-16)
 
Sec. 48-28. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1. Insert: Charter Township of Ypsilanti 
Section 103.5. Insert: As established by the Township Board, by Resolution, from time to time. 
Section 112.4. Failure to comply is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following new section: 
Section 112.4. Failure to Comply. Any person, firm, or corporation who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, as provided in Chapter 40, Article II, of this Code, and shall be subject to a fine as follows: 
(i)	the maximum fine for any first violation shall be $250.00; 
(ii)	the maximum fine for any violation which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of once before, shall be $400.00; 
(iii)	the maximum fine for any violation which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of twice before, shall be $500.00. 
Lien upon real estate. The violation shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the code official shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate. 
Each day a separate municipal civil infraction. A separate municipal civil infraction shall be deemed committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or continues. 
302.4 Insert: 7 inches 
Add the following new subsection as follows: 
Section 304.13.3 Boarded windows. The owner of a structure may, for a maximum of 30 days, board up a window when the window glass is broken, cracked or missing. After 30 days has expired, the window glass must be replaced with glass or other similar material and the board up material removed. 
Section 304.14. Insert the following dates: April 1 to November 1. 
Add new section as follows: 
Section 304.15.1 Boarded doors. The owner of a structure may, for a maximum of 30 days, board up a door when the door is broken or otherwise rendered inoperable. After 30 days has expired, a replacement door must be installed, and the board up material removed. 
Add new section as follows: 
Section 304.18.4 Common access. In multiple dwellings which are offered for rent or lease and where access to individual dwelling or rooming units is provided by means of common hallways and exterior doors, such exterior doors and any windows shall be equipped as follows: 
1.	All doors shall be self-closing and self-latching and shall not be equipped with any type of hold-open device. 
2.	All doors shall be equipped with a lock requiring a key or code for entry from the exterior. The lock shall operate without any key, code, tool or other special knowledge or effort from the interior and be of a type that remains locked from the exterior at all times. Electric releases are permitted, and if so equipped, said releases shall be operable at all times. Strike plates shall have protective guards on the exterior side to prevent the lock from being pried open. 
3.	Common tenant areas such as laundry rooms, storage areas, etc., which are accessed from a common hallway shall have entry doors meeting the requirements of this section. 
Section 602.3. Insert: January 1 to December 31. 
Section 602.4. Insert: January 1 to December 31. 
Add the following new section as follows: 
603.7 HVAC Certification Requirement. All gas fired heating equipment shall be serviced and inspected by a licensed mechanical contractor. The mechanical contractor shall provide certification of inspection minimally every 4 years. The certification shall be on a form approved by the Building Official. Inspectors may require cleaning and service more frequently based on observations made during the inspections. 
603.8 Carbon Monoxide Alarms. A carbon monoxide alarm shall be provided outside of each sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms in dwelling units where either or both of the following conditions exist: 
1.	The dwelling unit contains a fuel-fired appliance. 
2.	The dwelling unit has an attached garage with an opening that communicates with the dwelling unit. 
Combination carbon monoxide and smoke alarms shall be permitted to be used in lieu of carbon monoxide alarms. 
Section 605.2 Receptacles is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following new section: 
605.2 Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain an adequate number of receptacle outlets to meet demand. 
Add the following new section as follows: 
702.4.1 Finished Basements emergency escape and rescue window. If a home constructed since 7/31/01 is found to have a finished basement, an emergency escape and rescue window shall be required. Homes constructed prior to 7/31/01 may have finished basements without an emergency escape and rescue window provided there are no sleeping areas in the basement, and the work was completed prior to 7/31/01. All sleeping areas in a basement shall be provided with an egress window. 
Add the following new section as follows: 
705 Fire Extinguishers
705.1 Where required. Portable fire extinguishers shall be installed as follows: 
1.	All dwelling units, which are offered for rent or lease, shall be equipped with a fire extinguisher with a minimum rating of 5ABC and meeting the requirements of the International Fire Code. 
2.	All common tenant areas in the structure in which said units are located containing laundry equipment for tenant use shall be equipped with a fire extinguisher with a minimum rating of 10ABC and meeting the requirements of the International Fire Code. 
705.2 Location. All extinguishers shall be permanently mounted in conspicuous locations where they will be readily accessible and immediately available for use. 
(Ord. No. 96-155, § 3, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 99-228, 10-5-99; Ord. No. 2001-283, § B, 11-20-01; Ord. No. 2004-344, § B, 9-21-04; Ord. No. 2007-376, § B, 2-5-08; Ord. No. 2010-408, 10-19-10; Ord. No. 2013-431, § B, 7-22-13 ; Ord. No. 2016-465 , § B, 9-20-16)
 
Secs. 48-29—48-39. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. DWELLING UNIT RENTAL PROPERTIES 
 
Sec. 48-40. Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings respectively given to them in this article: 
Apartment dwelling means an attached dwelling unit with party or common walls, contained in a building with other dwelling units or sharing the occupancy of a building with other than a residential use. Apartments are commonly accessed by common stair landing or walkway. Apartments are typically rented to the occupants. Apartment buildings often may have a central heating system and other central utility connections. Apartments typically do not have their own yard space. Apartments are also known as garden apartments or flats. 
Certificate of compliance means a certificate issued by the township's office of community standards indicating that the dwelling unit identified on the certificate is in compliance with this article and other applicable state laws and township ordinances. The certificate shall show the name and address of the property owner and the expiration date. It shall be valid until its expiration date, unless suspended by the office of community standards upon a subsequent reinspection disclosing violations. 
Code means the township property maintenance code. 
Code compliance means the dwelling unit is in compliance with all applicable state law and township code requirements, including the township's property maintenance code. 
Department means Ypsilanti Township Office of Community Standards. 
Dwelling unit means a structure containing single-family detached residential dwelling unit, single-family attached residential dwelling unit, a multi-family residential dwelling unit, an apartment dwelling, a duplex residential dwelling unit, or a manufactured dwelling unit. 
Duplex dwelling means a detached building, designed exclusively for and occupied by two families living independently of each other, with separate housekeeping, cooking and bathroom facilities for each family. 
Family means: 
(1)	A single individual or a number of individuals domiciled together whose relationship is of a continuing nontransient, domestic character and who are cooking and living together as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit. This shall not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, coterie, hospice, organization, or group of students or other individuals whose relationship is of transitory or seasonal nature or for anticipated limited duration of school terms or other similar determinable period. 
(2)	The functional equivalent of the domestic family, that is, persons living together in a dwelling unit whose relationship is of a permanent and distinct character and is the functional equivalent of a domestic family, with a demonstrable and recognizable bond which constitutes the functional equivalent of the bonds which render the domestic family a cohesive unit. This definition shall not include any rooming house, society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, coterie organization or group whose association is temporary or seasonal in character or nature. For the purposes of the enforcement, it is presumed that a functional equivalent of a domestic family is limited to six or fewer persons. 
Manufacture dwelling unit means a dwelling unit which is substantially built, constructed, assembled, and finished off the premises upon which it is intended to be located. 
Multiple-family dwelling means a building designed for and occupied by three or more families living independently, with separate housekeeping, cooking, and bathroom facilities for each. Multiple-family dwelling units may also be known as apartments. 
Owner means a person or entity with legal or possessory interest in a dwelling unit. 
Owner's agent means any employee, or any person with implied consent or apparent authority, or acting under color of authority, of the owner. 
Rental agreement means any agreement or lease, written or oral, which establishes or modifies the terms, conditions, rules, regulations or any other provisions concerning the use and occupancy of residential premises. 
Single-family attached dwelling means a self-contained single-family dwelling unit attached to a similar single-family attached dwelling unit with party or common walls, designed as part of a series of three or more dwelling units, each with: 
(1)	A separate entryway with direct access to the outdoors at ground level; 
(2)	Each dwelling shall comprise of a single unit from the lowest floor to the highest floor of the structure between the common walls (i.e., units shall not be stacked on top of each other); 
(3)	A separate basement, if applicable; 
(4)	A separate utility connection; and 
(5)	Defined front and rear yards. 
Single-family attached dwelling units may also be known as townhouses, row houses, or clustered single-family dwellings. Any three or more attached dwellings not meeting the above criteria shall be considered a multiple-family dwelling. 
Single-family detached dwelling means an independent, detached residential dwelling designed for and used or held ready for use by one family only. 
Temporary certificate of compliance means a certificate issued for a dwelling unit, following an inspection, which is found to be in substantial compliance with the Code and which, in the opinion of the building officials, has no life-, health-, or safety-threatening violations. Such certificate shall state any remaining violations to be corrected and the date it expires. A reasonable extension may be granted at the discretion of the department. Failure by the owner to correct the violations within the specified time shall constitute a violation of this article. 
Tenant means the person entitled under a rental agreement to the use and occupancy of a dwelling unit. 
( Ord. No. 2016-464 , § 1, 9-20-16)
 
Sec. 48-41. Registry of owners and premises.
(a)	All persons owning dwelling units which are subject to rental agreements shall register the dwelling unit with the department. Owners of new dwelling units which are subject to rental agreements shall register prior to the date of issuance of the first certificate of occupancy. The registration shall include: 1) the owner's name, 2) business address, 3) email address, 4) date of birth, 5) telephone number and 6) the address of the dwelling unit within the township owned by such persons which are rented in whole or in part, including the number and type of each unit in the structure. 
(b)	If the dwelling unit is managed or operated by an agent, the owner shall supply the agent's name, business address, email address and telephone number and the name of that person's representative, and a statement that the agent is authorized to receive notices and process under this article. 
(c)	If the owner is a corporation, the names, addresses and telephone numbers of its officers shall be listed as shall the name, address and telephone number of the registered agent along with the state registration number. If the corporation is controlled in whole or in part by another corporation, the same information shall be provided for the other corporation. 
(d)	Any change in the name or address of the owner or the owner's agent, or in the number of units, or in any other information required in this section shall be reported to the department within 15 days. 
(e)	Owners of single and duplex dwelling units who permit persons to occupy single and duplex dwelling units are exempt from the provisions of this article provided: 
(1)	No compensation is received by the owners for the use and occupancy of the premises by non-owners. 
(2)	The owner pays the property taxes and homeowners insurance for the premises used and occupied by non-owners. 
(3)	The owner signs an affidavit attesting under oath that: 
a.	No compensation is received for the use and occupancy of the single or duplex dwelling unit; 
b.	The property taxes and insurance are paid by the property owner; 
c.	The exemption automatically terminates when the owner receives compensation for the use and occupancy of the premises or the property taxes and/or homeowners insurance are paid by a non-owner. 
( Ord. No. 2016-464 , § 2, 9-20-16)
 
Sec. 48-42. Certificate of compliance required.
(a)	The department shall provide for the systematic inspection of all dwelling units which are subject to rental agreements in the township for the purposes of determining whether the dwelling units are in compliance with the Code and this chapter. Those dwelling units that are in compliance shall be issued a certificate of compliance. 
(b)	An owner shall provide the department with a certificate of insurance, issued by an insurance company that certifies that the dwelling unit is insured against structural loss or damage, including, but not limited to, fire damage. The certificate of insurance shall state the name of each person named on the policy and its expiration date. The certificate of insurance shall be in force at the time a certificate of compliance is issued or at the time a renewed certificate of compliance is issued. 
(c)	The department shall schedule initial inspections, at its discretion, of dwelling units which are subject to rental agreements to determine if the units qualify for a certificate of compliance. The owner of the property shall receive not less than 30 days' prior notice of the department's intent to inspect the property. The owner shall provide to the tenant a minimum of 72 hours' written notice of the department's intent to inspect the property. After the initial phase-in period, all rental dwelling units which are subject to rental agreements shall be required to be inspected at not less than 24-month intervals nor more than four-year intervals. 
(d)	The department shall inspect a dwelling unit when it receives a complaint from a tenant that the dwelling unit is being maintained in violation of Michigan's housing law, Section 125.401 et seq. of the Michigan Compiled Laws or the township's property maintenance code § 48.26 et seq. 
(e)	No person, either the owner or the owner's agent, shall rent or lease a dwelling unit after the initial inspection, to any tenant, unless that owner or agent has first obtained a valid certificate of compliance from the department covering the dwelling unit. For new construction the original certificate of occupancy shall serve as the certificate of compliance for a period of 24 months. 
(f)	The department shall advise the landlord and tenant that either has the right to refuse entry for purposes of inspection unless a search warrant is first obtained. If entry is refused, the department shall apply to the appropriate judicial officer for a search warrant and shall not inspect until a valid search warrant is obtained. Inspections shall be limited to only the areas necessary to ascertain compliance with the Code and state law. 
(g)	An owner or owner's agent who is provided, during an inspection of a dwelling unit, with written notice of a Code violation or violations, shall correct the Code violations within the period specified in the notice of violations. 
( Ord. No. 2016-464 , § 3, 9-20-16)
 
Sec. 48-43. Fees.
Reasonable fees for registration, inspections and reinspections of a dwelling unit under this article shall be established by resolution adopted by the township board and shall be placed on file and made available to the public by the township clerk's office. 
( Ord. No. 2016-464 , § 4, 9-20-16)
 
Sec. 48-44. Issuance of certificate of compliance.
(a)	A certificate of compliance shall not be issued until all required inspection and reinspection fees have been paid in full. 
(b)	A certificate of compliance shall be issued on the condition that the premises remain in compliance with the Code. If upon valid complaint the department determines that violations exist, the full certificate may be suspended as to the affected areas, and the areas may be ordered vacated until the dwelling unit is brought into compliance. 
( Ord. No. 2016-464 , § 5, 9-20-16)
 
Sec. 48-45. Right to examine certificate of compliance, registry of certificate holders.
(a)	The owners or the owner's agent shall provide a copy of a valid certificate of compliance to the tenant or prospective tenant at the tenant's request. 
(b)	The department shall maintain a registry of all units that have obtained valid certificates. Such registry shall be available for public inspection. 
( Ord. No. 2016-464 , § 6, 9-20-16)
 
Sec. 48-46. Expiration of certificate of compliance.
Certificates of compliance shall be valid until the expiration date on the certificate of compliance unless suspended by the department. The date of issuance and expiration shall be recorded on the certificate. It is the duty of the owner of the dwelling unit to arrange for the inspection necessary for the renewal of the certificate at least 30 days prior to its expiration. 
( Ord. No. 2016-464 , § 7, 9-20-16)
 
Sec. 48-47. Transfer of certificate of compliance.
Certificates of compliance shall be transferable when the ownership of a dwelling unit changes provided that a valid certificate of compliance is in effect for each dwelling unit the owner intends to rent or lease. It shall be the duty of the new owner to register with the department consistent with section 48-41. 
( Ord. No. 2016-464 , § 8, 9-20-16)
 
Sec. 48-48. Scope of inspection authority.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to restrict the lawful authority of the department to inspect any dwelling units in the township more frequently than such periodic inspection as outlined in this article. 
( Ord. No. 2016-464 , § 9, 9-20-16)
 
Sec. 48-49. Penalties; municipal civil infraction.
A violation of this article shall be a municipal civil infraction subject to prosecution and penalty under Section 42.21(3) of the Michigan Compiled Laws. The requirements of this article are in addition to, and not in lieu of any other rights and remedies provided by law. Violation of this article shall be a municipal civil infraction and for the first offense subject to a maximum $250.00 fine and any of the penalties authorized under Section 600.8727 of the Michigan Compiled Laws and/or Section 600.8302 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. Second or subsequent offenses shall be subject to a maximum fine of $500.00 and any of the penalties authorized under Section 600.8727 of the Michigan Compiled Laws and/or Section 600.8302 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 2016-464 , § 10, 9-20-16)
 
Secs. 48-50—48-80. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. VACANT RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PROPERTIES 
 
Sec. 48-81. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prevent the deterioration of township neighborhoods and business districts by regulating vacant abandoned and foreclosed residential, commercial and industrial properties to insure that such properties are in compliance with all applicable state law and township code requirements including the township property maintenance code adopted by the township in sections 48-27 and 48-28 of the Ypsilanti Township Code of Ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 2015-450 , 9-15-15)
 
Sec. 48-82. Definitions.
As used in this article: 
Code compliance certificate means an annual certificate issued by the township office of community standards that the structure is in compliance with all applicable state law and township code requirements, including the township's property maintenance code. 
Owner means any person or entity with legal or equitable ownership or possessory interest in any residential, commercial or industrial structure. The owner shall include, but not be limited to, a bank, credit union, trustee, financial institution or trust which is in possession (in whole or in part) of the real property, foreclosing a lien or mortgage interest in the affected property, but may or may not have legal or equitable title. 
Vacant property means a residential, commercial, or industrial structure that remains unoccupied for a period in excess of 30 days. Vacant property does not mean property that is temporarily unoccupied while the residents are away on vacation, tending to personal matters or business. Property which is unoccupied in excess of 30 days and offered for sale constitutes vacant property and is not exempt from the requirements of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2015-450 , 9-15-15; Ord. No. 2016-461 , 2-16-16)
 
Sec. 48-83. Scope.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all existing residential, commercial or industrial structures. This article does not relieve any person from compliance with all other township ordinances, the state building code, and all other laws, rules and regulations. 
( Ord. No. 2015-450 , 9-15-15)
 
Sec. 48-84. Evidence of vacant property.
Evidence of vacancy shall include any condition that on its own, or combined with other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions include, but are not limited to: overgrown and/or dead vegetation; accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or mail; past due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash, junk and/or debris; boarded up windows; abandoned vehicles, auto parts or materials; the absence of or continually drawn window coverings such as curtains, blinds and/or shutters; the absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent with habitation or occupancy; statements by neighbors, delivery agents or utility agents, including township employees, that the property is vacant. 
( Ord. No. 2015-450 , 9-15-15)
 
Sec. 48-85. Registry of vacant properties.
There is hereby created in the township office of community standards a registry of vacant residential, commercial and industrial structures. 
( Ord. No. 2015-450 , 9-15-15)
 
Sec. 48-86. Vacant properties to be registered annually.
Owners of real property are required to register all vacant residential, commercial and industrial properties within 30 days of the vacancy and to reregister the properties annually thereafter. Residential, commercial and industrial owners of single family and duplex structures that are vacant at the time of the enactment of this article must register within 30 days. 
( Ord. No. 2015-450 , 9-15-15)
 
Sec. 48-87. Owner's registration form; content.
Owners who are required to register their properties pursuant to this article shall submit a completed vacant property registration form, as provided by the township office of community standards containing the following information: 
(1)	The name of the owner of the property. 
(2)	A mailing address where mail may be sent that will be acknowledged as received by the owner. If certified mail/return receipt requested is sent by the township office of community standards to the address and the mail is returned marked "refused" or "unclaimed," then such occurrence shall be prima facie proof that the owner has failed to comply with this requirement. If ordinary mail sent by the township office of community standards to the address is returned for whatever reason, then such occurrence shall be prima facie proof that the owner has failed to comply with this requirement. 
(3)	The name of an individual responsible for the care and control of the vacant property. Such individual may be the owner, if the owner is an individual, or may be someone other than the owner with whom he/she has contracted. 
(4)	A current address, phone number, fax, and email address (if fax and email addresses are available) where communications may be sent that will be acknowledged as received by the owner or individual responsible for the care and control of the property. If certified mail/return receipt requested is sent to the address and the mail is returned marked "refused" or "unclaimed,", or if ordinary mail sent to the address is returned for whatever reason, then such occurrence shall be prima facie proof that the owner has failed to comply with this requirement. 
(5)	Authorization to the township staff to access the exterior of the property for inspection purposes. 
(6)	Verification that the utilities and the furnace are functioning. 
(7)	Proof of property insurance coverage for vacant structure(s). 
( Ord. No. 2015-450 , 9-15-15)
 
Sec. 48-88. Annual registration and safety and blight inspection fee.
The annual registration and safety and blight inspection fees shall be set by the township board to offset the cost of processing the form, conducting the safety and blight inspection and maintaining the records. In addition, if an owner fails to register, the owner shall be assessed the added cost of the township's expense in having to determine ownership, which may include, but is not limited to title search and legal expenses. 
( Ord. No. 2015-450 , 9-15-15)
 
Sec. 48-89. Requirement to keep information current.
If at any time the information contained in the registration form is no longer valid, the property owner shall within ten days file a new registration form containing current information. There shall be no fee to update the current owner's information. 
( Ord. No. 2015-450 , 9-15-15)
 
Sec. 48-90. Requirement to maintain property insurance.
An owner of vacant residential, commercial, or industrial structure(s) shall maintain current property insurance on the vacant structure(s) against structural loss or damage including but not limited to fire damage. Upon request of the department of community standards, owners shall present valid proof of property insurance. Failure to present, upon request, valid property insurance, shall result in a suspension of the certificate of registration. 
( Ord. No. 2015-450 , 9-15-15)
 
Sec. 48-91. Inspections required.
Owners of residential, commercial and industrial structures who are required to file an owner's registration form under this article must immediately obtain and pay for a township office of community standards safety and blight inspections of the vacant property; and if applicable, obtain necessary permits for required repairs; make required repairs; obtain any follow-up inspections from the township office of community standards thereafter to ensure the structure is safe, secure and maintained to the standards of the township's property maintenance code and water and sewer requirements set forth in chapters 48 and 62 of the township code. The owner or the owner's agent shall certify by affidavit that all water, sewer, electrical, gas, HVAC, plumbing systems, roofing, structural systems, foundations, and drainage systems are sound, operational, or properly disconnected. The owner or the owner's agent shall also certify by affidavit that the property is in compliance with the township's property maintenance code, and the water and sewer requirements set forth in chapters 48 and 62 of the township code. 
( Ord. No. 2015-450 , 9-15-15)
 
Sec. 48-92. Building inspection; maintenance and security requirements.
Properties subject to this article shall be maintained and secured to comply with the minimum security fencing, barrier and maintenance requirements of the township's property maintenance code. 
Pools, spas, and other water features shall be kept in working order or winterized to ensure that the water remains clear and free of pollutants and debris, or drained and kept dry and free of debris, and must comply with the minimum security fencing, barrier and maintenance requirements of the property maintenance code. 
Vacant properties subject to this article shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. Secure manner includes, but is not limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors (walk-through, sliding and garage), gates and any other opening of such size that it may allow a child to access the interior of the property and/or structure(s). Broken windows must be repaired or replaced within seven days. Boarding up of open or broken windows is prohibited except as a temporary measure for no longer than 30 days. 
( Ord. No. 2015-450 , 9-15-15)
 
Sec. 48-93. Open property; securing fee.
Property subject to this article that is left open and/or accessible shall be subject to entry by the township in order to ensure that the property has not become an attractive nuisance and to ensure that the property is locked and/or secured and in compliance with the township's property maintenance code. The owner of property subject to this article which property is found open or unsecured shall be responsible for paying a securing fee as set by the township board to offset the cost incurred by the township in contacting the owner or management company to secure the property. If the owner and/or management company cannot be contacted or does not secure the property within a reasonable time, the owner shall be responsible for paying the cost incurred by the township in securing the property. 
( Ord. No. 2015-450 , 9-15-15)
 
Sec. 48-94. Reoccupation of vacant property; notification to township.
Prior to reoccupation of property that is subject to this article, the owner shall notify the township that the property has been sold or rented, and to whom. 
( Ord. No. 2015-450 , 9-15-15)
 
Sec. 48-95. Fire damaged property.
If an occupied structure is damaged by fire, the owner has 30 days, unless otherwise extended by the director of community standards or his designee, from the date of the fire to apply for a permit to start construction or demolition. 
Failure to do so will result in the property being deemed vacant and subject to the requirements of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2015-450 , 9-15-15)
 
Sec. 48-96. Unpaid fees; assessment.
All fees hereunder that remain unpaid after 14 days' written notice to the owner/management company shall be assessed against the property as a lien and placed on the tax roll. 
( Ord. No. 2015-450 , 9-15-15)
 
Sec. 48-97. Penalties; municipal civil infraction.
Except as otherwise provided, a violation of this article shall be a municipal civil infraction subject to prosecution and penalty under Section 42.21(3) of the Michigan Compiled Laws. The requirements of this article are in addition to, and not in lieu of any other rights and remedies provided by law. Violation of this article shall be a municipal civil infraction and for the first offense subject to a minimum $200.00 fine and any of the penalties authorized under Section 600.8727 of the Michigan Compiled Laws and/or Section 600.8302 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. Second or subsequent offenses shall be subject to a minimum fine of $400.00 and any of the penalties authorized under Section 600.8727 of the Michigan Compiled Laws and/or Section 600.8302 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 2015-450 , 9-15-15)
 
Chapter 50 SOLID WASTE 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 50-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Construction rubbish includes all waste, excess and discarded materials resulting from building construction or repair. 
Garbage includes all refuse and waste accumulation of animal, food or vegetable matter resulting from the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruits and vegetables, including spoiled food and dead animals. 
Industrial rubbish includes all refuse, waste and discarded materials resulting from the operation of industrial plants and establishments. 
Rubbish means all miscellaneous waste material resulting from housekeeping and ordinary mercantile enterprises. It shall not include industrial or construction rubbish as defined in this section. 
(Code 1975, § 10-1)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 50-2. Administration of chapter.
The administration of this chapter shall be under the jurisdiction of the township board, which may appoint a person or a committee to whom or to which it may delegate the duties of administering this chapter. Such person may be a member of the board, and such committee may include one or more board members. The board may, in the alternative and in its discretion, hire a qualified person to act as superintendent or director, to whom it may delegate the duties of administering this chapter. If such person shall be hired by the board, his rate of compensation shall be set by the board and his employment shall be subject to such terms and conditions as shall be determined from time to time by the board. 
(Code 1975, § 10-2)
 
Sec. 50-3. Reserved.
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2008-381, adopted on June 3, 2008 repealed section 50-3 in its entirety. The former § pertained to penalty for and restraint of chapter violations. See also the Code Comparative table. 
 
Sec. 50-4. Rules governing collection, removal and disposal.
(a)	Rules governing the collection, removal and disposal of all garbage, rubbish and waste material, including construction and industrial rubbish and waste, shall be established by the township board or at its direction and with its approval, and any violation of such rules shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. Such rules shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the township at least once before the rules become effective and as often thereafter as the board or the person charged with the administration of such rules deems expedient. 
(b)	No material alteration, amendment or addition to the rules established pursuant to this section shall be effective until approved by the township board. However, board approval shall not be necessary for minor alterations or changes which do not materially affect the substance of the rules and which are made for practical expediency. 
(Code 1975, § 10-4)
 
Sec. 50-5. Collection and disposal contracts generally.
The township board shall have the authority to enter into a contract with any qualified person for the collection of garbage and rubbish within the township and for the disposal thereof and may, in its discretion, enter into contracts for the collection and disposal of garbage and rubbish from other municipalities and governmental agencies. All such contracts shall provide for performance bonds and policies of insurance indemnifying the township and the officers and employees thereof, in such amounts and with such limits as shall be approved by the township board. 
(Code 1975, § 10-5)
State law reference(s)—Authority for township to contract for garbage collection and disposal, MCL 123.246, MSA 5.2666. 
 
Sec. 50-6. Agreements for collection and disposal of industrial and construction rubbish.
The person charged with the administration of this chapter may enter into agreements for the collection and disposal of industrial and construction rubbish upon such conditions and payment of such fees as shall be approved by the township board. 
(Code 1975, § 10-6)
 
Sec. 50-7. Unlawful deposits and accumulations.
No person shall place, put or cause or permit to be placed any garbage, rubbish, ashes or waste of any kind in or upon the streets, alleys or other public places of the township or permit the deposit or accumulation thereof on any lot, yard or public place in the township, except as provided under the rules established pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 10-7)
State law reference(s)—Littering, MCL 752.901, MSA 28.603(1). 
 
Sec. 50-8. Penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any section of this chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to a fine and shall also be responsible to pay the actual costs, including labor, equipment, and disposal for work performed by the township or the township's authorized agent. 
The fine shall be: 
(a)	One hundred dollars for any first violation; 
(b)	Two hundred fifty dollars for any violation which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of once before; 
(c)	Five hundred dollars for any violation which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of twice before. 
(Ord. No. 2008-381, § 1, 6-3-08)
 
Sec. 50-9. Unpaid fines and costs—Suspension of collection services.
If a person, firm or corporation is adjudicated by a court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of any section of this chapter and the court's fines and costs remain unpaid for more than 30 days after payment is due, collection of solid waste and recyclables may be suspended by the director of residential services department until the fines and costs are paid. 
(Ord. No. 2008-381, § 2, 6-3-08)
 
Sec. 50-10. Each day a separate municipal civil infraction.
A separate civil infraction shall be deemed committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 2008-381, § 3, 6-3-08)
 
Sec. 50-11. Rights and remedies are cumulative.
The rights and remedies provided herein are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2008-381, § 4, 6-3-08)
 
Sec. 50-12. Solid waste containers placement on designated collection day and removal from point of collection.
Solid waste containers must be stored at the rear or side of a structure, unless a different location is approved by the residential services director. Solid waste containers shall be placed at the point of collection no earlier than 6:00 p.m. the day before collection and shall be removed no later than 6:00 a.m. on the day after the designated day of collection. Solid waste which is not collected on the designated day of collection and is tagged as uncollectible must be removed from the point of collection no later than 24 hours after the designated day of collection. 
(Ord. No. 2008-381, § 5, 6-3-08)
 
Sec. 50-13. Improper storage of solid waste.
If solid waste containers are left at the point of collection, in violation of section 50-12, they may be removed and disposed of by the township or the township's authorized agent. Solid waste improperly stored elsewhere outdoors may be removed by the township or the township's authorized agent. At least 24 hours prior to removing materials pursuant to this section, the township shall serve a notice of violation on the property owner as shown on the assessment records. Notice of violation may be served by mailing it to the property owner, delivery to the owner, or posting the notice at a conspicuous place on the property. No notice shall be required if a public health hazard necessitates immediate removal of materials. 
(Ord. No. 2008-381, § 6, 6-3-08)
 
Secs. 50-14—50-25. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. RECYCLING
 
Sec. 50-26. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to achieve economic and environmental efficiency by requiring the residents of single-family homes in the township receiving curbside solid waste collection to recycle certain household solid waste products. It is intended that this mandatory recycling will promote the general health and welfare of the residents of the township by reducing the level of solid waste requiring disposal, by preserving natural resources, and by extending the life of and need for additional disposal facilities. 
(Code 1975, § 10-20)
 
Sec. 50-27. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator means the supervisor of the township or his designee. 
Alternate container means any sturdy, lightweight and identifiable container used in place of or in addition to the storage container provided by the township, which shall be identified with an approved recycling sticker obtained from the township. 
Commingled materials means a mixture of types of recyclable material separated from other solid waste but requiring further processing after collection. 
Contracted agent means an individual, partnership, or corporation authorized by the township to collect, process and dispose of residential solid waste and to collect, process and market recyclable materials from single-family homes. 
Curbside recyclables collection means the collection of recyclable materials at the point of generation by an authorized agent of the township on a regularly scheduled basis. 
Ferrous metal container means those nonaluminum food containers which are attracted to a magnet, commonly referred to as "tin cans." 
Glass container means all containers made from silica or sand, soda ash and limestone, the product being transparent or translucent and being used for packaging or bottling of various matter, and all other material commonly known as "glass"; excluding, however, blue glass, flat glass, plate glass and glass commonly known as "window glass," or other glass determined to be nonrecyclable in the township recycling program. 
Hard yard waste means wood compostable material, such as branches and other nonleafy parts of trees. 
Plastic container means polyethylene terephthalate (PETE or PET) containers, often known as "number 1" plastics. For example: beverage, salad dressing and cooking oil bottles that are clear or see-through-colored containers. The container will have the number "1" enclosed in a triangle of arrows, commonly known as the recycling symbol, imprinted on the bottom of the container. High-density polyethylene (HDPE) containers, often known as "number 2" plastics. For example: milk and cider jugs, liquid detergent bottles, and certain other colored containers that have a dull finish. The container will have the number "2" enclosed in a triangle of arrows, commonly known as the recycling symbol, imprinted on the bottom of the container. 
Recyclables means clean and uncontaminated newspaper, glass containers, plastic containers, ferrous metal containers and lids, and any additional items that the administrator may determine to be recyclable. 
Single-family home means residential structures comprised of from one to four dwelling units. 
Solid waste means all garbage and rubbish normally placed at the curb by residents for collection and disposal, being defined as follows: 
(1)	Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation and cooking of food. It is composed largely of organic matter; in its natural moisture content it does not include more than a minimum amount of free liquids. This form does not include food processing waste from canneries, slaughterhouses, packing plants or similar industries, large quantities of condemned food products, or oyster or clam shells. Garbage originates primarily in kitchens, cafeterias, stores, markets, restaurants, hotels and other places where food is served, prepared or stored. 
(2)	Rubbish means all other solid waste not included within the definition of garbage. It includes but is not limited to combustible and noncombustible waste materials from households, stores and institutions, including paper, boxes, baskets, wood, rags, household furniture, clothing, carpets, tin cans, tires, small auto parts, rubber, Christmas trees, ashes and other similar discarded, offensive materials and trash. It does not, however, include industrial refuse or construction refuse or abandoned automobiles. 
(3)	Construction rubbish means waste materials from the demolition, construction, remodeling and repair operations on buildings, a small amount of which, namely an amount less than 500 pounds in total and less than 60 pounds for any single item, shall be accepted by the contractor as the normal amount of refuse from households and stores; provided, however, that such materials are placed in containers or are bundled in lengths of four feet or less. In larger quantities, they shall not be regarded as municipal refuse but as construction refuse and shall be removed by the building or demolition contractor. 
Storage containers means containers provided by the township for use by residents for storage and placement of recyclables at curbside. These containers remain the property of the township. 
Yard waste means grass, leaves, soft garden waste, hedge clippings, and other nonwoody vegetation. 
(Code 1975, § 10-21)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 50-28. Enforcement.
(a)	Failure of occupants of single-family homes to place a designated storage container at curbside containing recyclable materials, along with other residential solid waste, will result in the other solid waste being subjected to review by the township or its contracted agent to determine if this article is being observed. If the review finds recyclable materials commingled with other solid waste, the administrator may refuse to collect such other solid waste. Occupants are required to remove such uncollected solid waste from the curbside not later than 24 hours from the day of the township-wide collection. 
(b)	Solid waste which contains unseparated yard waste will not be collected by the contracted agent. The contracted agent shall notify the administrator of a resident's noncompliance. Uncollected solid waste must be removed from curbside not later than 24 hours from the day of the township-wide collection. 
(c)	This article shall be enforceable by the administrator or his designee. 
(Code 1975, § 10-27)
 
Sec. 50-29. Reserved.
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2008-381, adopted on June 3, 2008 repealed § 50-29 in its entirety. The former section pertained to penalties. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 50-30. Mandatory recycling.
(a)	Separation of recyclables and yard waste and placement for removal from single-family homes. Under this article, recyclables and yard waste shall be separated and placed for removal from single-family homes as follows: 
(1)	All persons residing in single-family homes shall separate recyclables from all other solid waste produced by such household. Such recyclable material, except yard waste, shall be placed, commingled, in a designated storage container which shall be placed at curbside for collection on the same day as the other solid waste is collected as scheduled. 
(2)	All persons residing in single-family homes shall separate yard waste from all other solid waste generated by the household. Yard waste shall be further separated from hard yard waste. Such yard waste shall be placed either in biodegradable paper yard waste bags or in approved containers which are labeled with the township yard waste stickers. Such stickers must be clearly visible and shall be available from the township at no cost. 
(b)	Preparation of recyclable materials. Glass, plastic and metal recyclables shall be clean and all contents removed therefrom prior to placement at curbside for collection. Caps, rings, and spouts and any nonpaper shall be removed from glass recyclables; caps, rings, cans and spouts shall be removed from plastic recyclables; and labels shall be removed from metal recyclables prior to placement at curbside for collection. Ferrous metal containers and plastic containers, when possible, shall be flattened prior to placement at curbside for collection. Glossy sections shall be removed from newspapers, and newspapers shall not be bagged or bundled prior to placement at curbside for collection. 
(Code 1975, § 10-22)
 
Sec. 50-31. Exceptions and variances.
(a)	If a resident of a single-family home is physically incapable of placing recyclables at curbside, and no other resident of the same household is capable of carrying out such an obligation, special arrangements shall be made by the township or its contracted agent to have collection personnel collect recyclables from the rear or side of the single-family home. 
(b)	In cases of extreme hardship or practical difficulties, the administrator may, upon written request, authorize variances to the requirements of this article regarding separation and points of collection. 
(Code 1975, § 10-23)
 
Sec. 50-32. Authorized collectors.
No personnel, except those individuals, partnerships and corporations authorized by the township, shall collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up recyclable materials which have been placed for collection at curbside. 
(Code 1975, § 10-24)
 
Sec. 50-33. Right of generator to sell or donate recyclables.
Any person generating recyclable material may sell or donate the recyclable material to any person, whether for profit or not for profit. The buyer or recipient of such material, if not the authorized collection agent of the township, shall not under any circumstances pick up recyclables from the curbside or any other collection point in the township. 
(Code 1975, § 10-25)
 
Sec. 50-34. Responsibilities of contracted agent.
Under this article, the contracted agent shall be responsible for the curbside collection of recyclable materials in the designated containers. Such collection of recyclables shall occur on the same day that other solid waste is collected. If the contracted agent should determine that recyclables are commingled with other solid waste, the contracted agent shall not collect such other solid waste and the contracted agent shall report such noncomplying residences to the administrator. 
(Code 1975, § 10-26)
 
Chapter 58 TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 58-1. Basketball hoops.
(a)	Purpose and scope. This section is intended to promote the safety of motorists, pedestrians and basketball players who are in the public right-of-way and public sidewalks by prohibiting the placement of portable or permanent basketball hoops on public sidewalks and public rights-of-way. This section is not intended to regulate the placement or use of basketball hoops on private property. 
(b)	Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms mean: 
(1)	Basketball hoop means a backboard, hoop with or without a net, or supporting apparatus designed or intended to be used to play basketball. 
(2)	Public right-of-way means a paved or unpaved highway, street or road, including lawn extensions and the portion of a driveway on public property, maintained by the Washtenaw County Road Commission for the use by the public. 
(3)	Public sidewalk means a paved area between the curb lines or the lateral sides of the roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
(4)	Supporting apparatus means a post, pole or similar object that is either: 
a.	Attached to a moveable support base and is designed or intended to support a basketball hoop with or without a net; or 
b.	Affixed to the ground and is designed or intended to support a basketball hoop with or without a net. 
(c)	Basketball hoops are prohibited in public rights-of-way and sidewalks. No person shall erect in the public right-of-way or public sidewalk a basketball hoop. 
(d)	Violations; civil infraction. A person guilty of violating subsection (c) of this section shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction as provided in chapter 40 of this Code. 
(e)	Removal of basketball hoops in public rights-of-way and sidewalks. A basketball hoop located on a public right-of-way or public sidewalk in violation of subsection (c), may be removed by the township or a law enforcement officer. 
( Ord. No. 2013-428, §§ I—V, 6-24-13 )
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2013-428 , §§ I—V, adopted June 24, 2013, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 58-1 was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Secs. 58-2—58-25. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE 
 
Sec. 58-26. Title.
This article and the provisions of the Uniform Traffic Code and state laws adopted by reference herein shall be collectively known and may be cited as the "Charter Township of Ypsilanti Traffic Code Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2009-393, § (1), 6-16-09)
 
Sec. 58-27. Adoption of Uniform Traffic Code by reference.
The Uniform Traffic Code for cities, townships, and villages as promulgated by the director of the Michigan Department of State Police pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, Public Act 306 of 1969, as amended (MCL 24.201, et seq.) and made effective October 30, 2002, as updated through April 1, 2008, is hereby adopted by reference. All references in said Uniform Traffic Code to a "governmental unit" shall mean the Charter Township of Ypsilanti. 
(Ord. No. 2009-393, § (2), 6-16-09)
 
Sec. 58-28. Adoption of provisions of Michigan Vehicle Code by reference.
The following provisions of the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, as amended (MCL 257.1, et seq.) are hereby adopted by reference: 
(1)	Chapter I (Words and Phrases Defined): MCLs 257.1 to 257.82. 
(2)	Chapter II (Administration, Registration): MCLs 257.223, 257.224(8), 257.225, 257.228, 257.243, 257.244, 257.255, and 257.256. 
(3)	Chapter III (Operator's and Chauffeur's License): MCLs 257.310e, 257.311, 258.312, 257.312a, 257.315(1) and (3), 257.317, 257.324, 257.325, 257.326, and 257.328. 
(4)	Chapter VI (Obedience to and Effect of Traffic Laws): MCLs 257.601 to 257.601b, 257.602 to 257.606, 257.602(b), 257.611 to 257.616, 257.617a to 257.622, 257.624a to 257.624b, 257.625 (except felony provisions), 257.625a, 257.625m, 257.626 to 257.626b, 257.627 to 257.627b, 257.629b, 257.631 to 257.632, 257.634 to 257.645, 257.647 to 257.655, 257.656 to 257.662, 257.667 to 257.675d, 257.676 to 257.682b, 257.683 to 257.710e, 257.716 to 257.724 and 257.726. 
(5)	Chapter VIII (License Offenses): MCLs 257.904 to 257.904a, 257.904e, 257.905. 
(6)	MCL 257.625(1)(c). 
Violation of MCL 257.625(1)(c) is a misdemeanor punishable by one or more of the following: 
a.	Community service for not more than 360 hours. 
b.	Imprisonment for not more than 180 days. 
c.	A fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $700.00. 
(Ord. No. 2009-393, § (3), 6-16-09; Ord. No. 2012-422, §§ 1, 2, 4-9-12; Ord. No. 2016-469 , 10-18-16)
 
Sec. 58-29. Adoption of other state laws by reference.
The following provisions of state law are hereby adopted by reference: 
(1)	Section 3102 of the Michigan Insurance Code of 1956, Public Act 218 of 1956, as amended, pertaining to required insurance (MCL 500.3102); 
(2)	Subchapter 6 of Part 811 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Public Act 451 of 1994, as amended, pertaining to off-road vehicles (MCLs 324.81101 to 324.81147); 
(3)	Part 821 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Public Act 451 of 1994, as amended, pertaining to snowmobiles (MCLs 324.82101 to 324.82158); 
(4)	Section 703 of the Michigan Liquor Control Act, Public Act 58 of 1998, as amended, pertaining to minors and alcoholic liquor (MCL 436.1703). 
(Ord. No. 2009-393, § (4), 6-16-09)
 
Sec. 58-30. Penalties.
The penalties provided by the Uniform Traffic Code and the provisions of the state laws hereinabove adopted by reference are hereby adopted as the penalties for violations of the corresponding provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-393, § (5), 6-16-09)
 
Secs. 58-31—58-45. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. RESERVED 
 
Secs. 58-46—58-70. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. PARKING 
 
Sec. 58-71. Presumption in prosecutions for violations.
In any proceeding for violation of the parking provisions of this article and amendments thereto, the fact that a motor vehicle, motorcycle or motor-driven cycle is registered in the name of a person shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that such person was in control of the motor vehicle, motorcycle or motor-driven cycle at the time of such parking. 
(Ord. No. 2009-396, 9-15-09)
 
Sec. 58-72. Within marked spaces.
Where there is a specified parking area set out by lines or other instruments painted upon the pavement or other surface, or by signs displaying specified parking areas, it shall be unlawful for any person to park, or cause to be stationary, occupied or unoccupied, any motor vehicle, motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, unless it is parked or stationary within the specified areas. 
(Ord. No. 2009-396, 9-15-09)
 
Sec. 58-73. In designated no parking areas.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be stationary, occupied or unoccupied, any motor vehicle, motorcycle or motor-driven cycle in any area designated as a no parking area. A no parking area is designated by a sign or painting on the pavement or within the parking area, that says, in appropriate words, that there is no parking within a specific area. 
(Ord. No. 2009-396, 9-15-09)
 
Sec. 58-74. Residential.
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Park means standing a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except that vehicles loading or unloading or making necessary repairs shall not be deemed to be parked. 
Residential district means any area lying within an R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4 district. 
(b)	Prohibited parking. The following prohibitions shall apply to parking in residential districts: 
(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked any motor vehicle, van, or trailer on any street in any residential district for more than one hour when such motor vehicle, van or trailer is in excess of 36 feet in length. 
(2)	Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked any motor vehicle, van or trailer on any off-street property in any residential district for more than one hour when that motor vehicle, van or trailer is in excess of 36 feet in length unless the property exceeds one acre in area. 
(3)	It shall be unlawful to park or cause to be parked any motor vehicle, van or trailer on any street in the residential district between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. if there has been a snowfall of two or more inches of snow within the preceding 24 hours. 
(c)	Presumption. In any proceeding for violation of this section, the fact that a motor vehicle, van, or trailer is registered in the name of a person shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that such person was the person who parked or caused to be parked the motor vehicle, van, or trailer. 
(d)	Violations, civil infractions. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 2009-396, 9-15-09)
 
Sec. 58-75. Commercial vehicles.
(a)	Definition of commercial vehicle. Any of the following shall be considered a commercial vehicle: 
(1)	All motor vehicles used for the transportation of passengers for hire, or constructed or used for transportation of goods, wares or merchandise, and/or all motor vehicles designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn; 
(2)	A bus, school bus, or motor vehicle, except a motor home, having a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds, a motor vehicle towing a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of more than 10,000 pounds, or a motor vehicle carrying hazardous material on which is required to be posted a placard as defined and required under 49 C.F.R. parts 100 to 199. A commercial motor vehicle does not include a vehicle used exclusively to transport personal possessions or family members for non-business purposes; 
(3)	Truck tractor; 
(4)	Semi-trailer, which shall include flat beds, stake beds, roll-off containers, tanker bodies, dump bodies and full or partial box-type enclosures; 
(5)	Vehicles of a type that are commonly used for the delivery of ice cream, milk, bread, fruit or similar vending supply or delivery trucks. This category shall include vehicles of a similar nature which are also of a type commonly used by electrical, plumbing, heating and cooling, and other construction oriented contractors: 
(6)	Tow trucks; 
(7)	Commercial hauling trucks; 
(8)	Vehicle repair service trucks; 
(9)	Snow plowing trucks (subject to listed exclusions below); 
(10)	Any vehicle exceeding 12 feet in height or 35 feet in length. 
(b)	Vehicles excluded from definition of commercial vehicle. Pickup trucks and passenger vehicles, with or without snow plows, are specifically excluded from the above definition of commercial vehicle for the purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2009-396, 9-15-09)
 
Sec. 58-76. Parking and storage of commercial vehicles; purpose.
The purpose of this section is to secure the public peace and promote the health, safety and general welfare of citizens, motorists and pedestrians alike through the regulation of the parking of commercial vehicles within the township. 
The regulations imposed are aimed at such vehicles which are deemed to create excessive noise and exhaust levels, detract from the appearance and character of the neighborhoods of the township, negatively affect the value and marketability of surrounding property, constitute traffic hazards, obstruct access to bike paths, sidewalks, streets and rights-of-way, present an attractive nuisance for children, impede crime prevention and/or hamper the effectiveness and access of emergency personnel, vehicles and equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2009-396, 9-15-09)
 
Sec. 58-77. Public property.
The parking and storage of any commercial vehicle upon the public streets, rights-of-way, bike paths, greenbelts, and planting areas between bike paths and streets, except as allowed under the exception below, shall be prohibited unless such vehicle is the property of the township and/or being used at that time exclusively for a public service authorized by the township, county, or state. 
(Ord. No. 2009-396, 9-15-09)
 
Sec. 58-78. Exception.
The parking of commercial vehicles shall be allowed in any zoning district, where such parking is limited to vehicles engaged in the performance of a service on the adjacent or underlying property, for the period of time reasonably necessary to complete the service. 
(Ord. No. 2009-396, 9-15-09)
 
Sec. 58-79. Penalty for violation.
Any person who violates this section shall be responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 2009-396, 9-15-09)
 
Sec. 58-80. Person responsible.
The registered owner of the vehicle shall be considered the person responsible for any violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2009-396, 9-15-09)
 
Sec. 58-81. Parking on lawn extension.
(a)	Unlawful; exception. No person shall drive upon, park or stand any motor vehicle between the curb or curbline and the lot line nearest the street, said area being commonly known as the lawn extension, whether or not any sidewalk or curb is actually in place on such street; provided, however, that said lawn extension area may be used for parking purposes by persons who are authorized to park motor vehicles in said area by the owner of the abutting lot, if said owner has obtained a lawn extension parking permit from the ordinance department. Such a permit shall be issued by the ordinance department to said owner upon proper application by said owner making a satisfactory showing of the following facts: 
(1)	That there is a reasonable need for such parking for business or a residential purpose; 
(2)	That no unreasonable traffic hazard will be created by such parking; 
(3)	That no undue hardship will be suffered by the owners of neighboring lots. 
(b)	Violations. Any person, firm or corporation violating subsection (a) shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to a fine of $25.00. 
(c)	Each day a separate violation. Each day a separate municipal civil infraction shall be deemed committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or continues. 
(d)	Presumption. In any proceeding for violation of this section, the fact that a motor vehicle is registered in the name of a person, firm or corporation shall constitute prima facie presumption that such person, firm or corporation parked or caused to be parked the motor vehicle on the lawn extension. 
(Ord. No. 2001-278, §§ 1—4, 9-18-01)
 
Sec. 58-82. [Parking in business establishments.]
(a)	It shall be unlawful for a driver to park a vehicle in a parking space designated for parking by a business establishment within the township, and to then leave the vehicle parked on the premises, unless the driver is actively engaged in conducting business with the business establishment providing the parking space. This subsection shall not apply to any area or any property where the driver must pay to park his vehicle. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for a driver to park a vehicle in a parking space provided by a business establishment for extended periods of time, even though the driver remains in the vehicle, without conducting business in the business establishment providing the parking space, or to engage in a deliberate act of blocking the parking spaces from other possible use by other persons who may desire to conduct business at the business establishment. 
( Ord. No. 2014-437 , 5-20-14)
 
Secs. 58-83—58-95. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. BICYCLES
 
Sec. 58-96. Registration recommended.
All bicycles owned by township residents may be registered with the township treasurer to facilitate identification of the bicycles and to allow for an orderly recovery of bicycles which are stolen, lost, or otherwise lost from the possession of the owner. 
(Code 1975, § 13-3(a))
 
Sec. 58-97. Procedure.
The registration procedure is as follows: 
(1)	Serial number. All registered bicycles must have a serial number permanently marked on the frame. Such marking may be applied at the time of registration. 
(2)	Application. Applications for registration shall be made at the township treasurer's office on forms furnished by the township treasurer, and the township treasurer may from time to time delegate the authority to register bicycles to other persons such as retail sales shops. 
(3)	Contents of application. Such applications shall be signed by the person owning the bicycle or that person's parents or spouse. The application shall state the address of the owner, the make, type, and color of the bicycle, the serial number of the frame, and if applicable, the former registration number. 
(4)	List of stolen or missing bicycles. The county sheriff's department shall provide the township treasurer with a current list of all bicycles which have been reported stolen or missing. The township treasurer shall compare the description of the bicycle on the application with such list, and, if that bicycle appears to be one on that list, he shall report that fact to the county sheriff's department. 
(5)	Fee; card; tag. If the bicycle is eligible for registration and upon receipt of a registration fee of $0.50, the treasurer shall issue to the owner a registration card which shall contain the name and address of the owner, a description of the bicycle, and the registration number. He shall also issue the owner a copy of this section and a registration tag which shall contain the words "Township of Ypsilanti" and the number of the registration. The registration tag shall be firmly attached to the bicycle in a visible location. 
(6)	Cross index of registrations. The township treasurer shall maintain a cross index of all such registrations providing identification by owner's name, bicycle serial number and registration number. A copy of that cross index shall also be maintained by the county sheriff's department. 
(7)	Abandonment and recovery; return. Any bicycles coming into the possession of the county sheriff's department by reason of abandonment or recovery after being stolen shall be returned by the said sheriff department to the owner forthwith. 
(8)	Registry of recovered bicycles. If the bicycle coming into possession of the county sheriff's department is not registered, the owner shall first register the bicycle with the township treasurer before the sheriff may release it to the owner. 
(Code 1975, § 13-3(b))
 
Sec. 58-98. Transfer.
If there is a change of ownership in any bicycle, the new owner may register it with the township treasurer and pay a fee of $0.25. The treasurer shall make the appropriate changes in the cross index. 
(Code 1975, § 13-3(c))
 
Secs. 58-99—58-120. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VI. RESERVED 
 
Secs. 58-121—58-123. Reserved.
 
Chapter 62 UTILITIES 

 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 62-1. Protection of public water supply generally; labeling of water outlets not supplied by potable system.
The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified in this article and in the state and township plumbing codes. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as follows: "Water Unsafe for Drinking." 
(Code 1975, § 20-1)
 
Sec. 62-2. Cross connections with public water supply system.
(a)	The township hereby adopts by reference the water supply cross connection rules of the state department of public health, being R 325.11401 to R 325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of the township plumbing inspector to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water system where cross connections with the public water supply are deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the township water and sewer department and as approved by the state department of public health. 
(c)	The plumbing inspector shall have the right to enter, at any reasonable time, any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the township, for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross connections. On request, the owners, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspector any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(d)	The water and sewer department is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service, after reasonable notice, to any property wherein any connection in violation of this section exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1975, § 20-2)
 
Sec. 62-3. Reserved.
 
Sec. 62-4. Water meters.
(a)	Except as otherwise provided, water furnished by the township water system shall be measured by a meter controlled by the township community utilities authority. 
(b)	Water meters will be furnished by the township community utilities authority and shall be installed by the user under the supervision of the authority. The user shall be required to pay a service charge on the meter equal to the cost of the meter to the authority upon making application for water service. Ownership of the meter shall remain with the authority. 
(Code 1975, § 20-4)
 
Sec. 62-5. Connection charge.
(a)	The charges for water meters and new connections for water and sewer disposal services shall be annually set by the director of the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)	At least three months before the end of each year the rates for the next ensuing year shall be set by the director of the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority and shall be published by him in a local newspaper of general circulation and filed by him with the authority board. The board may make changes in the rates within one month after the proposed rates are filed with it. The new rates as originally published, or as changed by the board, if such changes are made, shall go into effect on the first day of the next ensuing year and shall thereafter remain in effect, without modification for the full year. If the procedure described in this subsection is not followed, the connection charges for the preceding year shall continue. Changes in connection charges shall reflect changes in labor and/or material costs. 
(c)	The word "year" as used in this section shall mean the fiscal year of the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority. 
(d)	All payments for water and sewer connections and water meters shall be paid in full prior to the time the connection is made and the meter is installed. 
(Code 1975, § 20-5)
 
Sec. 62-6. Penalty for violations of section 62-1 or 62-2.
Any person violating any of the provisions of section 62-1 or 62-2, or any written order of the plumbing inspector issued in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 for each violation. Each day upon which such a violation shall occur shall be deemed a separate and additional violation for the purpose of this section. 
(Code 1975, § 20-3)
 
Secs. 62-7—62-25. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. RESERVED 
 
Secs. 62-26—62-50. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. TRUNKLINE AND TRANSMISSION LINE SERVICE CHARGE
 
Sec. 62-51. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Family dwelling unit means a unit set forth under section 62-54 for the purposes of designating the amount of trunkline and transmission line service charge. 
Water and sewage disposal system means the complete sanitary sewage disposal system and water transmission system of the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority, including all sewers, pumps, lift stations, treatment facilities and all other facilities used or useful in the collection, treatment and disposal of domestic, commercial or industrial wastes, and for the transmission of water, either treated or untreated, and all facilities used or useful in the collection, treatment and transmission of water, including all appurtenances thereto and including all extensions and improvements thereto, which may hereafter be acquired. 
Water and sewage transmission and trunkline service charge means the fee designed and designated for the purpose of defraying at least a portion of the cost of the township community utility authority's water and sewage disposal system. 
(Code 1975, § 20-30)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2010-403, §§ 2—4, adopted Feb. 16, 2010, temporarily waives the benefit charges for trunk line and transmission line water and sewer charges for new connections or change of use in existing connections, as defined, between April 1, 2010 and Sept. 30, 2011. This waiver of the affected charges ends upon the conclusion of the township's business work day Sept. 30, 2011. All customers issued permits Oct. 1, 2011 and thereafter will be subject to all benefit charges for trunk line and transmission water and sewer charges for new connections or change of use in existing conditions as required by those sections to which the temporary waiver period applied. 
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 62-52. Necessity.
The township hereby ordains and determines that it is desirable and necessary for the public health, safety and welfare of the township to levy and collect a trunkline and transmission line service charge to advance, maintain, expand, enlarge and otherwise service the present and future water transmission lines and sewer transmission lines in the township. 
(Code 1975, § 20-31)
 
Sec. 62-53. Levied in addition to other charges; payment due date.
(a)	There is hereby levied, against all premises connecting to the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority water and sewage disposal system, a trunkline and transmission line service charge, which shall be paid, in cash, for the privilege of making a connection to the water and sewage disposal system of the authority. Such charge is not to be considered a tap-in fee, but is in addition to tap-in fees and any benefit charge for lateral extension of smaller type water and sewer lines in the township. The trunkline and transmission line service charge is in addition to all other charges set forth in this chapter and is not intended as a replacement of any other fees or rates set by the township, but is considered to be an additional service charge, in addition to other rates and charges. 
(b)	At the time of application for a building permit for new construction, the amount of $288.00, as an interceptor service charge for connection to the sewer system of the township, shall be paid for each family dwelling unit, as specified in section 62-54. 
(c)	At the time of application for a building permit for new construction, the amount of $288.00, as a transmission service charge for connection to the water system of the township, shall be paid for each family dwelling unit as specified in section 62-54. All building permits obtained in township since the effective date of this article for which the trunkline and transmission line service fee has not been paid shall be null and void unless the parties procuring the building permit shall pay the said fees within 30 days from the effective date of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 20-32; Ord. No. 97-160, 2-4-97)
 
Sec. 62-54. Computation.
(a)	The following definition of a "family dwelling unit" shall be used to compute the total trunkline and transmission line service charge to be paid for each family dwelling unit in the township: 
Type of Use 	Dwelling Use Factor 
(Units) 
Single-family residence 	1.00 unit per residence 
Auto dealers 	1.00 unit + 0.20 unit per 1,000 square feet 
Barbershops 	1.00 unit + 0.10 unit per chair 
Bars, see Restaurants 	
Beauty shops 	1.00 unit + 0.50 unit per booth 
Boardinghouses 	0.20 unit per bed 
Boarding schools 	0.20 unit per bed 
Bowling alleys 	0.20 unit per 1,000 square feet (bars, restaurants, etc., at their respective unit factors) 
Car wash conventional (with conveyor) 	10.00 unit per 20 feet of conveyor 
Car wash do-it-yourself (coin-operated, ten gallons or less per car) 	1.00 unit per stall 
Car wash mechanical (without conveyor over ten gallons per car) 	10.00 units per stall 
Churches 	0.40 unit per 1,000 square feet 
Cleaners 	1.00 unit per 1,000 square feet + 1.50 unit per press 
Convalescent homes 	1.00 unit + 0.50 unit per bed 
Convents 	0.20 unit per bed 
Country clubs 	1.50 units per 1,000 square feet of general building area plus restaurant, bar, swimming pool areas, etc., at their respective unit factors 
Drugstores with fountain service 	1.00 unit per 1,000 square feet 
Factories (exclusive of industrial wastes) 	0.75 unit per 1,000 square feet (industrial wastes will be assigned such sanitary use factor units as shall be appropriate in each individual instance, upon petition to the township for such assignment) 
Fraternal organizations 	0.50 unit per 1,000 square feet of general building area plus restaurant, bar, swimming pool area, etc., at their respective unit factors 
Grocery stores and supermarkets 	0.80 unit per 1,000 square feet 
Hospitals 	1.00 unit + 0.50 unit per bed 
Hotels and motels 	1.00 unit + 0.25 unit per bedroom plus restaurant, bar, swimming pool areas, etc., at their respective unit factors 
Laundry (self-service) 	0.50 unit per washer 
Multiple-family residence 	1.00 unit per residence unit 
Office building 	0.75 unit per 1,000 square feet 
Public institutes other than hospitals 	0.75 unit per 1,000 square feet 
Restaurants or bars (dinners and/or drinks) 	4.00 units per 1,000 square feet 
Auxiliary dining room (open not more than 20 hours per week) 	2.00 units per 1,000 square feet 
Schools without showers and/or pool 	1.00 unit per classroom 
Schools (shower and/or pool) 	1.50 unit per classroom 
Service stations 	1.00 unit + 0.15 unit per pump 
Snack bars, drive-ins, etc. 	4.00 units per 1,000 square feet 
Stores (other than specifically listed) 	0.35 unit per 1,000 square feet 
Swimming pool (net area of pool, see country clubs for building unit) 	3.00 unit per 1,000 square feet 
Theaters 	1.00 unit + 0.01 unit per seat 
Theaters, drive-in 	1.00 unit + 0.20 unit per car space 
Trailer home parks 	1.00 unit per trailer space occupied or unoccupied 
Warehouses 	0.15 unit per 1,000 square feet 

(b)	A unit means one times the amount set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of section 62-53. If only water is connected, then the unit is one times the water system charge. 
(Code 1975, § 20-33)
 
Sec. 62-55. Disposition.
The funds received from the trunkline and transmission line service charge provided for by this article shall become a part of the total revenues of the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority and shall be a portion of the general receipts of the authority without special label as to the specific use to be made of such funds. 
(Code 1975, § 20-34)
 
Sec. 62-56. Billing; lien for unpaid charges.
The Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority is hereby granted authority to send statements and bills to all persons responsible for paying the charge specified in this article. A ten percent penalty shall incur to the customer for all such bills remaining unpaid after the due date specified thereon, and the penalty and bill submitted by the authority shall become a lien upon the premises for which the charge was originally created, and the authority is hereby authorized to record the same in the county register of deeds office as a lien on the property, and the owner of the property shall be responsible to the authority for all costs incurred in recording the lien. 
(Code 1975, § 20-35)
 
Secs. 62-57—62-75. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. BIMONTHLY SERVICE CHARGES
 
Sec. 62-76. Water rates prescribed.
(a)	Except as otherwise provided in this section, water to be furnished by the system shall be measured by a meter controlled by the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority. 
(1)	For all billings rendered prior to October 1, 2018, existing water service rates shall prevail. For all billings rendered on or after October 1, 2018, water service rates shall be as follows, for each bimonthly (two-month) period: 
Readiness-to-serve rates based on size of meter:
Meter Size 
(inch) 	Water Rate 
⅝—¾ 	$14.94 
1 	37.35 
1½ 	74.70 
2 	119.52 
3 	373.50 
4 	747.00 
6 	1,494.00 
8 	2,614.50 
10 	4,108.50 
12 	4,855.50 

Commodity and water contracts community rate: $3.23 per 100 cubic feet. 
(b)	Water meters will be furnished by the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority and shall be installed by the authority or by the user under the supervision of the authority, and the user will be required to pay a service charge on the meter equal to the cost of the meter to the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority upon the making of application for such water service. Ownership of the meter will remain with the authority. 
(c)	The consumer shall pay a late payment fee of 1½ percent of the total bill on any bill not paid by the specified due date, but paid before the end of the month in which payment is due, and an additional 1½ percent of the total bill for every additional month thereafter in which the bill is not paid in full, including any late payment fee(s) accrued to date of payment, up to a maximum late payment fee of double the initial total bill. This late payment fee shall apply to any YCUA bill, not limited to bi-monthly water and sewer bills. 
(d)	For fire protection the township shall pay, out of its fiscal funds, the sum of $1.00 per year, commencing with fiscal year 1965—1966, and continuing each year thereafter, for each fire hydrant; provided, however, that this charge may be increased or decreased by joint agreement between the township and the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority board. The cost and value of any other water service to property owned by the township shall be paid on the schedule of rates in subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)	For any water furnished otherwise than through meters, the board shall fix a rate based on the number of taps and any other special consideration. 
(f)	The term "tap," as used in this section, shall include any opening or outlet heretofore or hereafter made in the system for the purpose of withdrawing water therefrom for any use, public or private, either commercial or domestic, excepting fire hydrants, and no taps shall be made to the system unless authorized by the proper Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority authorities. 
(g)	The board shall have the authority to establish other special rates as special rates may be required. 
(h)	A charge of $0.033 per 100 cubic feet of water shall be set aside for the specific purpose of capital improvements to the system. All such monies set aside shall be deposited into the township capital improvement fund and shall not be used for any purpose except by the authority of the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority board of commissioners with the recommendation of the township board. 
(i)	Benefit charge.
(1)	Wherever the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority has heretofore or may hereafter construct additions and extensions to its water supply and sewage disposal system out of the general and/or bond revenue of the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority without the establishment of a special assessment district therefor, then and in that event, a benefit charge against the adjoining benefiting property shall be levied at the time such property is connected to such water and sewer lines as follows: 
a.	Upon application for connection to such water lines by an adjoining property owner, in addition to all other charges, said property owner shall pay a benefit charge of $43.50 per front foot of the property owned by the applicant and serviced by such lines, which charge, computed as aforesaid shall be due and payable upon application; provided, however, that should the property owner desire to extend said payments over 30 bi-monthly installments, then said charge shall be computed on the basis of $49.25 per front foot without interest on the unpaid balance. 
b.	Upon application for connection to such sewer lines by an adjoining property owner, in addition to all other charges said property owner shall pay a benefit charge of $48.50 per front foot of the property owned by the applicant and serviced by such lines, which charge, computed as aforesaid, shall be due and payable upon application; provided, however, that should the property owner desire to extend said payment over 30 bi-monthly installments, then said charge shall be computed on the basis of $54.91 per front foot without interest on the unpaid balance. 
(2)	Any unpaid benefit charges hereunder shall constitute a lien upon the premises served in the same manner and to the same extent as provided by Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended, and the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority shall certify the amount of such benefit charge along with a description of the property served thereby to the supervisor and treasurer of the township who thereupon shall record the same upon the records maintained by their respective offices pertaining to such property. 
(3)	All monies received from the collection of said benefit charge shall be deposited in the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority receiving fund. 
(4)	The benefit charges established hereunder shall be in addition to all other rates and charges established under the water supply and sewer system ordinances of the township and shall be subject to the same penalties for nonpayment as heretofore or hereafter established for any other charges. 
(Code 1975, § 20-45; Ord. No. 97-159, 2-4-97; Ord. No. 99-235, 12-21-99; Ord. No. 2001-265, 4-3-01; Ord. No. 2002-302, 9-17-02; Ord. No. 2003-313, §§ 1, 4, 5-20-03; Ord. No. 2018-480 , 9-18-18)
Editor's note(s)—Ordinance No. 2009-391, §§ 1, 3, 4, adopted April 21, 2009, temporarily waives the benefit charges for water and sewer connections, as defined, for all applicants receiving new permits for existing structures or new building construction between April 1, 2009 and March 31, 2010. This waiver of the affected charges ends upon the conclusion of the township's business work day March 31, 2010. All customers issued permits April 1, 2010 and thereafter will be subject to all benefit charges for water and sewer connections for new connections or change of use in existing conditions as required by those sections to which the temporary waiver period applied. 
 
Sec. 62-77. Sewer rates prescribed.
For all billings rendered prior to October 1, 2020, existing sewage disposal service rates shall prevail. For all billings rendered on or after October 1, 2020, sewage disposal rates shall be as follows, for each bimonthly (two-month) period: 
Readiness-to-serve rates based on size of meter:
Meter Size 
(inch) 	Sewage Rate 
⅝—¾ 	$16.47 
1 	41.18 
1½ 	82.36 
2 	131.78 
3 	411.79 
4 	823.59 
6 	1,647.16 
8 	2,882.54 
10 	4,529.70 
12 	5,353.29 

Commodity rate: $2.71 per 100 cubic feet. 
(Code 1975, § 20-46; Ord. No. 94-134, 10-18-94; Ord. No. 99-235, 12-21-99; Ord. No. 2002-301, 9-17-02; Ord. No. 2005-363, 10-4-05; Ord. No. 2006-367, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 2007-375, 10-2-07, eff. 11-1-07; Ord. No. 2008-382, 9-2-08; Ord. No. 2011-418, 7-19-11; Ord. No. 2012-426, 9-24-12; Ord. No. 2013-432 , 9-23-13; Ord. No. 2014-439 , 9-16-14; Ord. No. 2015-451 , 9-15-15; Ord. No. 2016-466 , 9-20-16; Ord. No. 2018-481 , 9-18-18; Ord. No. 2019-489 , 9-17-19; Ord. No. 2020-493 , 9-15-20)
 
Sec. 62-78. Deposit to ensure payment.
A cash deposit of $15.00, as security for payment of water rates and sewage disposal rates, shall be required of each user in such cases as the township board shall deem such security to be advisable, or in such cases where a deposit is required by the provisions of section 21 of Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (MCL 141.121, MSA 5.2751), as amended. 
(Code 1975, § 20-47)
 
Sec. 62-79. Billing; late payment; other.
(a)	Charges for water and sewage disposal services furnished by the system shall be collected in six bimonthly periods, and bills shall be sent to each user within 30 days after the end of each bimonthly period, and shall be due and payable at the office of the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority (YCUA) ten days after the date of the bill. 
(b)	The consumer shall pay a late payment fee of 1½ percent of the total bill on any bill not paid by the specified due date, but paid before the end of the month in which payment is due, and an additional 1½ percent of the total bill for every additional month thereafter in which the bill is not paid in full, including any late payment fee(s) accrued to date of payment, up to a maximum late payment fee of double the initial total bill. This late payment fee shall apply to any YCUA bill, not limited to bi-monthly water and sewer bills. 
(c)	The township shall pay for sewage disposal furnished by the system to any premises owned or used by it at the rates prescribed in section 62-77. 
(d)	The Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority board shall have the right to fix and determine a charge for sewage disposal service to properties having no water connection, if any such properties exist. 
(e)	The term "connection," as used in this section, shall be construed as being any opening for public or private use made in any sewer of the system for the purpose of providing an outlet for the disposal of sewage. 
(f)	The Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority board shall have the authority to establish other special rates as special rates may be required. 
(g)	A charge of $0.033 per 100 cubic feet of sewer shall be set aside for the specific purpose of capital improvements to the system. All such monies set aside shall be deposited into the township capital improvement fund and shall not be used for any purpose except by authority of the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority board of commissioners with the recommendation of the township board. 
(h)	A charge of $0.01 per 100 cubic feet of sewer shall be set aside for the specific purpose of environmental cleanup. All such monies set aside shall be deposited into the township environmental cleanup fund and shall not be used for any purpose except by authority of the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority board of commissioners with the approval of the township board of trustees. 
(i)	For all billings rendered on or after January 1, 1985, surcharges shall be assessed upon any wastewater discharging into the system having any excess of suspended solids, BOD 5 , phosphates or total nitrogen (TKN). The surcharges shall apply only to those quantities in excess of the concentrations listed in this subsection: 
(1)	For wastewater with a suspended solids concentration greater than 350 milligrams per liter (mg/l) at $0.0729 per pound for the excess. 
(2)	For wastewater with a BOD 5 concentration greater than 300 mg/l at $0.0797 per pound for the excess. 
(3)	For wastewater with a phosphate concentration greater than 13 mg/l at $2.2709 per pound for the excess. 
(4)	For wastewater with a total nitrogen (TKN) concentration greater than 40 mg/l at $0.3353 per pound. 
(j)	Any tax exempt or community user of wastewater service may request Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority to review its charges for wastewater service for the previous calendar year by submitting a written request for a review by March 1 of the current year. All reviews so requested shall be limited to a review of the previous calendar year's charges. Upon receipt of a request for review, Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority shall review the user's record of payment and wastewater service provided to determine whether the user is paying the appropriate pro rata share of debt retirement. If, after a review is concluded, it is determined that the user has not paid the appropriate pro rata share during the previous calendar year, then the current calendar year's charges to the user shall be adjusted. 
(k)	Reserved. 
(l)	The Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authorities Board shall have the authority to adjust the water rates established in section 62-76 of this article equally commensurate with and limited to future water rate increases charged to the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority by the City of Detroit's Water and Sewerage Department. 
(Code 1975, § 20-48; Ord. No. 94-134, 10-18-94; Ord. No. 99-235, 12-21-99; Ord. No. 2003-313, §§ 2—5, 5-20-03; Ord. No. 2018-482 , 9-18-18)
 
Sec. 62-80. Discontinuance of service for nonpayment.
The township shall have the right to shut off and discontinue the supply of water to any premises for the nonpayment, when due, of water or sewer charges prescribed by this article. In the event of nonpayment of the sewer charges, the sewage disposal service to the premises may likewise be discontinued. 
(Code 1975, § 20-49)
 
Sec. 62-81. Unpaid water and sewage disposal charges to constitute lien.
Charges for water and sewage disposal service shall constitute a lien on the property served. On or before March 1 of each year, the township clerk shall deliver to the supervisor a certified statement of all water and sewage disposal charges then six months past due and unpaid. The supervisor shall then place such charges on the next general tax roll, and the charges shall be collected as part of the general township taxes. 
(Code 1975, § 20-50)
State law reference(s)—Similar provisions, MCL 141.121, MSA 5.2751. 
 
Sec. 62-82. Replacement fund.
(a)	There shall be established and maintained a separate depository account designated replacement fund, which shall be used solely for the purpose of making major repairs and replacements to the system, if needed. 
(b)	For the revenue bonds issued concurrently with the enactment of Ordinance No. 11, there shall be deposited into the account, in quarterly installments, after providing for all requirements of the operation and maintenance fund and the bond and interest redemption fund, including the bond reserve account, the sum of $15,000.00 during each of the operating years commencing September 1, 1955, September 1, 1956, and September 1, 1957, until such sum shall total $45,000.00. If, at any time, it shall be necessary to use the monies in such fund for such purpose, the monies so used shall be replaced from net revenues in the receiving fund which are not required by this section to be used for the operation and maintenance fund of the bond and interest redemption fund, including the bond reserve account. 
(c)	The replacement fund shall be reviewed annually to determine that sufficient replacement funds are in the account to meet all federal and state laws, statutes and grant or bond requirements. 
(Code 1975, § 20-51)
 
Sec. 62-83. Operating year; water and sewer divisions; records.
The system shall be operated on the basis of an operating year commencing on September 1 and ending on August 31. The system shall include two divisions consisting of the water division and the sewer division. Records for these divisions shall be kept separately and shall include all expenses and revenues pertaining to each division. 
(Code 1975, § 20-52)
 
Secs. 62-84—62-105. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. MUNICIPAL SEWER USE AND INDUSTRIAL WASTE PRETREATMENT 
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 62-106. Applicability of article.
This article shall apply to all users that discharge into the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority's (YCUA) publicly-owned treatment works (the POTW). In addition, it shall be unlawful for any user located outside the township limits to continue discharges to the POTW except as provided in this article. In addition, this article shall establish permit requirements for connections or alterations to township or YCUA sewage works facilities or the POTW; govern the design, construction, alteration or use of and connection to the sewage works and POTW; regulate the discharge of wastewater into the sewage works and POTW; prohibit certain detrimental conduct; authorize the issuance of permits; authorize inspections; provide for administration and enforcement of this article; establish civil and criminal penalties for violations; and authorize the enforcement of and ensure compliance within the township of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, the Clean Water Act and the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, more specifically defined herein, and regulations promulgated and adopted under said acts and statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-107. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: Act, "the Act," the Federal Water Pollution Control Act and the Clean Water Act are used interchangeably in this article and refer to Public Law 92-500, as adopted in 1972 and amended by Public Law 95-217 in 1977, and any succeeding amendments and any administrative rules promulgated there under, as amended or revised from time to time. 
Alternative discharge limit means limits set by the YCUA in lieu of the promulgated national categorical pretreatment standard for integrated facilities in accordance with the combined wastestream formula as set by the EPA. 
Authorized representative of industrial user means: 
(1)	A responsible corporate officer, if the industrial user is a corporation, who shall be a president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation or means the principal manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having a gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 (in second quarter 1980 dollars) if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures; 
(2)	A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; 
(3)	A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above and if all of the following apply: 
a.	The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in subsections (1) or (2) of this definition. 
b.	This authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well, or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and 
c.	The written authorization is submitted to the director. If an authorization is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of this definition shall be submitted to the director or YCUA prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
Best management practices (BMP) means programs, practices, procedures or other directed efforts, initiated and implemented by users, which can or do lead to the reduction, conservation or minimization of pollutants being introduced into the ecosystem including, but not limited to, the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority (YCUA) publicly-owned treatment system. BMPs include, but are not limited to, equipment or technology modifications, process or procedure modifications, reformulation or design of products, substitution of raw materials, and improvements in housekeeping, maintenance, training, or inventory control, and may include technical and economic considerations. BMPs may be structural or nonstructural or both. In determining what BMPs will be required of an user in a particular case, the director may consider all relevant technological, economical, practical, and institutional considerations as determined relevant and appropriate by the director, consistent with achieving and maintaining compliance with the requirements of this article and other applicable laws and regulations. 
Best management practices plan (BMPP) means a written document that describes how the BMPs will be accomplished. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20 degrees Celsius expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter). 
Board means the Board of Commissioners of the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the drainage from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means that extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other places of disposal. 
Bypass means intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means a measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water or wastewater. It is expressed as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specified test. It does not differentiate between stable and unstable organic matter and thus does not necessarily correlate with biochemical oxygen demand. Also known as OC and DOC, oxygen consumed and dichromate oxygen consumed, respectively. 
Chlorine demand means the difference between the amount of chlorine added to water or waste water and the amount of residual chlorine remaining at the end of a specified contact period. The demand for any given water varies with the amount of chlorine applied, time of contact and temperature. 
City means the City of Ypsilanti, or the City Council of Ypsilanti. 
Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
Combined wastestream means the wastestream at industrial facilities where regulated process effluent is mixed with other wastewaters (either regulated or unregulated) prior to treatment. 
Compatible pollutant means a substance amenable to treatment in the wastewater treatment plant such as biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit if the publicly owned treatment works was designed to treat such pollutants, and in fact does remove such pollutant to a substantial degree. Examples of such additional pollutants may include: chemical oxygen demand, total organic carbon, and phosphorus and phosphorus compounds, nitrogen compounds, fats, oils and greases of animal or vegetable origin. 
Composite sample means a sample formed either by continuous sampling or by mixing discrete samples obtained at intervals over a period of time. The individual samples shall be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the YCUA. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the YCUA, the samples must be representative of the discharge. Manual generation of a composite sample through the collection and combining of grab samples may be approved if the user demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. 
The decision to allow the alternative sampling must be documented in the industrial user's file for that facility or facilities. Composite sampling protocols delineated in the user's permit take precedence. 
Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
Daily maximum means the concentration or mass loading that shall not be exceeded on any single calendar day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetical average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged during the day. If a composite sample is required for a parameter, the determination whether the daily maximum limitation for that parameter has been exceeded on a single calendar day shall be based on the composite sample collected for that parameter on that calendar day. If grab samples are required for a parameter, the determination whether the daily maximum limitation for that parameter has been exceeded on a calendar day shall be based on the average of all grab samples collected for that parameter on that calendar day. If only one grab sample is collected for a parameter on a given day, the determination whether the daily maximum limitation for that parameter has been exceeded for the day shall be based on the results of that single grab sample. If the pollutant concentration in any sample is less than the applicable detection limit, that value shall be regarded as zero when calculating the daily maximum concentration. 
Debt service charges means the charges levied to customers of the wastewater system which are used to pay principal, interest and administrative costs of retiring the debt incurred for construction of the sewage works. 
Department of Natural Resources and Environment or DNRE means the State of Michigan Department of Natural Resources and Environment, Administrator or other duly authorized official. 
Director means the director of the YCUA or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Domestic sewage means waste and wastewater from humans or household operations, which is discharged to, or otherwise enters, a POTW. 
Environmental protection agency or EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, administrator or other duly authorized official. 
Fats, oils, and grease (FOG) means any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes, oils, or any other nonvolatile or semi-volatile material of animal, vegetable or mineral origin that is extractable by solvents in accordance with standard methods. 
Flow proportional sample means a composite sample taken with regard to the flow rate of the wastestream. 
Food service establishment (FSE) means a nondomestic user that engages in one or more of the following food preparation activities: cooking by frying (all methods); baking (all methods); grilling; sautéing, rotisserie cooking; broiling (all methods); boiling; blanching; roasting; toasting; poaching; infrared heating; searing; barbecuing; and any other food preparation activity that produces a hot, nondrinkable food product in or on a receptacle that requires washing. 
Footing drain means a pipe or conduit, which is placed around the perimeter of a building foundation and which intentionally admits groundwater. 
Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
Grab sample means a sample taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis over a period of time of not more than 15 minutes without regard to the flow in the wastestream. 
Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum pump tank trucks. 
Incompatible pollutant means any pollutant, which is not a compatible pollutant. 
Industrial wastes means the wastewater discharges from industrial, manufacturing, trade or business processes, or wastewater discharge from any structure with these characteristics, as distinct from their employee's domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
Industrial user means a person who contributes, causes or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW, including, but not limited to, a place of business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether public or private, commercial or charitable, but excludes single-family and multifamily residential dwellings with discharges consistent with domestic waste characteristics. 
Industrial user permit or industrial user pretreatment permit means a discharge permit issued by the director under this article and the YCUA industrial pretreatment program. 
Infiltration means that portion of groundwater, which is unintentionally admitted to a sewer. 
Interference means a discharge, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, to which both of the following provisions apply: 
(1)	The discharge inhibits or disrupts the publicly owned treatment works, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; 
(2)	Pursuant to paragraph (1) of this definition, the discharge is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the YCUA or the Act or the State Act, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation, or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued there under, or more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC Section 2601 et seq., including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act: The Clean Air Act, 42 USC Section 7401 et seq.; the Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 USC Section 2601 et seq.; the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act, 33 USC Section 1401 et seq. 
Instantaneous maximum concentration means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any instant in time (independent of the flow rate or duration of the sampling event). If the concentration determined by analysis of any grab sample, composite sample, or discrete portion of a composite sample exceeds the instantaneous maximum concentration, the instantaneous maximum concentration shall be deemed to have been exceeded. Any discharge of a pollutant at or above a specified instantaneous maximum concentration is a violation of this article and the YCUA industrial pretreatment program. 
Mercury reduction plan means a plan to ensure that the maximum allowable mercury loading to the POTW is not exceeded as described in section 62-181 of this article. 
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act, 33 USC Section 1317, which apply to a specific category of nondomestic users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, subchapter N (1990), parts 405-471. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System or NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342). 
National Prohibitive Discharge Standard or prohibitive discharge standard means any regulation developed under the authority of [Section] 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater. 
New source means any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge and for which construction commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Clean Water Act will be applicable to the source if the standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307(c), and if any of the following provisions apply: 
(1)	The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
(2)	The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
(3)	The production of wastewater-generated processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation is substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. The extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source and the extent of integration of the new facility with the existing plant should be considered in determining whether the process is substantially independent. 
Nondomestic user means an industry, commercial establishment, or other entity that discharges wastewater to a publicly-owned treatment works other than, or in addition to, sanitary sewage. 
Operation and maintenance means all work, materials, equipment, utilities, administration and other effort required to operate and maintain the sewage works consistent with insuring adequate treatment of wastewater to produce an effluent in compliance with the NPDES permit and other applicable state and federal regulations, and includes the cost of replacement. 
Operator means the person responsible for the overall operation of a facility. 
Owner means the person who owns a facility or part of a facility. 
Pass-through means a discharge that exits the WWTP into state waters in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the Act, the State Act, or the NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, limited liability company, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or its legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
pH means the logarithm (base ten) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution or expressed in standard units (SU). 
Pollutant means any of the following: substances regulated by categorical standards; substances discharged to the POTW that are required to be monitored, are limited in the POTW's permit, or are or are to be identified in the POTW's permit application; substances for which control measures on nondomestic users are necessary to avoid restricting the approved residuals management program of the POTW; substances for which control measures on nondomestic users are necessary to avoid operational problems at the POTW; substances for which control measures on nondomestic sources are necessary to avoid worker health and safety problems in the POTW. 
Pollution means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of water. 
Pretreatment or treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the sewage works. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard, imposed on a nondomestic user. 
Pretreatment standards means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act and the State Act. This term includes prohibited discharges and local limits defined in R 323.2303 and categorical standards. 
Properly shredded garbage means garbage that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half-inch in any dimension. 
Publicly-owned treatment works (POTW) means the treatment works owned and/or operated by the YCUA and includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. The term also includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances if they convey wastewater to or through the publicly owned treatment works. The term also means the municipality (the Township of Ypsilanti) that has jurisdiction over indirect discharges to, and discharges from, the treatment works. 
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
Replacement means the replacement in whole or in part of any equipment in the wastewater transportation or treatment systems to ensure continuous treatment of wastewater in accordance with the NPDES permit and other state and federal regulations. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer, which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which cause them to become inoperable, or substantial or permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
Sewage or wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the sewage works. 
Sewage treatment or wastewater treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
Sewage works means all municipal facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Sewer service charge means the sum of any applicable user charges, surcharges and debt service charges. 
Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
Significant industrial user (SIU) means either of the following: 
(1)	A nondomestic user subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR S403 (1992) and 40 CFR Chapter I, subchapter N (1990); or 
(2)	A nondomestic user that, in the opinion of YCUA or of the township, has a reasonable potential to adversely affect the POTW's operation, or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement or that contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant, or that discharge an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW, excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blow down wastewater. Any user designated as significant may petition the township to be deleted from the list of significant industrial users on the grounds that it has no potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
The director may determine that a user that meets the criteria of subsections (1) and (2) of this definition above is not currently a significant industrial user, if the director finds that the user has no reasonable potential to adversely affect the operation of the POTW, to violate any pretreatment standard or requirement, or that a industrial user permit is not required to meet the purposes and objectives of this article. a determination that a user is not a significant industrial user (or that a permit is therefore not required) shall not be binding and may be reversed by the director at any time based on changed circumstances, new information, or as otherwise determined necessary by the director to meet the purposes and objectives of this article. 
Significant noncompliance means any of the following: 
(1)	Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as results of analyses in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed, by any magnitude, a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l); 
(2)	Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as results of analyses in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) multiplied by the applicable technical review criteria. (Technical review criteria equals 1.4 for compatible pollutants and 1.2 for all other pollutants, except pH.); 
(3)	Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l), (daily maximum, longer-term average, instantaneous limits, or narrative standard) that the YCUA determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through, including endangering the health of township or YCUA personnel or the general public; 
(4)	Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare, or the environment or has resulted in the YCUA's exercise of its emergency authority under Rule 323.2306(a)(vi) of the Part 23 Rules under the State Act or its emergency authority under this article to halt or prevent the discharge; 
(5)	Failure to meet, within 90 days after a scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a YCUA or other local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)	Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, a required report such as, but not limited to, a baseline monitoring report, 90-day or other compliance report, periodic self-monitoring report, or report on compliance with a compliance schedule; 
(7)	Failure to timely or accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)	Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of best management practices, that YCUA determines will affect or has adversely affected the operation or implementation of the YCUA pretreatment program or operation of the POTW. 
Slug, slug loading, slug discharge means either: 
(1)	Any discharge of pollutants at a volume or concentration that causes upset of or interference with the POTW or causes the pass-through of pollutants to receiving waters; or 
(2)	Any discharge of a pollutant(s), measured by a grab sample, at a concentration exceeding five times the composite or grab sample discharge limit; or 
(3)	Any discharge of wastewater outside the pH range of five—11 S.U. for either a continuous duration of greater than or equal to 15 minutes or for a sum total of 30 minutes within one day, or 
(4)	Any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or noncustomary batch discharge. 
State means [the] State of Michigan. 
State Act means Public Act 451 of 1994, the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (NREPA), as amended, and any administrative rules promulgated there under, as amended or revised from time to time. 
Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters an drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting there from. 
Surcharge means an extra charge to cover the cost of treating, sampling and testing extra strength sewage. 
Suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
Township means the Charter Township of Ypsilanti, Michigan or its board of trustees. 
Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants, which is or can potentially be harmful to the public health or the environment including those listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the environmental protection agency under the provisions of CWA 307(a) or other acts. 
User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the sewage works. 
User charge means a charge levied on users of a treatment works for the cost of operation and maintenance of sewerage works pursuant to Section 204(b) of PL 92-500 and includes the cost of replacement. 
User class means the kind of user connected to sanitary sewers including, but not limited to, residential, industrial, commercial, institutional and governmental, defined as follows: 
(1)	Residential user means a user of the treatment works whose premises or buildings are used primarily as a domicile for one or more persons, including dwelling units such as detached, semidetached and row houses, mobile homes, apartments, or permanent multifamily dwellings (transient lodging is not included, it is considered commercial); 
(2)	Industrial user means any user who discharges an "industrial waste" as defined in this article or any nondomestic source who discharges pollutants to the sewage works or POTW; 
(3)	Commercial user means an establishment involved in a commercial enterprise, business or service, which, based on a determination by the YCUA discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences and which is not a residential user or an industrial user; 
(4)	Institutional user means any establishment involved in a social, charitable, religious, or educational function which, based on a determination by the YCUA discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences; and 
(5)	Governmental user means any federal, state or local government user of the wastewater treatment works. 
Waters of the state means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-108. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the following meanings: 
ASTM 	American Society for Testing and Materials. 
BMP 	Best management practices. 
BMPP 	Best management practices plan. 
BOD 	Biochemical oxygen demand. 
CFR 	Code of Federal Regulations. 
COD 	Chemical oxygen demand. 
CWA 	Clean Water Act. 
DNRE 	Department of Natural Resources and Environment (State of Michigan). 
EPA 	Environmental Protection Agency. 
FOG 	Fats, oils, and grease. 
l 	Liter. 
MRP 	Mercury reduction plan. 
mg 	Milligrams. 
mg/l 	Milligrams per liter. 
NPDES 	National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
O&M 	Operation and maintenance. 
POTW 	Publicly-owned treatment works. 
SIC 	Standard Industrial Classification. 
SS 	Suspended solids. 
USC 	United States Code. 
WWTP 	The Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority Wastewater Treatment Plant. 
WEF 	Water Environment Federation. 
YCUA 	Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority. 

(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-109. Protection from damage.
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment, which is a part of the sewage works or POTW. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Secs. 62-110—62-120. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
 
Sec. 62-121. Permit or authorization required.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to the waters of the state within the township, or in any area under the jurisdiction of such township and/or to the sewage works, any wastewater except as provided by an NPDES permit and/or as authorized by the township and the YCUA in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-122. Information required prior to connection to system.
All industrial users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the sewage works shall submit information on the use, processes and wastewater to the director before connecting to or contributing to the sewage works. The information submitted must be sufficient for the YCUA to determine the impact of the user's discharge on the sewage works and the need for pretreatment. The user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)	The name, address and location of the user. 
(2)	The SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended and the industrial category subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, 40 CFR, Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Part 403, Appendix C, if applicable. 
(3)	Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those pollutants mentioned in sections 62-177 through 62-187 of this article, when required by the director, as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 (March 26, 2007) as amended from time to time. Where 40 CFR Part 136 (March 26, 2007) does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 (March 26, 2007) sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods of any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the publicly owned treatment works or other parties, approved by the EPA. 
(4)	The time and duration of contribution. 
(5)	The average daily wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any. 
(6)	Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation, if the user is a SIU or as required by the YCUA. 
(7)	A description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials, which are or could be discharged. 
(8)	The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge, which are limited by any YCUA, state, or federal pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required by the industrial user to meet applicable pretreatment standards. 
(9)	If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment shall be provided. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
a.	The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards. 
b.	No increment referred to in subsection (9)a. of this section shall exceed nine months. 
c.	Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the director including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the director. 
(10)	Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production. 
(11)	The type and amount of raw materials processed, average and maximum per day. 
(12)	The number and type of employees, hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system. 
(13)	Any other information as may be deemed by the director to be necessary to evaluate the impact of the discharge on the sewage works. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-123. Reporting required after promulgation or revision of a pretreatment standard and reporting from a new source.
Within 180 days or the promulgation or revision of a categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the final administrative decision made upon a category determination submission under R 323.2311(2) of the Part 23 Rules promulgated under the State Act, whichever is later, existing nondomestic users subject to the categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging, or scheduled to discharge, to the POTW shall submit, to the YCUA, a report that contains all of the information listed in this section. Where reports containing this information already have been submitted to the YCUA or EPA in compliance with the requirements of 40 C.F.R. S128.140(b)(1977), the nondomestic user will not be required to submit the information again. Not less than 90 days before the commencement of a discharge, sources that become nondomestic users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard and new sources shall be required to submit, to the YCUA, a report that contains the information listed in subsections (1) to (5) of this section. New sources shall also be required to include in this report information on the method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. New sources shall give estimates of the information requested in subsections (4) and (5) of this section. All of the following information shall be submitted pursuant to this section: 
(1)	The name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owners. 
(2)	A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)	A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classification of the operation or operations carried out by the nondomestic user. The description shall include a facility drawing and schematic process diagram that indicates points of discharge to the POTW and from which processes the discharges originate. 
(4)	Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW for each of the following: 
a.	Regulated process streams. 
b.	Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula specified in R 323.2311(6). YCUA may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where justified by cost or feasibility considerations. 
(5)	All of the following information shall be provided with respect to the measurement of pollutants: 
a.	The identity of the pretreatment standards, including state or local standards, applicable to each regulated process. 
b.	The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration or mass, where required by the standard or YCUA, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average concentration or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations. 
c.	A minimum of four grab samples shall be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. For all other pollutants, 24-hour composite samples shall be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques. The YCUA may waive flow-proportional composite sampling for any nondomestic user that demonstrates that time-proportional sampling is representative of the discharge during the sampling period. Samples obtained through time-proportional composite sampling techniques or through a minimum of four grab samples may be approved by the director or designee when the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. 
d.	With the exception of the pollutants specified in paragraph c. of this subsection, the user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile the data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection. 
e.	Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if the facilities exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if pretreatment facilities do not exist. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater before pretreatment, the nondomestic user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula specified in R 323.2311(7) to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with R 323.2311(5), the adjusted limit and supporting data shall be submitted to YCUA. 
f.	Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. Part 136 (March 26, 2007). Where 40 C.F.R. Part 136 (March 26, 2007) does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA. determines that the Part 136 (March 26, 2007) sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by YCUA or other parties, approved by the EPA. 
g.	The YCUA may allow the submission of a baseline report that utilizes only historical data if the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures. 
h.	The baseline report shall indicate the time, date, and place of sampling and the methods of analysis and shall certify that the sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW. 
(6)	A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the nondomestic user and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance or additional pretreatment is required for the nondomestic user to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)	If additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the nondomestic user will provide such additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance. The completion date in the schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. All of the following conditions shall apply to compliance schedules: 
a.	The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the nondomestic user to meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standards. The events may include any of the following: (i) the hiring of an engineer; (ii) completing preliminary plans; (iii) completing final plans; (iv) executing contracts for major components; (v) commencing construction; (vi) completing construction; or (vii) other similar major events; 
b.	An increment referred to in this subsection shall not be more than nine months. 
c.	Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the nondomestic user shall submit a progress report to YCUA, including, at a minimum, whether or not the user complied with the increment of progress to be met on a particular date and, if not, the date on which the user expects to comply with the increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the nondomestic user to return the construction to the schedule established. Not more than nine months shall elapse between progress reports to YCUA. 
(8)	Where the nondomestic user's categorical pretreatment standard has been modified by a removal allowance under R 323.2311(7) or a fundamentally different factors variance under R 323.2313(b) at the time the nondomestic user submits the report required by this rule, the information required by subsections (6) and (7) of this section shall pertain to the modified limits. 
(9)	Any changes to information requested under subsections (1) to (5) of this section shall be submitted by the nondomestic user to YCUA within 60 days. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-124. Additional reporting required and periodic report requirements.
(a)	Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction at of wastewater into the sewage works, POTW or the WWTP, any nondomestic user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director and/or YCUA a report containing the information required in subsections (4) through (6), inclusive, of section 62-123 of this article. For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by YCUA in accordance with the procedures in R 323.2311(5) of the Part 23 Rules promulgated under the State Act or otherwise established by the Act or the State Act or rules promulgated there under, the report shall contain a reasonable measure of the nondomestic user's long-term production rate. For all other nondomestic users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production, or other measure of operation, the report shall include the nondomestic user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. 
(b)	The YCUA may impose mass limitations on users, which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases in which the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(c)	All of the following provisions shall apply to periodic reports on continued compliance: 
(1)	Any nondomestic user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard after the compliance date of the pretreatment standard or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the publicly-owned treatment works shall submit, to the YCUA semiannually, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the YCUA, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent that are limited by the categorical pretreatment standards. In addition, the report shall include a record of measured or appropriately estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period for the discharge reported in subsection 62-123(4) of this article, except that YCUA may require more detailed reporting of flows. 
(2)	Where YCUA has imposed mass limitations on nondomestic users as provided for by R 323.2311(5) of the Part 23 Rules promulgated under the State Act or where such limitations are otherwise established by the Act or the State Act or Rules promulgated there under, the report required by subsection (a) immediately above shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the discharge from the nondomestic user. 
(3)	For nondomestic users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the YCUA or under the Act or the State Act or rules promulgated there under, the report required by subsection (a) immediately above shall contain a reasonable measure of the nondomestic user's longterm production rate. For all other nondomestic users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed only in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production, or other measure of operation, the report required by subsection (a) immediately above shall include the nondomestic user's actual average production rate for the reporting period. 
(d)	All categorical and noncategorical nondomestic users shall notify the YCUA immediately of all discharges that could cause problems to the POTW, including any slug loadings. 
(e)	All of the following provisions apply to significant industrial users that are categorical industrial users or noncategorical industrial users in regards to monitoring and analysis to demonstrate continued compliance: 
(1)	The reports required in section 62-123 of this article or in this section shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass where requested by the YCUA, of pollutants contained in the discharge that are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The sampling and analysis may be performed by the YCUA instead of the nondomestic user. Where the YCUA elects to perform the required sampling and analysis instead of the nondomestic user, the nondomestic user will not be required to submit the compliance certification required under subsection 62-123(6) and subsection (a) of this section. In addition, where the YCUA collects all the information required for the report, including flow data, the nondomestic user will not be required to submit the report. The YCUA shall provide, to the nondomestic user, within ten days after the results are available, the results of any sampling the YCUA performs for nondomestic user self-monitoring that show a violation of any pretreatment standard. Any certification required by a categorical pretreatment standard shall be included with the semiannual compliance reports. 
(2)	If sampling performed by a nondomestic user indicates a violation of pretreatment standards, the nondomestic user shall notify the YCUA within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The nondomestic user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the YCUA within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation; however, the nondomestic user is not required to resample if the YCUA performs sampling at the nondomestic user at a frequency of at least once per month or if the YCUA performs sampling at the nondomestic user between the time when the nondomestic user performs its initial sampling and the time when the nondomestic user receives the results of the sampling. 
(3)	The reports required in subsection (c)(3) of this section shall be based upon data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, which data is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. The YCUA may require a frequency of monitoring that is necessary to assess and assure compliance by nondomestic users with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(4)	All analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the E.P.A. pursuant to Section 304(h) of the Clean Water Act and contained in 40 C.F.R. Part 136 (March 26, 2007) or with any other test procedures approved by the E.P.A. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the E.P.A. Where the provisions of 40 C.F.R. Part 136 (March 26, 2007) do not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, or where the E.P.A. determines that the Part 136 (March 26, 2007) sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed using validated analytical methods or any other sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the YCUA or other parties and approved by the E.P.A. 
(5)	If a nondomestic user monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the YCUA using the procedures prescribed in subsection (4) immediately above, the results of the monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(6)	A minimum of one grab samples shall be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. For all other pollutants, 24-hour composite samples shall be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques. The YCUA may waive flow-proportional composite sampling for any nondomestic user that demonstrates that time-proportional sampling is representative of the discharge during the sampling period. Samples obtained through time-proportional composite sampling techniques or through a minimum of four grab samples may be approved by the director or designee when the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. 
(f)	The YCUA may require appropriate reporting from nondomestic users that have discharges, which are not subject to categorical pretreatment standards. Significant industrial users shall submit, to the YCUA, at least semiannually, a description of the nature, concentration, and flow of the pollutants required to be reported by the YCUA. The reports shall be based on sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the report and performed in accordance with the techniques described in 40 C.F.R. Part 136 (March 26, 2007). Where the provisions of 40 C.F.R. Part 136 (March 26, 2007) do not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the E.P.A. determines that the Part 136 (March 26, 2007) sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the YCUA or other persons and approved by the E.P.A. The sampling and analysis may be performed by the YCUA instead of the significant industrial user. Where the YCUA collects all of the information required for the report, the significant industrial user will not be required to submit the report. The YCUA shall provide, to the nondomestic user, within ten days after the results are available, the results of any sampling it performs for nondomestic user self-monitoring that show a violation of any pretreatment standard. Where YCUA performs sampling for a significant industrial user, YCUA must perform any required repeat sampling and analysis within 30 days of becoming aware of a violation. 
(g)	All periodic compliance reports shall be certified and signed by the authorized representative of the industrial user. The authorized representative shall state the following certification when submitting the periodic compliance reports to YCUA: "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquire of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-125. Powers of the YCUA.
Wastewater discharges shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article, the Act and State Act and all other applicable regulations established by the YCUA. The YCUA may: 
(1)	Limit the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
(2)	Limit the average and maximum rate and time of discharge or make requirements for flow regulations and equalization. 
(3)	Require the installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities. 
(4)	Establish specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule. 
(5)	Establish compliance schedules. 
(6)	Require submission of technical reports or discharge reports. 
(7)	Require the maintaining, retaining and furnishing of plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the YCUA, and affording YCUA access thereto, and copying thereof. 
(8)	Require notification of slug discharges and accidental spills. 
(9)	Require other conditions as deemed appropriate by the YCUA to ensure compliance with this article, the Act and the State Act. The YCUA shall require notification of the YCUA for any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-126. Sampling and monitoring facilities may be required.
The YCUA shall, when determined necessary by the director, require to be provided and operated at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with plans and specifications submitted to and approved by the YCUA and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written notification by the YCUA. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-127. Right to access of facilities for inspection, sampling, records examination, record copying or other duties.
The YCUA shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this article is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the YCUA or its representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination, records copying or in the performance of any of their duties. The YCUA, DNRE and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property, at the user's expense, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards or other appropriate personnel so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the YCUA, DNRE and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-128. Compliance with ordinance provisions required.
(a)	Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article, the Act and State Act and shall achieve compliance with all pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations and as required by the YCUA, the Act or the State Act. Any industrial user that qualifies, as a new source is required to have pretreatment equipment installed and operational before discharging and shall be in full compliance within 90 days of initial discharge. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the YCUA shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the YCUA for review, and shall be approved by the YCUA before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the YCUA under the provisions of this article, the Act or the State Act. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the YCUA prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
(b)	As required by Section 403.8(D) (viii) of the Federal Register, the YCUA shall publish at least annually in a newspaper(s) of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdiction(s) served by the POTW of the industrial users, which during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with any applicable pretreatment requirements. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the EPA or DNRE upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-129. Confidentiality of information.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the DNRE and the EPA without restriction and shall be available to the public without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user, in accord with applicable provisions of the State Freedom of Information Act, Public Act 442 of 1976, as amended and Rule 323.2314 of the Part 23 Rules promulgated under the State Act. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-130. Enforcement by township.
All orders, directives, legal and/or equitable actions, which are necessary and appropriate to enforce this article, the Act and State Act shall be carried out by YCUA and/or the township. Nothing contained in this section shall preclude the township or YCUA from instituting, maintaining or joining any legal and/or equitable actions to enforce this article, the Act and State Act. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-131. Records, accounts, audits, classification of users, insurance.
(a)	The YCUA will maintain and keep proper books of records and accounts, separate from all other records and accounts, in which shall be made full and correct entries of all transactions relating to the POTW. The YCUA will cause an annual audit of such books of record and account for the preceding operating year to be made by a recognized independent certified public accountant, and will supply such audit report to authorized public officials on request. 
(b)	In conjunction with the audit there shall be an annual review of the sewer charge system for adequacies meeting expected expenditures for the following year. 
(c)	Classification of old and new industrial users may also be reviewed annually. 
(d)	The YCUA will maintain and carry insurance on all physical properties of the system, of the kinds and in the amounts normally carried by public utility companies and municipalities engaged in the operation of sewage disposal systems. 
(e)	Retention of records. A user shall retain records of all monitoring information, including, all calibration and maintenance records and all original strip chart recordings for continuous monitoring instrumentation, copies of all reports required by this article, an order, or a permit, all documentation associated with best management practices, and the records of all data used to complete the application for a permit, for a period of at least three years from the date of a sample, measurement, report application or orders. This period may be extended by the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-132. Powers and authority of inspectors.
The director and other duly authorized employees of the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article, the Act and State Act. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-133. Enforcement process.
(a)	Emergency suspension. The director may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or any permit issued under this article when such a suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the director, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge that presents or may present an imminent or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons or the environment, the POTW, or constitutes a violation of any condition of a NPDES or other permit, this article, the Act or State Act. Any user notified of a suspension of wastewater treatment services or a permit shall immediately stop or eliminate its discharge into a township or YCUA sanitary sewer. If a user fails to immediately comply with such a suspension order and as required in this section, the YCUA shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate termination or severance of the user's sewer connection to prevent or minimize damage to any person, the POTW or the environment. The YCUA shall allow the user to recommence its discharge upon receipt of proof of compliance with this article and the elimination of the discharge and/or identified danger. A user whose wastewater treatment service or permit has been suspended under this article shall submit, within 15 days of the suspension, a written statement to the director describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent future harmful discharges in addition to other information required by this article or otherwise required by the Act or State Act under such circumstances. 
(b)	Notice letter. The minimum enforcement response that the director or his/her designee will use to notify a user that a violation of the local applicable sewer use ordinance or YCUA industrial pretreatment program has occurred or is occurring. 
(c)	Notification of violation. Whenever the director finds that any user has violated or is violating any provision of this article or a wastewater discharge permit, an order issued under this article, the Act or State Act, the director may serve upon said user written notice of the violation. Within 30 days of receipt of such notice the user shall submit to the director or designee an explanation of the violation and a written plan for satisfactory correction. Submission of this plan does not relieve the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation or as otherwise provided in this article, the Act or State Act. 
(d)	Show cause order. The director may order any user violating this article or the IPP permit, an order issued under this article, the Act, or State Act, to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The show cause notice shall require the user to appear before the director for a show cause meeting within a reasonable time, not less than ten days after first class mailing of the order to the user's recorded or last known address. Enforcement action may be pursued whether or not a user appears at a show cause meeting and issuance of a show cause order does not relieve the user of liability for any violation occurring before or after receipt of the notice or as otherwise provided in this article, the Act, or State Act. 
(e)	Consent order. The director is empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance and other similar documented agreements establishing an agreement with a user responsible for noncompliance with an order, permit, this article, the Act or State Act. Such a document may include compliance schedules, stipulated fines or penalties, the amount of which shall not be limited by the civil fine assessment provision of this article, remedial actions and signatures of the director and user. Consent orders or similar documented agreements prepared and executed under this section shall have the same force and effect as other orders issued under this article. 
(f)	Compliance order. When the director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate this article, a permit, an order issued under this article, the Act or State Act, an order may be issued to the user directing that, following a specified time period, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances have been installed and are properly operated and compliance is otherwise achieved. Such an order may contain other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including, but not limited to, the installation of pre-treatment technology, additional self-monitoring and new management practices. Issuance of a compliance order does not relieve the user of liability for any violation occurring before or after receipt of the notice or as otherwise provided in this article, the Act or State Act. 
(g)	Cease and desist order. When the director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate this article, a permit, an order issued under this article, the Act or State Act, an order may be issued to the user responsible for the violation directing that such violations cease and desist immediately. In an emergency, the order to cease and desist may be given by telephone. In a nonemergency situation, the cease and desist order may be used to suspend or permanently revoke an industrial wastewater discharge permit or permits. A cease and desist order may require the user to take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist order does not relieve the user of liability for any violation occurring before or after receipt of the order or as otherwise provided in this article. 
(h)	Termination of wastewater discharge permit. Any user who has a permit who violates the following conditions of a wastewater discharge permit or violates this article, the Act or State Act or any applicable state or federal law or regulation is subject to permit termination: 
(1)	Failure to accurately report wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(2)	Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)	Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises or records for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling or for any other purpose permitted under this article, the Act or State Act; 
(4)	Failure to comply with an order issued under this article; or 
(5)	For those reasons stated in section 62-138 or for any other reason permitting such termination as provided in this article, the Act or State Act. 
Such users shall be notified of the proposed permit termination and shall be offered an opportunity to show cause under the provision of subsection (d) of this section, why the proposed action should not be taken. 
(i)	Administrative assessments. Notwithstanding any other section of this article, any user who violates any provision of this article, a permit, an order issued under this article, the Act or State Act, shall be liable to the YCUA and/or township for any expense loss or damage occasioned by reason of such violation including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney's fees and may be subject to an administrative assessment by the YCUA in an amount of $1,000.00 per violation, per day. Each day on which noncompliance shall occur or is continued shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. Such expense, loss, damage or assessments may be added to a user's sewer service charges and the YCUA and the township shall have such other collection rights and remedies as designated by law, the Act, the State Act and this article to collect these sewer service charges. 
(j)	Judicial remedies. A person who violates any provision of this article, a permit, an order issued under this article, the Act or State Act, is subject to the judicial remedies described below in addition to being responsible for a civil fine assessment or a misdemeanor or any administrative remedy or enforcement action provided for in this article: 
(1)	Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, a permit, an order issued under this article, the Act or the State Act, the director, through counsel, may petition the circuit court for issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction or both to restrain or compel certain activities on the part of the user. 
(2)	Any user who has violated or continues to violate any order or permit issued hereunder may be liable to the YCUA in such judicial proceedings for a civil fine assessment of $1,000.00, plus actual damages, direct or indirect, incurred by the YCUA, per violation, per day, for as long as the violation continues. Additionally, the YCUA may recover reasonable attorney's fees; court costs and other expenses associated with any enforcement activities, including sampling, monitoring and analysis expenses. 
(3)	The director, through counsel, may petition the circuit court to impose, assess, and recover such assessments and sums. In determining the amount of liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude or duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained by the user through the violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user and any other relevant factor. 
(k)	Liens. Any fine or other assessment issued or imposed under this article or other costs or charges imposed under this article may be added to the user's sewer service charges and the YCUA shall have such other collection rights and remedies as designated by law and this article to collect said charges and all unpaid charges, fines, assessments, penalties and service charges shall constitute and may be recorded as a lien against the user's property if not paid within the time frame allocated by YCUA or a court for payment. 
(l)	Appeals. Any person or user subject to enforcement action under the provisions of this article, the Act or State Act, except for civil fine assessment notices, consent orders, emergency actions under this article or judicial actions by YCUA, may request a hearing before the director within ten days of receipt of notification of the proposed enforcement action. A hearing shall then be held by the director concerning the violation, the reasons why the enforcement action has been taken, the proposed enforcement action, and the user's explanation or other relevant evidence. An appeal may be taken from the director's final decision. The following rules shall apply to the hearing and appeal: 
(1)	The director may issue notices of such a hearing requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses or the production of evidence relative to the hearing. 
(2)	In the event a request for hearing is not filed within ten days of the user's notice of an enforcement action, failure to file such a request shall be deemed a waiver of any and all hearing or appeal rights established under this article. 
(3)	A request for hearing shall state the basis for the request, the reasons in support of the request and any alternative relief, which the aggrieved party seeks. 
(4)	During the pendency of any hearing process or appeal the user must comply with the enforcement action or YCUA order from which the appeal is taken. 
(5)	At the hearing, testimony may be taken under oath and recorded stenographically. A transcript of the hearing shall be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of usual and reasonable charges. 
(6)	After the director has held such a hearing and reviewed the evidence, he may issue an order affirming, modifying or withdrawing the enforcement action. 
(7)	Within 15 days from receipt of the director's final decision, the aggrieved party may appeal the decision to the board stating the grounds on which the appeal is based together with all documents, evidence, transcripts and information in support of the aggrieved party's position. In addition, the aggrieved party shall file five copies of the appeal and supporting documentation with the board and serve an additional copy on the director. 
(8)	The director shall have 30 days to respond to the appeal and to submit all evidence, documents and information in support of the director's decision and shall file five copies with the board and shall serve an additional copy on the aggrieved party. 
(9)	Within 30 days of receiving the director's response the board shall meet and review all documents and evidence pertaining to the appeal and shall issue an order affirming the director's order, affirming the director's order in part and reversing in part, or reversing the director's order in full. The board shall forward a copy of its decision to all interested parties. 
(m)	Industrial pretreatment program (IPP) and enforcement response plan (ERP). This article, the Act and State Act shall also be enforced by the YCUA pursuant to a written industrial pretreatment program adopted by YCUA as required by the Act and State Act which plan shall include those plan elements required by the Act and State Act including, but not limited to, an enforcement response plan designed to achieve enforcement of that program. That enforcement response plan shall provide for, at minimum, those powers of enforcement granted by this article, the Act and State Act. 
(n)	Time limits. YCUA's failure to strictly comply with and/or to meet an enforcement procedure time deadline or other time deadline specified in this article, the Act, State Act, or the enforcement response plan, shall not prohibit or prevent YCUA from taking enforcement or other action outside of or not in compliance with such a time deadline, unless the user or permitee in question has been and is able to demonstrate that it has been materially prejudiced by action taken by YCUA outside of or not in compliance with such a time deadline. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-134. Same—Surcharges, fees.
The director shall also establish appropriate surcharges or fees to reimburse the YCUA for the additional cost of operation and maintenance of the sewage works or POTW due to the violations of this article, the Act or State Act. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-135. Permit—Requirements for nondomestic users.
(a)	All nondomestic users must notify the director of the nature and characteristics of their wastewater prior to commencing their discharge. The director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for significant industrial users to discharge wastewater, either directly or indirectly, into the sewage works or POTW without first obtaining an industrial user pretreatment permit from the YCUA. Any violation of the terms and conditions of an industrial user pretreatment permit shall be deemed a violation of this article. Obtaining an industrial user pretreatment permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to obtain other permits required by federal, state or local law. 
(c)	The director may require that other industrial users, including liquid waste haulers, obtain industrial user pretreatment permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(d)	Any industrial user located beyond the township limits shall submit a permit application within 60 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. New industrial users located beyond the township limits shall submit such applications to the director 60 days prior to discharging into the sewage works or POTW. Upon review and approval of such application, the director may enter into a contract with the user, which requires the user to subject itself to, and abide by this article, including all permitting, compliance monitoring, reporting, and enforcement provisions contained in this article, the Act or State Act. 
(e)	Any significant industrial user which discharges nondomestic waste into the sewage works or POTW prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 90 days after such date, apply to the YCUA for an industrial user pretreatment permit and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 180 days from and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived except in accordance with a permit issued by the director. 
(f)	Any significant industrial user proposing to begin or recommence discharging nondomestic wastes into the sewage works or POTW must obtain a pretreatment permit prior to beginning or recommencing such discharge. An application for this permit must be filed at least 60 days prior to the anticipated start-up date. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-136. Same—Application.
(a)	In order to be considered for a pretreatment permit, all industrial users required to have a permit must submit the information required by section 62-122 on an application form approved by the director. 
(b)	When required, plans must be certified for accuracy by a state-registered professional engineer. 
(c)	All applications must contain the following certification statement and be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user: "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(d)	The director will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and may require additional information. After evaluation of the data furnished, the director may issue an industrial user pretreatment permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein. 
(e)	At the time an application for a permit is made, the user shall pay to YCUA a permit fee in an amount established from time to time by the board, which fee shall be refunded to the user in the event the permit is denied. In addition to the above-stated permit fee, the user shall pay to YCUA a nonrefundable permit application fee equal to YCUA's expenses, and YCUA expenses incurred in hiring laboratories, engineers, or other consultants, for the purpose of evaluating the permit application submitted by the user to YCUA. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-137. Same—Contents.
Pretreatment permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by the director to prevent pass-through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the POTW's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate POTW sludge management and disposal, protect ambient air quality, and protect against damage to the POTW collection system or plant and ensure compliance with this article, the Act and State Act. Permits shall contain a statement of the duration of the permit, which shall not be more than five years; a statement of permit nontransfer ability without prior notification to the YCUA and provision of a copy of the existing permit to the new owner or operator; effluent limits based on applicable general pretreatment standards, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and local law; self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record keeping requirements, including identification of the pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type, based on the applicable general pretreatment standards, categorical pretreatment standards, local limit, and state and local law; and a statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements and any applicable compliance schedule. The schedule may not extend the compliance date beyond applicable federal or state deadlines. Permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following: 
(1)	Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization. 
(2)	Limits on the average and/or maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater constituents or properties. 
(3)	Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology or construction of appropriate containment devices, or similar requirements designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sewage works or POTW. 
(4)	Development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including additional management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routing discharges. 
(5)	The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the sewage works or POTW. 
(6)	Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities. 
(7)	Specifications for monitoring programs, which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests, and reporting schedules. 
(8)	Compliance schedules. 
(9)	Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports. 
(10)	Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the director and affording the director, or his representatives, access thereto. 
(11)	Requirements for notification of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or of any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater being introduced in the sewage works or POTW. 
(12)	Requirements for the notification of any change in the manufacturing and/or pretreatment process used by the permittee. 
(13)	Requirements for notification to YCUA of excessive, accidental, or slug discharges. 
(14)	Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this article and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations, including the Act and State Act. 
(15)	A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal, state or local pretreatment standards or limits, including those which become effective during the term of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-138. Same—Issuance process.
(a)	Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the director. 
(b)	The director will provide all interested persons with notice of final permit terms. Upon notice by the director, any person, including the industrial user, may petition to appeal the terms of the permit within 30 days of the notice. 
(1)	Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the appeal. 
(2)	In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to be placed in the permit. 
(3)	The effectiveness of the permit shall not be stayed pending a reconsideration by the board. If, after considering the petition and any arguments put forth by the director, the board determines that reconsideration is proper, it shall remand the permit back to the director for reissuance. Those permit provisions being reconsidered by the director shall be stayed pending reissuance. 
(4)	A board's decision not to reconsider a final permit shall be considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial review. 
(c)	The director may modify or terminate the permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)	To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(2)	Material or substantial alterations or additions to the discharger's operation processes, or discharge volume or character which were not considered in drafting the effective permit. 
(3)	A change in any condition in either the industrial user or the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge. 
(4)	Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the sewage works or POTW or POTW personnel or the receiving waters. 
(5)	Violation of any terms or conditions of the permit. 
(6)	Misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in the permit application or in any required reporting. 
(7)	Revision of or a grant of variance from such categorical standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13. 
(8)	To correct typographical or other errors in the permit. 
(9)	To reflect transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator. 
(10)	Upon request of the permittee, provided such request does not create a violation of any applicable requirements, standards, laws, or rules and regulations. 
(11)	Falsifying self-monitoring reports. 
(12)	Tampering with monitoring equipment. 
(13)	Refusing to allow timely access to the facility premises and records. 
(14)	Failure to meet effluent limitations. 
(15)	Failure to pay fines. 
(16)	Failure to pay sewer charges. 
(17)	Failure to meet compliance schedules. 
(18)	As provided in section 62-133. 
(d)	The filing of a request by the permittee for a permit modification, revocation and reissuance, or termination, or a notification of planned changes or anticipated noncompliance, does not stay any permit condition. 
(e)	Permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator with prior approval of the director, if: 
(1)	The permittee must give at least 30 days' advance notice to the director; and 
(2)	The notice must include a written certification by the new owner which: 
a.	States that the new owner has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes. 
b.	Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur. 
c.	Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing permit. 
(f)	The user shall apply for permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. An expired permit will continue to be effective and enforceable until the permit is reissued, if: 
(1)	The industrial user has submitted a complete permit application at least 90 days prior to the expiration date of the user's existing permit; and 
(2)	The failure to reissue the permit, prior to expiration of the previous permit, is not due to any act or failure to act on the part of the industrial user. 
(g)	Nothing in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the POTW and any user whereby wastewater of unusual strength or character is accepted into the POTW and specially treated and subject to any payments or user charges, as may be applicable. However, no discharge which violates pretreatment standards will be allowed under the terms of such special agreements. If, in the opinion of the director, the wastewater may have the potential to cause or result in any of the following circumstances, no such special agreement will be made: 
(1)	Pass through or interference; or 
(2)	Endanger municipal employees or the public. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-139. Penalty for violation of article; liability of user.
(a)	Any person who violates any provision of this article, a permit, an order issued under this article, the Act or State Act, shall become liable to the township for and may be subject to a civil fine assessment of $1,000.00 per violation, per day, plus any costs, damages and expenses, direct or indirect, incurred by the township or YCUA in connection with the violation. Each day on which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. 
(b)	Any person who violates any provision of this article that is listed below shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction is subject to a fine of not more than $500.00, exclusive of any civil fine assessment or other costs, damages and expenses, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both. Misdemeanor violations include: 
(1)	Intentional unpermitted discharge; 
(2)	Falsification of a monitoring report or the making of any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article; 
(3)	Improper sampling, with evidence of an intent to falsify or mislead; 
(4)	Intentional failure to install monitoring equipment after a deadline established by an order issued under this article or the tampering with or knowingly rendering inaccurate any monitoring device or equipment or method required under this article; 
(5)	Intentional recurring violation of a compliance schedule in a permit or a violation of a compliance schedule in an order issued under this article; or 
(6)	Illegal discharge when the discharge causes harm and there is evidence of intent. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-140. Funding/fees.
(a)	The purpose of this section is to provide for the recovery of costs from Users of the POTW. The applicable charges or fees established by the board shall be sufficient to meet the costs of the operation, maintenance, improvement or replacement of the system, or as provided by law or by board action. 
(b)	The board shall adopt charges and fees which shall include, but not necessarily limited to: 
(1)	Fees for reimbursement of costs of establishing, operating, maintaining, or improving the YCUA's industrial pretreatment programs; and enforcement response plan. 
(2)	User fees based upon volume of waste and concentration or quantity of specific pollutants in a discharge, and to cover other treatment costs including sludge handling and disposal; and 
(3)	Reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs for enforcement hearings or other enforcement action including, but not limited to, expenses regarding hearings officers, court reporters, and transcriptions; and 
(4)	Other fees, which the board may deem necessary, to carry out the requirements contained herein and continued in other IPP and ERP, or as may be required by law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Secs. 62-141—62-155. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
 
Sec. 62-156. Permit required.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof or any part of the sewage works or POTW without first obtaining a written permit from the director. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-157. Classes of permits; application; fees.
There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)	For residential and commercial service; and 
(2)	For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the township or YCUA. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent, in the judgment of the township or YCUA. A permit and inspection fee for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the township at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-158. Costs of connection to be borne by owner; indemnification of township and YCUA.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the township and the YCUA from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-159. Separate building sewer for each building required; exception.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-160. Use of old building sewers with new buildings.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the township or YCUA, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-161. Construction specifications.
The size, slope, alignment, and materials of construction of a building sewer; and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the township or YCUA. In the absence of the Code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WEF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-162. Elevation.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-163. Prohibited connections.
(a)	No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which, in turn, is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer or combined sewer. 
(b)	The YCUA shall not allow any connection to the sanitary sewer unless there is sufficient capacity in the sewage works to convey and adequately treat the additional wastewater from the proposed connection. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-164. Connection specifications.
(a)	The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules land regulations of the YCUA or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WEF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. 
(b)	Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the YCUA before installation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-165. Inspection; supervision of connection.
The contractor installing the building sewer shall notify the YCUA when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of YCUA. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-166. Guards for excavations; restoration of public property.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the township and YCUA. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Secs. 62-167—62-175. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 4. USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
 
Sec. 62-176. Required.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the township, or in any area under its jurisdiction, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted water, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this article. 
(c)	Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(d)	The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose situated within the township and abutting on any street, alley or right-of way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer or combined sewer of the township, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable sewage facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so provided that such public sewer is within 200 feet of the property line. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-177. Unpolluted discharges.
(a)	No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, water from footing drains, roof water, or other unpolluted water to any sanitary sewer or sewer connection except as otherwise provided in this article. Any premises connected to a storm sewer shall comply with county, state and federal requirements as well as those by the township and the YCUA. 
(b)	Stormwater, groundwater, water from footing drains and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged into such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers, or to a natural outlet, except as otherwise provided in this article. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged upon application and approval of the YCUA and the appropriate state agency to a storm sewer, or natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-178. Fats, oils, and grease (FOG) interceptor and sand interceptors.
Fats, oils, and grease (FOG) and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing fats, oils, or grease discharges in which the concentration in a grab sample exceeds the 100 mg/l limit, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for single-family or multiple-family dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted into place shall be gastight and watertight. When installed, all fats, oils, and grease, and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. A user may petition the director for an exemption from having to install a fats, oils, and grease (FOG) interceptor in accordance with provisions specified in the YCUA FOG mitigation program policy, as amended from time to time. Upon approval by the director, YCUA's contract communities that have a fats, oils, and grease ordinance/policy can implement said ordinance/policy in lieu of this section and the YCUA fats, oils, and grease mitigation program policy. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-179. Prohibited discharges.
No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will pass through or interfere with the operation or performance of the sewage works. 
A user may not contribute the following substances to the sewage works: 
(1)	Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the sewage works or to the operation of the sewage works. 
(2)	Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities. 
(3)	Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or greater than 11.0; or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel of the sewage works. 
(4)	Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants or of high chlorine demand in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the sewage works, or exceed the limitation set forth in the EPA categorical pretreatment standard, or any other federal, state or county standards. 
(5)	Pollutants that result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause worker health and safety problems. This prohibition includes, but is not limited to, wastewaters which contain liquids, solids, or gases that cause gases, vapors, or fumes from the discharge to exceed ten percent of the immediately dangerous to life and health (IDLH) concentration. Discharges which contain more than one pollutant which may contribute to fume toxicity shall be subject to more restrictive limitations, as determined necessary by the director. The more restrictive discharge limits shall be calculated based on the additive fume toxicity of all compounds identified or reasonably expected to be present in the discharge. 
(6)	Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(7)	Any substance, which may cause the sewage, works such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for land application or reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. 
(8)	Any substance, which will cause the sewage, works to violate its NPDES permit or the receiving water quality standards. 
(9)	Any wastewater with color of sufficient light absorbency to interfere with treatment plant process, prevent analytical determinations, or create any aesthetic effect on the treatment plant effluent, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(10)	Daily maximum concentration or mass loading shall not be exceeded on any single calendar day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetical measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged during the day. If a composite sample is required for a parameter, the determination whether the daily maximum limitation for that parameter has been exceeded on a single calendar day shall be based on the composite sample collected for that parameter on that calendar day. If grab samples are required for a parameter, the determination whether the daily maximum limitation for that parameter has been exceeded on a calendar day shall be based on the average of all grab samples collected for that parameter on that calendar day. If only one grab sample is collected for a parameter on a given day, the determination whether the daily maximum limitation for that parameter has been exceeded for the day shall be based on the results of that single grab sample. If the pollutant concentration in any sample is less than the applicable detection limit, that value shall be regarded as zero when calculating the daily maximum concentration. 
(11)	Any wastewater having a temperature, which will inhibit biological activity in the sewage, works resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the sewage works, which exceeds 60 degrees Celsius (140 degrees Fahrenheit) or is lower than zero degrees Celsius (32 degrees Fahrenheit). 
(12)	Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by applicable state or federal regulations. 
(13)	Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance. 
(14)	Organic solvent extractable substances such as fats, wax, grease, or oils of petroleum origin, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit (zero degrees Celsius) and 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius). 
(15)	Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases; or other pollutants which cause the wastewater to have a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius), or which cause an exceedance of ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) at any point within the collection system or containing gasoline, benzene, xylene or toluene which causes the wastewater to exceed the state surface water quality standard. 
(16)	Any garbage that has not been ground by household type or other suitable garbage grinders. 
(17)	Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch, manure or any other solids or viscous substances capable of causing obstructions or other interferences with the proper operation of the sewer system. 
(18)	Toxic or poisonous substances in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, or to constitute hazards to humans or animals, or to create any hazard in waters which receive the POTW effluent, which shall include, but are not limited to, wastes containing cyanide, chromium, cadmium, mercury, copper, and nickel ions. 
(19)	Solids of such character and quantity that special and unusual attention is required for their handling. 
(20)	Any substance which would cause the treatment plant to be in noncompliance with sludge use, recycle or disposal criteria pursuant to guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Federal Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or other regulations or criteria for sludge management and disposal as required by the state. 
(21)	Any medical or infectious wastes prohibited from being discharged under federal or state law and regulations. 
(22)	Material considered a hazardous waste under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). 
(23)	Any commercial or industrial waste that may cause pass-through of pollutants or interference with the wastewater treatment plant operations or that violates federal, state, or local restrictions. 
(24)	Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD etc.) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the POTW. 
(25)	Trucked and hauled waste, except at discharge points designated by the POTW. 
(26)	Pollutants causing toxic gases, vapors, and fumes. 
(27)	Any leachate from a hazardous waste landfill. 
(28)	Any landfill leachate unless permitted and authorized under a written contract, within YCUA's sole discretion, between YCUA and the user. 
(29)	Any pollutant discharge which constitutes a slug. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-180. Promulgation of more stringent standards.
Upon the promulgation of the national categorical pretreatment standards, alternative discharge limits, or other federal or state limitations, for a particular industrial subcategory, the pretreatment standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article and shall be considered part of the article. The YCUA shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-181. Prohibited concentrations of certain pollutants and mercury reduction plan.
(1)	No person shall discharge wastewater such that the concentration of pollutants in one grab sample exceeds the following limits for oil and grease or pH: 
100 mg/l oil and grease 
< 5 or > 11 standard units pH 
1.0 mg/l 	Total cyanides 
1.0 mg/l 	Total phenolic compounds 

(2)	No person shall discharge wastewater such that the concentration of pollutants contained in a representative composite sample is at or above the following surcharge threshold, except as otherwise permitted in writing by the director and on payment of a surcharge fee, and no person shall discharge wastewater such that the concentration of pollutants contained in a representative composite sample exceeds the following upper limits, with respect to the following compatible pollutants: 
Compatibles
Surcharge Threshold 	Upper Limits 	
300 mg/1 	1000 mg/l 	5-day BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) 
350 mg/l 	2500 mg/l 	Total SS (suspended solids) 
600 mg/l 	2000 mg/l 	COD (chemical oxygen demand) 
 15 mg/l 	  75 mg/l 	Total phosphorus 
 30 mg/l 	 700 mg/l 	Ammonia-nitrogen 

(3)	No person shall discharge wastewater such that the concentration of pollutants contained in a representative composite sample shall exceed the following limits with respect to the following inorganic or organic pollutants or phenolic compounds: 
Inorganics
1.0 mg/l 	Arsenic 
0.002 mg/l 	Beryllium 
0.50 mg/l 	Cadmium 
4.0 mg/l 	Chromium (total) 
3.0 mg/l 	Copper 
0.3 mg/l 	Lead 
Nondetectable 	Mercury 
3.0 mg/l 	Nickel 
0.15 mg/l 	Silver 
3.0 mg/l 	Zinc 

Organics
Nondetectable polychlorinated biphenyls (nondetectable per U.S. EPA Method 608. Any detectable sample exceeds this limit). The local discharge limitation for polychlorinated biphenyls is established at the level of detection in accordance with the following: 
There shall be no detectable amounts of polychlorinated biphenyls discharged to a township or YCUA sanitary sewer. Polychlorinated biphenyls sampling procedures, preservation and handling, and analytical protocol for compliance monitoring shall be in accordance with EPA Method 608. The level of detection, developed in accordance with the procedure specified in 40 CFR 136, shall not exceed 0.2 ug/L for polychlorinated biphenyls, unless higher levels are appropriate due to matrix interference. 
(4)	The total phenols limit is based on the discharge of any or all of the following phenolic compounds: 2 - Chlorophenol, 4 - Chlorophenol, 2, 4 - Dichlorophenol, 2, 4 - Dimethylphenol, 2, 4 - Dinitrophenol, 2 - Methyphenol, 3 - Methylphenol, 4 - Methylphenol, 2 - Nitrophenol, 4 - Nitrophenol, and Phenol. Discharge of other phenolic compounds is prohibited except as specifically authorized by the director. 
(5)	The director shall annually review the quantities of industrial pollutants listed above which are discharged or proposed to be discharged to the sewage works. The director shall recommend any revisions to these limits necessary to insure that the NPDES permit, Federal Pretreatment Standards and water resources limits are met and to insure that the industrial discharge will not interfere with the treatment process of sludge disposal. At such time as the previously cited limits are changed by the township or YCUA, the unit authorizing such change shall notify the remaining units of such change. 
(6)	The local discharge limitation for mercury is established at the level of detection in accordance with the following: 
(a)	There shall be no detectable amounts of mercury discharged to a township or YCUA sanitary sewer. Mercury sampling procedures, preservation and handling, and analytical protocol for compliance monitoring shall be in accordance with EPA Method 245.1. The level of detection, developed in accordance with the procedure specified in 40 CFR 136, shall not exceed 0.2 ug/L for mercury, unless higher levels are appropriate due to matrix interference. 
(b)	The evaluation of potential matrix interference(s) shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
i.	A demonstration that the laboratory conducting the analysis is capable of achieving the level of detection of 0.2 ug/L in reagent water; 
ii.	A demonstration that the level of detection of 0.2 ug/L cannot be achieved in the effluent; and 
iii.	A demonstration that an attempt has been made to resolve the matrix interference(s). 
(c)	In cases where true matrix interference(s) can be demonstrated, a discharge-specific level of detection will be developed in accordance with the procedure in 40 CFR 136. Discharge specific levels of detection will be incorporated into the wastewater discharge permit of the nondomestic user. 
(d)	To ensure that the maximum allowable mercury loading to the POTW is not exceeded, YCUA may require any nondomestic user with a reasonable potential to discharge mercury to develop, submit for approval and implement a mercury reduction plan (MRP). The MRP may be required by permit if the nondomestic user has not violated the local limit for mercury, but YCUA has determined that a reasonable potential for such violation may exist. MRPs may be required in notices of violations, orders or other enforcement actions when the nondomestic user has violated the mercury local limit. 
At a minimum, an approvable MRP shall contain the following: 
i.	A written commitment by the nondomestic user to reduce all nondomestic discharges of mercury to levels below the level of detection within three years of the MRP's original approval date; 
ii.	Within 60 days of notification by YCUA that a MRP is required, the nondomestic user shall supply an initial identification of all potential sources of mercury which could be discharged to the sanitary sewer system; 
iii.	Specific strategies for mercury reduction with reasonable time frames for implementation, capable of ensuring that mercury discharges will be below the specified level of detection within three years; 
iv.	A program for quarterly sampling and analysis of the nondomestic discharge for mercury in accordance with EPA Method 245.1; 
v.	A demonstration of specific, measurable and/or otherwise quantifiable mercury reductions consistent with the goal of reducing mercury discharges below the specified level of detection. Where such reductions cannot be demonstrated through normal effluent monitoring (e.g., mercury discharges are already near level of detection), the demonstration should incorporate the following: 
a.	Internal process monitoring, documenting the results of mercury reduction strategies at sampling locations within the facility (e.g., a program of regular monitoring of sink traps where mercury containing reagents had previously been disposed, but have since been substituted by non-Mercury containing compounds). 
b.	Internal and/or effluent sampling utilizing clean and/or ultra-clean sampling and analytical methods as referenced by EPA Federal Register. The results of such monitoring will not be used for compliance purposes unless performed in accordance with EPA Method 245.1 and collected at the appropriate compliance measurement location. 
c.	Loading calculations wherein the nondomestic user calculates the total mass of mercury reduced from the sanitary sewer discharge through reagent substitutions, changes in disposal practices and/or other approved MRP strategies implemented. 
vi.	A semi-annual report on the status of the mercury reduction efforts. At a minimum, these reports shall: Identify compliance or noncompliance with specific reduction commitments in the MRP; summarize the analytical, mass-based or other quantifiable demonstrations of mercury reductions performed to date; provide all applicable analytical data; provide an evaluation of effectiveness of actions taken to date; provide updates to the initial list of mercury containing compounds discharged to the sanitary sewer and propose for approval new strategies and/or modifications to the current MRP to continue and improve mercury reduction efforts; and 
vii.	Any other conditions that YCUA deems necessary to ensure that mercury-reduction efforts are effective in achieving the goals of this section. 
(e)	Failure to submit an approvable MRP within 30 days of the required due date shall constitute significant noncompliance in accordance with this section, and will result in publication as a significant violator. 
(f)	A MRP may be evaluated for adequacy at any time by YCUA. If such an evaluation determines that the mercury reduction plan is in adequate or the nondomestic user has not complied with its approved MRP, the nondomestic user will be notified. Failure to comply with the MRP requirement constitutes noncompliance. YCUA will follow its enforcement response plan (ERP) to ensure that corrective actions are taken. 
(g)	A nondomestic user may request a release from MRP requirements if all samples of the discharge for a period of one year are less than the specified level of detection; the nondomestic user has complied with the minimum monitoring frequency of quarterly sampling events; and YCUA deems that MRP commitments have been fulfilled sufficiently to ensure continued compliance with the mercury limitation. YCUA shall notify the nondomestic user of any release from MRP requirements in writing. 
(h)	If the MRP requirement is waived by YCUA, the nondomestic user remains subject to the local limitation for mercury in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(i)	Rediscovery of mercury in the nondomestic user discharge subjects said user to the submission of a new MRP, or escalation of enforcement in accordance with the ERP. 
(7)	Implementation of best management practices or best management practices plan. 
(a)	The director may require any user to develop and implement best management practices (BMP) to control, contain, treat, prevent, or reduce the discharge of wastewater, pollutants, or other substances from the user's premises to the POTW, as determined necessary by the director. 
(b)	In addition, the director may require a user to develop and submit a best management practices plan ("BMPP"), including an enforceable implementation schedule, for review and approval by the director. The BMPP shall be submitted within 30 days after notification by the director or as otherwise required by a user permit. The BMPP shall be directed at preventing the entrance of pollutants, directly or indirectly, into the POTW . The BMPP shall be available for inspection at all times at the user's premises. At a minimum, a user's BMPP shall contain all of the following elements, as determined necessary by the director, at a level of detail and in units and terms as determined necessary by the director to adequately evaluate the plan: 
i.	A statement of the purpose and objectives of the plan. 
ii.	A description of the strategies, methods, policies and procedures to prevent, minimize or reduce the introduction of pollutants into the user's discharge and to minimize waste generation. 
iii.	A description of the options available to the user to control accidental spillage, leaks and drainage. 
iv.	A description of best available or practicable control technologies available for the user's specific circumstances. 
v.	A detailed facility layout and site diagram showing points of entry into the (POTWs). 
vi.	A description of the waste handling, treatment and discharge disposal facilities, including flow diagrams and process schematics. 
vii.	A description of operating and maintenance processes and procedures. 
viii.	An inventory of raw materials and a list of waste sources, including a list of all chemicals used or stored at the facility. 
ix.	A description of employee training programs, policies and procedures; continuing education programs; and participation. 
x.	A description of the user's documentation, including record keeping and forms. 
xi.	A description of monitoring activities. 
xii.	An information log of facility personnel, organization chart, emergency phone numbers, contact persons and maintenance or service representatives. 
xiii.	A certification by a qualified professional that the plan is adequate to prevent spills, leaks, slug loads, or noncustomary discharges of regulated substances, directly or indirectly, to the POTW. 
xiv.	Such other information, documents or diagrams as required by the director, including, but not limited to, any of the information required under this article, the Act, or State Law. 
(c)	The BMPs or BMPP required of a user or approved for a user shall be incorporated in a user permit issued to the user. If the user already has a user permit, the existing permit shall be modified to incorporate the BMP requirements. If the user does not currently have a user permit, a permit shall be issued for that purpose. 
(d)	The director may require revisions to a user's BMPP if the director determines that the plan contains elements that are inadequate, or as otherwise determined necessary by the director to ensure compliance with applicable requirements of this article, the Act or State Law. Review of a BMPP by the director shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to comply with this article, the Act or State Law. 
(e)	The user reports to the director must include best management practices compliance information. The user reports must be certified and signed by the user's authorized representative. 
(f)	The user shall retain all documentation associated with best management practices for a period of at least three years from the date of an activity associated with the practices. This period may be extended by the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-182. Sampling, measurements, tests and analyses.
Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 (March 26, 2007). Where 40 CFR Part 136 (March 26, 2007) does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 (March 26, 2007) sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by YCUA or other parties, approved by the EPA. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-183. Surcharge for discharges of unusual strength.
(a)	If the character of the wastewater from any manufacturing or industrial plant or any other building or premises exceeds the limits for compatible pollutants established in section 62-181 or shall be such as to impose any unreasonable burden upon the sewers of the system or upon the sewage works or POTW in excess of a maximum limit prescribed in this article, then an additional charge shall be made over and above the regular rates, or the director shall require that such sewage be treated by the person, firm or corporation responsible for the sewage being emptied into the sewer or the right to empty such sewage shall be denied, if necessary, to protect the system or any part thereof. Surcharges required shall be computed as the weight of excess compatible pollutant in pounds multiplied by the cost per pound specified in the applicable township rate ordinance. The strength of such wastes shall be determined by composite samples taken over a sufficient period of time to insure a representative sample. The cost of sampling and testing shall be borne by the industry or establishment, whether owner or lessee. Tests shall be made by the user, at an independent laboratory, or at the YCUA wastewater treatment plant. 
(b)	Any wastewater discharged into the sewage works having a compatible pollutant in excess of those prescribed in section 62-181 may be permitted by the director provided payment by the industrial concern for the full cost of treating such excess constituents in the wastewater is made and acceptance of the waste does not cause violation of EPA guidelines, NPDES requirements, the Act or State Act. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-184. Special agreements authorized.
With respect to compatible pollutants only, no statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any agreement between the director and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted, subject to payment therefore by the industrial concern, provided such agreement shall not violate EPA guidelines or NPDES requirements and provided user charges and surcharges as provided in this article are agreed to in the agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-185. Dilution of discharge.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards, alternative discharge limits, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the YCUA or the state. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-186. Accidental discharges.
(a)	Where required, a user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article, the Act or State Act. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the director for review, and shall be approved by the director before construction of the facility. All required users shall complete such a program within 90 days of notification by the director. If required by the director a user who commences contribution to the sewage works after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives shall not be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the director. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article, the Act or State Act. In the case of any discharge, whether accidental or not, that could cause problems to the YCUA, the WWTP or POTW, including any slug loadings by the user, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the YCUA of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. 
(b)	Within five days following any discharge, whether accidental or not, that could cause problems to the YCUA, the WWTP or POTW, including any slug loadings by the user, the user shall submit to the director a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the sewage works or POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article, the Act or State Act, or other applicable law. Failure to file a report shall be a separate violation of this article. 
(c)	Slug control plan. 
(1)	Each significant industrial user shall prepare and implement an individualized slug control plan when in the opinion of the director a slug control is required. Existing significant industrial users that do not have a YCUA-approved slug control plan shall provide an approvable slug control plan to the director within 90 days of being notified by YCUA that a slug control plan is required. New sources that are significant industrial users shall submit a slug control plan to the director for approval before beginning to discharge. Upon written notice from the director, users that are not significant industrial users may also be required to prepare and implement a slug control plan, and the plan shall be submitted to the director for approval as specified in the notice. Slug control requirements must be included in the SIU control mechanism (industrial user's permit). 
(2)	All slug control plans shall contain at least the following elements: 
a.	A description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
b.	A description of stored chemicals; 
c.	The procedures for immediately notifying the director of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate any discharge prohibition, limitation or requirement under this article, and procedures for follow-up written notification within five days of the discharge; 
d.	The procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(3)	If a user has submitted to the director plans or documents pursuant to other requirements of local, state or federal laws and regulations which meet all applicable requirements of the article, the director may in its discretion determine that the user has satisfied the slug plan submission requirements of this section. 
(4)	Significant industrial users must immediately notify the director of any changes at their facilities affecting their slug control plan or spill/slug potential. 
(d)	Secondary containment requirements. 
(1)	Each user when in the opinion of the director is required must provide and maintain at the user's sole expense secondary spill containment structures (including diking, curbing or other appropriate structures) adequate to protect all floor drains from accidental spills and discharges to the POTW of any pollutants or discharges regulated by this article, the Act or State Law. 
a.	The containment area shall be constructed so that no liquid polluting material can escape from the area by gravity through the building sewers, drains, or otherwise directly or indirectly into the POTW. 
b.	The containment or curbing shall be sufficient to hold not less than ten percent of the total volume of the tanks or containers within the secondary containment structure or provide a capacity of 100 percent of the largest single tank or container within the secondary containment structure, whichever is larger, unless a lesser containment area or alternate control measures are approved in advance by the director. 
c.	The containment structure must accommodate "squirt distance." Containers within the containment structure must be able to be placed sufficiently back from the edge of the structure so if punctured, the resulting leak will be contained. 
d.	The containment structure must be designed or operated to prevent run-on or infiltration, rain or other liquids into the secondary containment system unless the containment system has sufficient excess capacity to contain run-on, infiltration, rain, or other liquids. Excess capacity when such prevention is not provided in the system must be sufficient to contain rain precipitation from a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
e.	The containment structure shall be constructed with chemical-resistant water stops in place at all joints (if any) to be free of cracks or gaps. 
f.	The containment structure shall be designed and installed to completely surround the tank or containers and to cover all surrounding earth likely to come into contact with the waste if released from the tank(s) or containers (i.e., capable of preventing lateral as well as vertical migration of the material). 
g.	All floor drains found within the containment area must be plugged and sealed. 
(2)	Spill troughs and sumps within process areas must discharge to appropriate pretreatment tanks. 
(3)	Emergency containment shall also be provided for storage tanks that may be serviced by commercial haulers and for chemical storage areas. 
(4)	Solid pollutants shall be located in security areas designed to prevent the loss of the materials to the POTW. 
(5)	Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide the protection required by this article shall be submitted to the director for review, and shall be approved by the director before construction. Construction of approved containment for existing sources shall be completed within the time period specified by the director. 
(6)	No new source shall be permitted to discharge to the POTW until emergency containment facilities have been approved and constructed as required by this article. 
(7)	The director may order a user to take interim measures for emergency containment as determined necessary by the director under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-187. Determination of sewage flow.
To determine the sewage flow from any establishment, the YCUA may use one of the following methods: 
(1)	The amount of water supplied to the premises by the public water system as shown upon the water meter if the premises are metered. 
(2)	If the premises are supplied with river water or water from private wells, the amount of water supplied from such sources may be metered at the source or metered at its point of discharge prior to entry into the public sewer. 
(3)	If such premises are used for an industrial or commercial purpose of such a nature that the water supplied to the premises cannot be entirely discharged into the sewer system, the estimate of the amount of sewage discharged into the sewer system made by the utilities authority from the water, gas or electric supply, or metered at its point of discharge prior to entry into the public sewer. 
(4)	The volume of sewage discharged into the sewer system as determined by measurements and samples taken at a manhole installed by the owner of the property served by the sewer system at his own expense in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit issued by the YCUA pursuant to this article. 
(5)	A figure determined by the YCUA by any combination of the foregoing or by any other equitable method. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-188. Disposal at sewage treatment plant.
Waste from industrial sewage disposal systems shall be disposed of at the sewage treatment plant or at any other refuse or disposal site approved by the director. No waters or wastes described in section 62-179 shall be disposed of at the sewage treatment plant. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-189. Bypass.
(a)	An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation. If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the director, if possible at least ten days before the date of the bypass. An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the director within 24 hours from the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. 
(b)	Bypass is prohibited, and the director may take enforcement action against an industrial user for bypass, unless: 
(1)	Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
(2)	There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and 
(3)	the industrial user submitted notice as required under this section. The director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the director determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in this subsection (b). 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-190. Report of violation.
If the results of any sampling performed by the user indicates that any violation of this article, a permit, an order issued under this article, the Act or State Act has occurred, the user shall notify the YCUA within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation and shall repeat the sampling and pollutant analysis and shall submit, in writing, the results of this repeat analysis within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. A written follow up report shall be filed by the user with the YCUA within 30 days of a user becoming aware of the violation. The report shall specify the following: 
(1)	A description of the violation, the cause thereof, and the violation's impact on the user's compliance status. 
(2)	Duration of the violation, including exact dates and times of the violation, and if not corrected, the anticipated time the violation is expected to continue. 
(3)	All steps taken or intended to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of such a violation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-191. Notification of authorities upon discharge of hazardous waste.
All industrial users shall notify the YCUA, the EPA regional waste management division director and the DNRE in writing of any discharge to the YCUA of a substance that would be a regulated hazardous waste under any federal statute if disposed of otherwise. Such notice shall be given in accordance with CFR 403.12(p). 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Secs. 62-192—62-200. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 5. PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
 
Sec. 62-201. Authorized under certain conditions.
Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of subsection 62-176(d), the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-202. Permit required; application; fees.
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the plumbing inspector. The application for such a permit shall be made on a form furnished by the township or YCUA and shall include specifications and other information deemed necessary by the township and YCUA. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the township treasurer at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-203. Inspection by township and YCUA.
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the township and YCUA. The township and YCUA shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the township and YCUA when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by the township or YCUA. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-204. Specifications.
The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the county health department. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 10,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-205. Connection with public sewer.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 62-204, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-206. Sanitary maintenance required.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the township or the YCUA. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Sec. 62-207. Other requirements.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the state or county health department or DNRE. 
(Ord. No. 2010-406, 7-20-10)
 
Secs. 62-208—62-229. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VI. RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS AND FRANCHISES
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 62-230. Right-of-way permit requirement.
No person, partnership, association or corporation, public or private, operating a public utility may use the highways, streets, alleys or other public places in the Charter Township of Ypsilanti (Township) for wires, poles, pipes, tracks, conduits or other utility facilities without the consent of the township. 
(Ord. No. 2000-252, § 1, 10-17-00)
 
Sec. 62-231. Franchise requirement.
No person, partnership, association or corporation, public or private, operating a public utility may transact local business in the township, without first obtaining a franchise from the township. Competitive suppliers of natural gas or electricity with customers in the township shall first obtain a franchise from the township. A public utility providing transmission or distribution services to any person, partnership, association or corporation, public or private, offering any public utility, natural gas or electric supply service to customers in the township shall promptly notify the township clerk in writing of the name and address of such person, partnership, association or corporation. 
(Ord. No. 2000-252, § 1, 10-17-00)
 
Sec. 62-232. Telecommunication permit requirement.
Providers of telecommunications services using the highways, streets, alleys, or other public places in the township shall obtain a permit from the township as required by Section 254 of Act. No. 179 of the Public Acts of 1991, as amended. It is unlawful to accept any telecommunications services from a provider of telecommunications services using the highways, streets, alleys or other public places in the township which does not have a permit from the township. 
(Ord. No. 2000-252, § 1, 10-17-00)
 
Sec. 62-233. Applications for franchises and permits.
(a)	Applications for permits and franchises under this chapter shall be made to the township clerk on a form prepared by the clerk. Applications for a right-of-way permit under section 62-230 shall require the payment of a nonrefundable application fee of $2,500.00. Applications for a franchise under section 62-231 shall require the payment of a nonrefundable application fee of $10,000.00. Applicants for a telecommunications permit under section 62-232 shall pay a fee not exceeding the fixed and variable costs to the township in granting a permit by depositing with the clerk a refundable application fee of $5,000.00. The clerk will keep a record of the fixed and variable costs to the township in each case and render a refund or an invoice to the applicant. 
(b)	Upon receiving a completed application, the clerk will advise the township attorney who will draft the appropriate permit or franchise and schedule the matter for consideration by township board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 2000-252, § 1, 10-17-00)
 
Sec. 62-234. Permits and franchises—generally.
(a)	A right-of-way permit under section 62-230 will contain such terms and conditions as deemed appropriate by the township attorney and the community and economic development director. The township board of trustees may require payment of an annual right-of-way fee determined by resolution from time to time. A right-of-way permit is revocable at will by the township and may be issued for a term not exceeding 30 years. 
(b)	A franchise under section 62-231 will contain such terms and conditions as deemed appropriate by the township attorney and community and economic development director. The township board of trustees may require payment of a franchise fee. Unless submitted to the voters and approved by a three-fifths majority, franchises are revocable at will by the township. Franchises may be issued for a term not exceeding 30 years. 
(c)	The township board of trustees will approve or deny a permit under section 62-232 within 90 days from the date a provider files an application. A permit under section 62-232 will contain such terms and conditions as deemed appropriate by the township attorney and community and economic development director. The township board of trustees may require payment of a permit fee not exceeding the fixed and variable costs to the township of maintaining the rights-of-way, easements and other public places used by a provider. The township may require as a condition of a permit under section 62-232 that a bond be posted by a provider of telecommunication services to ensure that the right-of-way, easements and other public place used by a provider are returned to their original condition during and after a provider's access and use. 
(d)	In the event that a holder of a permit or franchise (or any subsidiary, affiliate or other related company) pays a fee, charge, or other payment of any kind on a periodic basis (i.e., monthly, quarterly, annually) to any municipality in the State of Michigan which is higher or in addition to any fees or charges set forth in a permit or franchise with the township, the holder of a permit or franchise shall notify the township in writing of the details of such other arrangement within 60 days of its effective date. A one-time charge prior to and for the installation of a new service shall not be considered a periodic fee unless the charge is unreasonably higher than that paid to other municipalities. Upon receipt by the township of such notice, a revocable permit or franchise may be revoked upon notice from the township. As a condition for a new permit or franchise, the township may require payment of a similar fee or charge as provided to the third party. 
(e)	A person, partnership, association or corporation granted a permit or franchise under this chapter shall obtain all other necessary permits or approvals for construction, maintenance and operation in the township. 
(Ord. No. 2000-252, § 1, 10-17-00)
 
Secs. 62-235—62-244. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. ADMINISTRATION; REGULATION; ENFORCEMENT
 
Sec. 62-245. Title.
This article may be known as the "Charter Township of Ypsilanti Public Right-of-Way Ordinance". 
(Ord. No. 2000-252, § 1, 10-17-00)
 
Sec. 62-246. Declaration of purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the construction, maintenance and repair activities in the public right-of-way and to establish permit procedures and standards pertaining to the installation of facilities and structures within the public right-of-way and utility easements, encouraging joint planning of public utility, cable television and telecommunication construction projects in the public right-of-way, coordinating and standardizing the location of particular kinds of facilities and structures in the public right-of-way and minimizing their interference and impairment of sidewalks, streets, sanitary sewer, storm drain or water pipes. 
(Ord. No. 2000-252, § 1, 10-17-00)
 
Sec. 62-247. Definitions.
Unless otherwise indicated the terms used in this article are defined as follows: 
Alley. A public or legally established thoroughfare other than a street affording a secondary method of vehicular access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Curb. A part of the street usually of the same elevation as the center of the street which is parallel to the street which separates the portion of the roadway established for vehicular traffic from the adjacent greenbelt area designed to keep vehicular traffic from the greenbelt area. 
Facilities and structures. Poles, towers, monitoring wells, pipes, conduits, guy wires, anchors, pedestals, utility boxes, manholes, handholes, vaults, utility pits, nodes, junction boxes, buildings and enclosures, including fences. 
Public right-of-way. The entire area owned or dedicated by the township or other governmental agency or entity for public use as a highway, street, alley or other public place. 
Street. That portion of a public thoroughfare improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic including curbs on paved roads and shoulders on unimproved thoroughfares. 
Utility easement. A right or privilege over a specific portion of land area granted by the owner to the public, a corporation or some particular person or persons for specific uses and purposes and which is designated a public or private easement depending on the nature of the use. 
(Ord. No. 2000-252, § 1, 10-17-00)
 
Sec. 62-248. General permit requirements.
(a)	It is unlawful to work within any public right-of-way or utility easement without a permit from the township. 
(b)	It is unlawful to make any excavation or opening in or to tunnel under any public right-of-way without a permit from the township. The township supervisor or his designee may, if public safety requires, grant immediate permission to a person to make a necessary excavation or opening within the public right-of-way provided that a permit is obtained by the next business day. 
(c)	An emergency above ground repair within the public right-of-way made without a permit must be reported to the township by the next business day. 
(Ord. No. 2000-252, § 1, 10-17-00)
 
Sec. 62-249. General construction requirements.
(a)	No unnecessary damage or injury may be done to any tree or shrub in the public right-of-way. If any sidewalk is blocked by any work, a temporary sidewalk shall be constructed or provided which must be safe and convenient for travelers. 
(b)	Owners of any underground facilities and structures within a public right-of-way must participate in the Miss Dig System and respond to and stake or locate its facilities and structures within the rules and regulations as prescribed by the Miss Dig System and hold the township, its agents and contractors harmless for any damage to facilities and structures which may be damaged as a result of the township repairing or maintaining its sanitary sewers, storm drains or water mains located in any public right-of-way if due to untimely or incorrect locations being staked or identified. 
(c)	The placement of facilities and structures within public right-of-way and utility easements is subject to approval by the township engineer. The location of above ground facilities and structures are subject to review and approval by the township for visibility, traffic and pedestrian safety, landscaping, screening and other site conditions. 
(d)	All openings, excavations or obstructions in a public right-of-way must be properly barricaded and illuminated as required by the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic-Control Devices to prevent injury or damage to persons or vehicles. Safety devices must be installed at all construction-sites to provide adequate notice and warning to both pedestrians and motorists. 
(e)	All openings, excavations and tunnels in a public right-of-way must be properly shored and braced in accordance with all standards promulgated by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and the Michigan Occupational Safety and Health Administration (MIOSHA) to insure the safety of all workers and prevent cave-ins and washouts which would likely cause damage to the surface grade of the street or adjoining portions of the right-of-way. If it appears that there is a danger to the public safety, the township has the authority to install any and all barricades warning signs and other such devices that it may deem necessary and may charge the permit holder for costs incurred in protecting the public and may revoke the permit. 
(f)	Underground facilities and structures constructed of nonmetallic material are required to have a traceable metallic wrap or accompanying wire for the purpose of tracing and locating with conventional locating equipment. When placed in the public right-of-way, facilities and structures constructed of material susceptible to breakage (i.e. fiber optic line) may be encased in a protective shell as approved by the township. 
(Ord. No. 2000-252, § 1, 10-17-00)
 
Sec. 62-250. Application procedure.
(a)	Application for a construction or maintenance permit under the terms and conditions of this article and any other applicable provision of this Code shall be made on forms provided by the township and shall be accompanied by plans and specifications showing the proposed work to be performed within the public right-of-way. 
(b)	Application for a permit may not be accepted unless it contains all of the required information, is accompanied by required plans which conform to the applicable provisions of this Code, ordinances and regulations and is accompanied by the payment of a permit fee as established by resolution of the township council from time to time. The proposed plans and specifications shall be reviewed by appropriate township departments depending on the nature of the work to be performed. 
(c)	Adequate self-insurance or liability policies naming the township (and the Ypsilanti Community Utility Authority if requested), their past, present, and future elected officials, boards, commissions, appointees, agents, and assigns, as additional named insured for the project or purpose in question may be required by the township. A properly executed certificate of insurance containing evidence that the pertinent policy of insurance or endorsement applies to the provisions under which the permit is issued and approved as to form by the township attorney shall be filed with the township clerk. 
(d)	Any applicant hereunder shall be required to attend a preconstruction meeting if requested to do so by the township. 
(Ord. No. 2000-252, § 1, 10-17-00)
 
Sec. 62-251. Construction bond and hold harmless requirement.
As a condition of obtaining a permit the applicant may be required to file with the township a cash construction bond in an amount of at least $1,000.00 or five percent, whichever is greater, as established by the Community and Economic Development Director based on the applicant's estimated cost of the project, including labor, materials and overhead. The cash construction bond which may be utilized to pay all valid claims for damages resulting from activity within the public right-of-way. Applicant may post a blanket bond of $5,000.00 covering all new construction up to $100,000.00 per year. The estimated cost of the project shall be consistent with the installed cost of the project as reported for state and local tax purposes. The cash bond shall be conditioned to pay all damages to the public right-of-way of the township and to hold the township harmless of every damage of every other nature whether to persons or property for which such township may be held liable by reason of or which is occasioned by the doing of a thing or the exercise of the privilege for which the permit upon which the cash bond was based was granted. The applicant must execute an agreement to defend, indemnify and hold the township harmless in the event a claim arises out of an activity conducted by the applicant within the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2000-252, § 1, 10-17-00)
 
Sec. 62-252. Blanket permit and bond.
The owner of any facilities and structures within a public right-of-way may obtain an annual blanket work permit (January 1 to December 30) covering all maintenance and repair activities: (a) upon payment of a fee set by resolution of the township board of trustees; (b) the posting of a cash construction bond in an amount determined by the Community and Economic Development Director based on experience; (c) the filing of maps describing the location of all the owner's facilities and structures within the township. The holder of an annual blanket work permit must file with the township upon request, a report describing the nature and location of the maintenance and repair work. The cash bond shall be conditioned to pay all damages to the public right-of-way of the township and to hold the township harmless of every damage of every other nature whether to persons or property for which such township may be held liable by reason of or which is occasioned by the doing of a thing or the exercise of the privilege for which the permit upon which the cash bond was based was granted. The applicant must execute an agreement to defend, indemnify and hold the township harmless in the event a claim arises out of an activity conducted by the applicant within the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2000-252, § 1, 10-17-00)
 
Sec. 62-253. Inspection of work; suspension or revocation of permit; filing of "as-built" plans with GIS data.
(a)	All construction work done pursuant to any permit issued pursuant to this article shall be inspected by the township to determine that the work conforms with the applicable Code provisions. The township may suspend or revoke any permit where the workmanship or materials used do not conform to the approved plans and specifications and the applicable provisions of this Code or other applicable ordinances. Violation of the terms and conditions contained in this article or any other applicable ordinance or Code provision may result in the permit being revoked. It is unlawful to perform any work authorized by any permit or cause any work to be performed after a permit has been suspended or revoked. 
(b)	"As-built" or engineering maps and plans must be submitted by the applicant to the township engineer as soon as they are completed but no later than 90 days after completion of the work. If available, a digital geographical information system layer, using a program, format and computer media acceptable to the township and containing such information and data as the township may require, which accurately displays the work. Proprietary information may be submitted under a promise of confidentiality as provided by the Freedom of Information Act. 
(Ord. No. 2000-252, § 1, 10-17-00)
 
Sec. 62-254. Review procedure.
All operations for which a permit is granted pursuant to the terms of this division are under the direction and supervision of the Community and Economic Development Director. If a permit is refused suspended or revoked, the applicant may within ten days of the denial, suspension or revocation appeal that determination to the township council. The township board of trustees may, after proper notice to all interested parties, conduct a hearing concerning the refusal, suspension or revocation. After conducting the public hearing the township board of trustees may either affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the director of public works. The decision of the township board of trustees is final. 
(Ord. No. 2000-252, § 1, 10-17-00)
 
Chapter 66 VEGETATION 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Secs. 66-1—66-25. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. TREES AND OTHER VEGETATION 
 
Sec. 66-26. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commissioner means the commissioner of noxious weeds. 
Lawn extension means the unpaved portion of any street which is inside the curbline. 
Natural areas means a site largely unaltered by modern human activity where vegetation is distributed in naturally occurring patterns. 
( Ord. No. 2015-449 , 9-15-15)
 
Sec. 66-27. Violations, civil infractions.
Any person, firm or corporation, which owns real property (as shown on the assessor's records), violating any provision of this article shall be responsible for a civil infraction and shall be subject to a fine as follows: 
(1)	The fine for any first violation shall be $75.00; 
(2)	The fine for any violation which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of once before, shall be $150.00; 
(3)	The fine for any violation which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of twice before, shall be $250.00. 
( Ord. No. 2015-449 , 9-15-15)
 
Sec. 66-27.1. Each day a separate civil infraction.
A separate civil infraction shall be deemed committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or continues. 
( Ord. No. 2015-449 , 9-15-15)
 
Sec. 66-27.2. Rights and remedies are cumulative.
The rights and remedies provided herein are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies, including an action to abate, restrain, and/or enjoin filed in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
( Ord. No. 2015-449 , 9-15-15)
 
Sec. 66-28. Diseased, damaged, infested vegetation.
No tree or other vegetation which by virtue of disease, damage or insect infestation presents a hazard to persons or property on adjoining land shall be maintained. 
( Ord. No. 2015-449 , 9-15-15)
 
Sec. 66-29. Trimming and corner clearance.
Trees and other vegetation on private property shall be maintained so that no part thereof intrudes upon the public right-of-way in the space eight feet above the surface of the right-of-way. Vegetation on private property within 25 feet of the intersection of right-of-way lines shall not be permitted to grow to a height of 36 inches above the adjacent right-of-way surface. Trees may be maintained within 25 feet of the intersection but must have all branches trimmed to provide clear vision for vertical height of eight feet above the roadway surface. 
( Ord. No. 2015-449 , 9-15-15)
 
Sec. 66-30. Lawn extensions.
The owner or occupant of every parcel of land is responsible for grading, planting, mowing and raking the extension so that it is covered with grass or other ground cover approved by the commissioner before it reaches a height of seven inches. Upon receipt of evidence demonstration that vegetation cannot be maintained on a lawn extension, the commissioner may issue a permit to cover the lawn extension with stone or such other material as will present a neat appearance. 
( Ord. No. 2015-449 , 9-15-15)
 
Sec. 66-31. Grass and weeds.
It shall be the duty of all owners of any residential, developed, subdivided or landscaped areas, including vacant properties that adjoin such areas, to cut or destroy any grass, noxious weeds or other vegetation found growing on such land before it reaches height of seven inches. This provision applies to lands, including fence lines, structural perimeters and landscaped areas. In other areas situated within close proximity to an occupied structure and when deemed necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of citizens, such vegetation may be maintained at an average height of less than ten inches. 
The commissioner may designate natural areas where such vegetation may be permitted to grow in excess of ten inches without causing blight, creating a nuisance or compromising the safe and sanitary maintenance of nearby dwellings, commercial and industrial buildings. 
Annually, a notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation during the month of April indicating that if grass, weeds and other vegetation are not cut or destroyed by Memorial Day and thereafter maintained according to these standards during the growing season, they may be cut or removed by the township and the costs charged against the property as described in section 66-32. 
( Ord. No. 2016-458 , 2-16-16)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2016-458 , adopted Feb. 16, 2016, repealed § 66-31 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former § 66-31 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2015-449 , adopted Sept. 15, 2015. 
 
Sec. 66-32. Enforcement.
If private property or a lawn extension is not maintained as required by this article, the commissioner may have the work done to bring the property or lawn extension into compliance. The notice provided for enforcement of sections other than section 66-31 shall be sent to the address of the owner as shown on the assessor's records at least five days prior to commencing the work. If an immediate hazard to public safety occurs, no prior notice shall be necessary. The actual costs of the work needed to bring property or a lawn extension into compliance, together with an administrative fee as determined by resolution of the township board, shall be billed to the owner. If this amount is not paid within 45 days, it shall be a special assessment against the property as provided in this Code. The supervisor shall add such expense to the tax roll on such lands, and such shall become a lien against such lands and be enforced in the same manner as provided by the laws of the state for general property taxes. 
( Ord. No. 2016-458 , 2-16-16)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2016-458 , adopted Feb. 16, 2016, repealed § 66-32 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former § 66-32 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2015-449 , adopted Sept. 15, 2015. 
 
Sec. 66-33. Financial hardship.
Under proof of financial hardship, the supervisor may authorize charges under section 66-32 to be paid in installments or reduced and subject to township board approval. 
( Ord. No. 2015-449 , 9-15-15)
 
Secs. 66-34—66-60. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. NOXIOUS WEEDS
 
Sec. 66-61. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commissioner means the commissioner of noxious weeds appointed by the township board pursuant to this article. 
Noxious weeds means and includes Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense), dodders (any species of Cuscuta), mustards (charlock, black mustard and Indian mustard, species of Brassica or Sinapis), wild carrot (Daucus carota), bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis), perennial sowthistle (Sonchus arvensis), hoary alyssum (Berteroa incana), ragweed (Ambrosia elatior l.), poison ivy (Rhus toxicodendron), poison sumac (toxicodendron vernix), oxeye daisies, goldenrod or other plant which, in the opinion of the township board, is recognized as deleterious to health, safety or public welfare and recognized as a common nuisance. 
(Code 1975, § 19-11)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 66-62. Application of article.
This article shall apply to and cover noxious weeds, grass, trees and other vegetation found growing in the subdivisions of the of the township where 60 percent or more of the lots of such subdivision have buildings erected thereon, and on streets of common usage in the township, to a depth of 165 feet or the depth of the lots, whichever is the lesser. 
(Code 1975, § 19-12; Ord. No. 2007-374, § 1, 9-4-07)
 
Sec. 66-63. Violations, civil infractions.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall be subject to a fine as follows: 
(1)	The fine for any first violation shall be $75.00; 
(2)	The fine for any violation which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of once before, shall be $150.00; 
(3)	The fine for any violation which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of twice before, shall be $250.00. 
(Code 1975, § 19-20; Ord. No. 96-151, 6-18-96)
 
Sec. 66-63.1. Each day a separate civil infraction.
A separate civil infraction shall be deemed committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 96-151, 6-18-96)
 
Sec. 66-63.2. Rights and remedies are cumulative.
The rights and remedies provided herein are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 96-151, 6-18-96)
 
Sec. 66-64. Control fund.
There is hereby created a fund to be known as the "noxious weed control fund," into which the township board shall transfer annually such amounts, in addition to the expenses and fines recovered under this article, as shall be necessary to compensate the commissioner and agents necessary to carry out this article and to provide for necessary expenses. 
(Code 1975, § 19-13)
 
Sec. 66-65. Appointment of commissioner.
(a)	The township board shall appoint a competent person to be the commissioner of noxious weeds, who shall take the oath required of township officers and shall hold office for a term of two years and until a successor is appointed and qualified. The township board may, at any time for good cause, remove such commissioner from office and appoint his successor to serve the remaining portion of his term. 
(b)	The township board shall report the name and address of the person appointed as commissioner to the state department of agriculture, within ten days after making such appointment. 
(c)	The commissioner shall receive such compensation as may from time to time be fixed by the township board. 
(Code 1975, § 19-14)
 
Sec. 66-66. General powers and duties of commissioner; limitation on expenditures.
(a)	The commissioner shall diligently inquire concerning the introduction and existence of noxious weeds in the township, acting upon his own knowledge or report to him. If any noxious weeds are found growing in the township, he shall take charge of all such weeds and take care that they do not go to seed or otherwise spread or become a detriment to the public health. The commissioner shall carefully seek and learn, so far as practicable, the best methods of the destruction of noxious weeds, and he shall apply, in proper time, such treatment or remedy as shall best be calculated to prevent their spread and to eradicate them. 
(b)	The commissioner shall apply the best-known means and use the utmost diligence in eradicating noxious weeds, but he shall not have power to expend, in work or materials, more than $25.00 on any one infested tract, without the advice and consent in writing of the township supervisor. 
(c)	It shall be the duty of the commissioner to prosecute or complain to the proper authorities about any person who may violate this article. 
(Code 1975, § 19-15)
 
Sec. 66-67. Commissioner's annual report to state department of agriculture.
The commissioner shall, annually before December 1, make a written report to the state department of agriculture, upon blank forms furnished by such department, containing such information with reference to the existence and growth of noxious weeds as such department may require. 
(Code 1975, § 19-16)
 
Sec. 66-68. Duty of landowners to destroy.
It shall be the duty of all owners of land on which noxious weeds are found growing to destroy the weeds before they reach a seed-bearing stage and to prevent such weeds from perpetuating themselves or to prevent such weeds becoming a detriment to public health. 
(Code 1975, § 19-17)
 
Sec. 66-69. Publication of notice to destroy.
(a)	During the month of March of each year, the commissioner shall cause to be published, in a newspaper of general circulation in the township, a notice that noxious weeds not destroyed by June 1 of that year will be destroyed by the township and the owner of the property charged with the cost under section 66-70. Such notice shall contain a summary of sections 66-68 and 66-70 and shall contain methods of treating and eradicating such noxious weeds. Failure to publish the notice provided for in this subsection shall not constitute a defense to any action to enforce the payment of any penalty imposed for a violation of this article or debt created under this article. 
(b)	As an alternative method of notification and in lieu of the publication of notice required by subsection (a) of this section, the commissioner may notify, by certified mail with return receipt requested, the owner, agent or occupant of any lands on which noxious weeds are found growing. Such notice shall contain or have enclosed therewith a summary of methods of treating and eradicating such noxious weeds, and a summary of sections 66-68 and 66-70. Failure of the commissioner to give such notice provided for in this subsection shall not constitute a defense to any action to enforce the payment of any penalty imposed for a violation of this article or debt created under this article. 
(Code 1975, § 19-18)
 
Sec. 66-70. Destruction by township.
(a)	If any owner, agent or occupant of lands shall fail or refuse to destroy noxious weeds or cause the weeds to be destroyed, the commissioner or any official, inspector or other agent of the township board is hereby authorized to enter upon such lands or lots and destroy, by cutting, any and all noxious weeds found thereon. Such weeds may be cut as many times as is necessary. 
(b)	If the township, through its agents, is required to destroy noxious weeds on private property, all expenses incurred in such destruction shall be paid by the owner of such lands. A billing covering such expenses shall be forwarded to the owner by the township, and if the expenses are not paid within 30 days from the date of billing, the supervisor shall add such expenses to the tax roll on such lands, and such shall become a lien against such lands and be enforced in the same manner as provided by the laws of the state for general property taxes. 
(Code 1975, § 19-19)
 
ARTICLE IV. MANUFACTURED FERTILIZER
 
Sec. 66-71. Title.
The article shall be known and may be cited as the Charter Township of Ypsilanti (Township) "Manufactured Fertilizer" Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-392, 7-21-09, eff. 12-1-09)
 
Sec. 66-72. Purpose.
(1)	The township board of trustees finds that certain compounds containing phosphorus, which are contained in manufactured fertilizer, when used in the township, enter into the township's and neighboring communities' water resources, including wetlands and watercourses, resulting in excessive and accelerated growth of algae and aquatic plants which is detrimental to these resources. 
(2)	The township board of trustees finds that reduction of the use of manufactured fertilizers containing phosphorus will assist the township in reducing the amount of phosphorus that enters the township's and neighboring communities' water resources as required by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality's Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) limitation for the Middle Huron River and associated tributaries and related National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit limits pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), as amended and the United States Environmental Protection Agency's Water Quality Planning and Management Regulations (40 C.F.R. part 130), as amended. 
(3)	The township board of trustees finds that most mature topsoil in the township has a sufficient level of phosphorus, which occurs naturally to promote adequate turf root growth. 
(4)	It is the purpose and intent of this article to regulate the use and application of manufactured fertilizers only on turf areas and not on or in areas such as gardens, farms, or landscape amenities. 
(Ord. No. 2009-392, 7-21-09, eff. 12-1-09)
 
Sec. 66-73. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings described in this section: 
Applicator means any person who applies manufactured fertilizer in the township including, but not limited to, commercial applicators, homeowners, and occupants of rental property, property managers, independent contractors and agents for any of these entities. 
Fertilizer program administrator (FPA) means the person designated to administer this chapter by the township board. 
General turf means nonagricultural land managed using turf grasses including, but not limited to, home lawns, cemeteries, park areas as well as commercial, school, university and government grounds. General turf does not include vegetable and flower gardens, forage production, sod farms, or other agricultural use. 
Manufactured fertilizer means a commercially manufactured substance containing one or more recognized plant nutrients, which is used for its plant nutrient content and which is designed for use, or claimed to have, in promoting plant growth. Fertilizer does not include unmanipulated animal and vegetable manures, marl, lime, limestone, and wood ashes. 
Soil test means a set of scientific measurements that determine the basic texture of soil, the pH level of the soil, and the various nutrient levels of phosphorus, potassium, calcium and magnesium in soil, for the purpose of providing a fertilizer recommendation regarding the amount of nutrients and rate of application or nutrients for general turf growth. 
Soil testing service means a company, organization, or township service unit designated by the fertilizer program administrator to perform soil tests and recommend fertilizer application rates. 
(Ord. No. 2009-392, 7-21-09, eff. 12-1-09)
 
Sec. 66-74. Regulation of the use and application of manufactured fertilizer.
(1)	Manufactured fertilizer shall not be applied to any commercial, industrial, residential or public development prior to April 1 or after November 15 in any year, due to the inability of frozen soil to absorb nutrients. 
(2)	For any commercial, industrial, residential and public developments in the township, manufactured fertilizer shall not be applied or stored uncontained on driveways, parking lots, streets, sidewalks, or other impervious surfaces, unless removed within one hour of application or storage. 
(3)	Manufactured fertilizer shall not be applied in any natural features open space, or within 25 feet of any wetland, watercourse, or stormwater retention or detention basin. 
(Ord. No. 2009-392, 7-21-09, eff. 12-1-09)
 
Sec. 66-75. Regulation of the use and application of manufactured fertilizer containing phosphorus.
(1)	Manufactured fertilizer that contains any amount of phosphorus or a compound containing phosphorus, such as phosphate, shall not be applied to general turf within the township for any commercial, industrial, residential and public developments, except under one or both of the following conditions: 
(a)	Application of manufactured fertilizer to an area where general turf is being established from seed or sod, during the first growing season of the seed or sod. 
(b)	Application of manufactured fertilizer that is exempt under section 66-76. 
(2)	Manufactured fertilizer containing any amount of phosphorus or a compound containing phosphorus shall be watered into the soil within 14 hours of application so that the fertilizer is immobilized and prevented from loss by runoff. 
(Ord. No. 2009-392, 7-21-09, eff. 12-1-09)
 
Sec. 66-76. Exemption for the use and application of manufactured fertilizer containing phosphorus.
(1)	The prohibition against the application of manufactured fertilizer containing any amount of phosphorus or a compound containing phosphorus shall not apply to general turf areas where a soil test completed within the last three years has indicated that the level of phosphorus in the soil is insufficient to support turf growth. 
(2)	A level of phosphorus in a soil test that is less than or equal to ten parts per million indicates that the level of phosphorus in the soil is insufficient to support turf growth. 
(3)	The application of manufactured fertilizer allowed under this section shall not exceed the amount or rate of application of phosphorus or a compound containing phosphorus recommended by the soil test. 
(Ord. No. 2009-392, 7-21-09, eff. 12-1-09)
 
Sec. 66-77. Soil testing.
(1)	A soil sample or samples shall be taken from the general turf area on which an applicator is proposing to apply manufactured fertilizer containing phosphorus or a compound containing phosphorus, following the procedure required by the soil testing service. The FPA may require the applicator to provide such confirmation as is required to confirm the origin of the sample or samples. 
(2)	The applicator shall submit the soil sample to the soil testing service, following the procedure required by the soil testing service. 
(3)	The soil testing service shall determine the rate and application of manufactured fertilizer containing phosphorus based on the results of the soil test and the requirements of this article. 
(4)	The results of the soil test shall be maintained for a period of three years following receipt of the test by the applicator. 
(5)	The applicator shall provide a copy of the soil test results to the FPA within 48 hours of a written request for the test results by the FPA or other persons designated by the township board to enforce this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-392, 7-21-09, eff. 12-1-09)
 
Sec. 66-78. Registration.
All commercial fertilizer applicators shall be required to register by completing a form prepared by the township and by paying a fee in the amount determined by resolution of the township board of trustees. The form shall include the fertilizer applicator's agreement to provide, upon request, test reports showing the chemical content of fertilizers used in the township. Registrations shall be valid for a period of one year, from January 1 through December 31. The board may revoke a registration for up to one year if after a public hearing, following proper notice to the fertilizer applicator, it determines that applicator has violated this article. None of the entities covered by this article may conduct business in the township without a valid current registration. 
(Ord. No. 2009-392, 7-21-09, eff. 12-1-09)
 
Sec. 66-79. Public information.
If the township makes available a brochure explaining the terms and purposes of this article: 
(1)	No person shall sell fertilizer without giving the buyer a copy of the brochure. 
(2)	No fertilizer applicator shall apply fertilizer without giving the general turf owner a copy of the brochure. 
(Ord. No. 2009-392, 7-21-09, eff. 12-1-09)
 
Sec. 66-80. Enforcement.
Violation of this article is a municipal civil infraction, for which the fine for each violation of this article shall be no less than $250.00 per incident. The fine for each violation of this article by a commercial applicator, property manager, independent contractor or agent for any of these entities shall be no less than $500.00 per incident. 
(Ord. No. 2009-392, 7-21-09, eff. 12-1-09)
 
APPENDIX A ZONING 
ORDINANCE NO. 74 
An ordinance enacted under Act No. 184 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1943 (MCL 125.351 et seq.), as amended, governing the unincorporated portions of the Charter Township of Ypsilanti, Washtenaw County, Michigan, to regulate and restrict the location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence and for public and semipublic or other specified uses; and to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings, and other structures; to regulate and to determine the size of yards, courts, and open spaces; to regulate and limit the density of population; and for said purposes to divide the charter township into districts and establish the boundaries thereof; to provide for changes in the regulations, restrictions and boundaries of such districts; to define certain terms used herein; to provide for enforcement; to establish a board of appeals and to impose penalties for the violation of this ordinance. 
PREAMBLE 
Pursuant to the authority conferred by the Public Acts of the State of Michigan in such case, made and provided and for the purpose of promoting, and protecting the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the township by protecting and conserving the character and social and economic stability of the residential, commercial, industrial and other use areas; by securing the most appropriate use of land, preventing overcrowding the land and undue congestion of population; providing adequate light, air and reasonable access; and facilitating adequate and economical provision of transportation, water, sewers, schools, recreation, and other public requirements, and by other means, all in accordance with a comprehensive plan; now therefore: 
ENACTING CLAUSE 
The Charter Township of Ypsilanti ordains: 
 
ARTICLE I. SHORT TITLE
 
Sec. 100. Short title:
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Charter Township of Ypsilanti zoning ordinance. 
 
ARTICLE II. CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE AND DEFINITIONS
 
Sec. 200. Construction of language:
The following rules of construction apply to the text of this ordinance: 
1.	The particular shall control the general. 
2.	In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this ordinance and any caption or illustration, the text shall control. 
3.	The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. 
4.	Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
5.	A "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof. 
6.	The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for" or "occupied for." 
7.	The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity. 
8.	Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," "either…or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
a.	"And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
b.	"Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
c.	"Either…or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
9.	Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. 
 
Sec. 201. Definitions:
Access property: A property, parcel or lot abutting Ford Lake, either natural or man-made, and used or intended to be used for providing access to Ford Lake by pedestrian or vehicular traffic to and from offshore land regardless of whether said access to the water is gained by easement, common fee ownership, single fee ownership, lease, license, gift, business invitation or any other form or dedication or conveyance. 
Accessory use, or accessory: A use which is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, and located on the same zoning lot, unless otherwise specified, as the principal use to which it is related. 
When "accessory" is used in this text, it shall have the same meaning as accessory use. 
An accessory use includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
1.	Residential accommodations for servants and/or caretakers. 
2.	Outdoor swimming pools, hot tubs and saunas for the use of the occupants of a residence, or their guests. 
3.	Domestic or agricultural storage in a barn, shed, toolroom or similar accessory building or other structure. 
4.	A newsstand primarily for the convenience of the occupants of a building, which is located wholly within such building and has no exterior signs or displays. 
5.	Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock in connection with a business or industrial use, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district regulations. 
6.	Storage of goods used in or produced by industrial uses or related activities, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district regulations. 
7.	Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, subject to the accessory off-street parking regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. 
8.	Uses clearly incidental to a main use such as but not limited to: offices of an industrial or commercial complex located on the site of the commercial or industrial complex. 

9.	Accessory off-street loading, subject to the off-street loading regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. 
10.	Accessory signs, subject to the sign regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. 
11.	Solar panels, wind generators, television reception antenna and air conditioning units. 
12.	Common household gardening in a residential district when located only in the rear yard and/or nonrequired side yard areas. For purposes of this ordinance, common household gardening shall include the growing of fruits and vegetables for consumption solely by members of the family residing in the dwelling unit located on the same zoning lot. 
Adult care facility, state licensed: Any structure constructed for residential purposes that is licensed by the State of Michigan pursuant to Public Act 287 of 1972, Public Act 116 of 1973, or Public Act 218 of 1979. These acts provide for the following types of residential structures: 
1.	Adult foster care facility. A residential structure that is licensed to provide room, board and supervised care, but not continuous nursing care, for unrelated adults over the age of 17, in accordance with Public Act 218 of 1979, as amended, and the Adult Foster Care Administrative Rules as administered by the Michigan Department of Social Services. The following four types of adult foster care homes are provided for by these rules: 
2.	Adult foster care family home. A residence for six or fewer adults. Licensee must live in the home; and local zoning approval is not required prior to issuance of a license. 
3.	Adult foster care small group home. Residence for 12 or fewer adults. Licensee is not required to live in the home. Local zoning approval is required prior to issuance of a license only if seven or more residents will live in the house. 
4.	Adult foster care large group home. Residence for 13 to 20 adults. Licensee is not required to live in the home. Local zoning approval is required prior to issuance of a license. 
5.	Congregate facility. Residence for more than 20 adults. 
Adult entertainment facilities:
1.	Adult bookstore. An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, magazines and other periodicals with an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual areas" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined below), or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material and which excludes minors by virtue of age. 
2.	Adult motion picture theater. An enclosed building, with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material with an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined below), for observation by patrons therein and which excludes minors by virtue of age. 
3.	Adult mini-motion picture theater. An enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons, used for presenting material with an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined below), for observation by patrons therein and which excludes minors by virtue of age. 
4.	Adult cabaret. An establishment in which alcoholic beverages are not served and which provides dancers or other live entertainers who display or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined herein), for observation by patrons therein and which excludes minors by virtue of age. 
Alley: Any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access to abutting property, and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Alterations: Any change, addition or modification in construction or type of occupancy, or in the structural members of a building such as walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, the consummated act of which may be referred to herein as "altered" or "reconstructed." 
Ambient: Ambient is defined as the sound pressure level exceeded 90 percent of the time or L90. 
ANSI: American National Standards Institute. 
Antique goods: Personal property purchased or made more than 50 years ago. 
Apartment, efficiency: A dwelling unit consisting of not more than one room in addition to kitchen, dining and necessary sanitary facilities. 
Apartments: A suite of rooms in a multiple-family building arranged and intended for a place of residence of a single-family or a group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
Arcade: A building or structure, or any part thereof, which is devoted to the commercial use of amusement devices, pinball machines, electronic tables featuring pool, billiards, bowling, basketball, football, or the like, or electronic games of skill or dexterity utilizing videotapes or video screen or TV adaptations, etc., automatic sport devices or tables or similar activities for hire, or for amusement. 
Architectural features: Steps, window sills, belt courses, brick and/or wrought iron wing walls, chimneys, architraves, pediments. 
Automobile repair, major: The general repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision service, such as body, frame or fender straightening and repair; and painting of automobiles and any repair of a major component part as defined by the administrative rules promulgated pursuant to the State of Michigan Motor Vehicle Service and Repair Act (MCL 257.1302). 
Automobile repair, minor: Repairs other than major repair including but not limited to lubrication; oil changes; installing, changing, or otherwise servicing the antifreeze or other coolant; and the replacement, adjustment, repair, or servicing of tires, batteries, fuel pumps, gaskets, brakes and other parts and assemblies listed as minor repair services by the administrative rules promulgated pursuant to in State of Michigan Motor Vehicle Service and Repair Act (MCL 257.1302). 
Basement: That portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling. A basement shall not be counted as a story. 
Bed and breakfast operations: A use which is subordinate to the principal use of a dwelling unit as a single-family dwelling unit and a use in which transient guests are provided room and board in return for payment. 
Berm: An earthen mound of definite height and location to serve as an obscuring device in carrying out the requirements of this ordinance. 
Block: The property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), or between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, lake, river or live stream; or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of development, or corporate boundary lines of the township. 
Board: The board of zoning appeals as established under this ordinance. 
Body-piercing: The perforation of human tissue other than an ear for a non-medical purpose. 
Branding: A permanent mark made on human tissue by burning with a hot iron or other instrument. 
Building: Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof supported by columns or walls, and intended for the shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind. 

Building height: The vertical measured distance from the established grade to the highest point of the roof surface for flat roofs, to the deck line for mansard roofs, and the average height between eaves and the ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. Any extension of a mansard, gambrel, hip or gable roof below a wall shall require building height measurement to take place at the average height between the top of the building wall and the ridge line and the established building grade. Where a building is located on sloping terrain, the height may be measured from the average ground level of the grade at the building wall. 
 
BUILDING HEIGHT

Building line: Is a line formed by the face of the building, and for the purposes of this ordinance, a minimum building line is the same as a front setback line. 
 
BUILDING LINE

Building, main or principal: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. 
Child care organization: A governmental or nongovernmental organization having as its principal function receiving minor children for care, maintenance, training, and supervision. Child care organizations include organizations commonly described as child care institutions, child placing agencies, children's camps, children's campsites, children's therapeutic group homes, child care centers, day care centers, nursery schools, parent cooperative preschools, foster homes, group homes or child care homes as defined in 1973 PA 116, MCL 722.111 as amended. 
Child care organization, state licensed: A facility for the care of children under 18 years of age, as licensed and regulated by the State under Act No. 116 of the Public Acts of 1973 and Act No. 218 of the Public Acts of 1979 and the associated rules promulgated by the state department of social services. Definitions for various care organizations are listed below: 
1.	Child care center or day care center. A facility other than a private residence, receiving more than six children for group day care for periods of less than 24 hours a day, and where the parents or guardians are not immediately available to the child. It includes a facility which provides care for not less than two consecutive weeks, regardless of the number of hours of care per day. 
The facility is generally described as a child care center, day care center, day nursery, nursery school, parent cooperative preschool, play group, or drop-in center. "Child care center" or "day care center" does not include a Sunday school conducted by a religious institution or a facility operated by a religious organization where children are cared for during short periods of time while persons responsible for such children are attending religious services. 
2.	Child caring institution. A child care facility which is organized for the purpose of receiving children for care, maintenance, and supervision, usually on a 24-hour basis, in a building maintained for that purpose, and operates throughout the year. It includes a maternity home for the care of unmarried mothers who are minors, an agency group home, and institutions for mentally retarded or emotionally disturbed children. It does not include hospitals, nursing homes, boarding schools, or an adult foster care facility in which a child has been placed. 
3.	Foster family home. A private home in which at least one but not more than four children, who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood, marriage, or adoption, are given care and supervision for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian. 
4.	Foster family group home. A private home in which more than four but less than seven children, who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood, marriage, or adoption, are provided care for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian. 
5.	Family day care home. A private home in which at least one but less than seven children are received for care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. It includes a home that gives care to an unrelated child for more than four weeks during a calendar year. 
6.	Group day care home. A private home in which more than six but not more than 12 children are given care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. It includes a home that gives care to an unrelated child for more than four weeks during a calendar year. 
Clinic: An establishment where human patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of physicians, dentists or similar professions. 
Club: An organization of persons for special purposes or for the promulgation of sports, arts, sciences, literature, politics, or the like, but not operated for profit. 
Commercial vehicle. Any of the following shall be considered a commercial vehicle: 
(a)	All motor vehicles used for the transportation of passengers for hire, or constructed or used for transportation of goods, wares or merchandise, and/or all motor vehicles designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn; 
(b)	A bus, school bus, or motor vehicle, except a motor home, having a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds, a motor vehicle towing a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of more than 10,000 pounds, or a motor vehicle carrying hazardous material on which is required to be posted a placard as defined and required under 49 C.F.R. parts 100 to 199. A commercial motor vehicle does not include a vehicle used exclusively to transport personal possessions or family members for nonbusiness purposes; 
(c)	Truck tractor; 
(d)	Semi-trailer, which shall include flat beds, stake beds, roll-off containers, tanker bodies, dump bodies and full or partial box-type enclosures. 
(e)	Vehicles of a type that are commonly used for the delivery of ice cream, milk, bread, fruit or similar vending supply or delivery trucks. This category shall include vehicles of a similar nature which are also of a type commonly used by electrical, plumbing, heating and cooling, and other construction oriented contractors; 
(f)	Tow trucks; 
(g)	Commercial hauling trucks; 
(h)	Vehicle repair service trucks; 
(i)	Snow plowing trucks (subject to listed exclusions below); 
(j)	Any vehicle exceeding 12 feet in height or 35 feet in length; 
(1)	Vehicles excluded from definition of commercial vehicle.
Pickup trucks and passenger vehicles, with or without snow plows, are specifically excluded from the above definition of commercial vehicle for the purposes of this section. 
Composting: The process of biologically decomposing organic matter. 
Convalescent or nursing home: A structure with sleeping rooms, where persons are housed or lodged and are furnished with meals, nursing and limited medical care. 
dB(A): The sound pressure level in decibels. Refers to the "a" weighted scale defined by ANSI. A method of weighting the frequency spectrum to mimic the human ear. 
Debilitating medical condition: One or more of the following: 
1.	Cancer, glaucoma, positive status for human immunodeficiency virus, acquired immune deficiency syndrome, hepatitis C, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Crohn's disease, agitation of Alzheimer's disease, nail-patella syndrome (NPS), or the treatment of these conditions. 
2.	A chronic or debilitating disease or medical condition that produces one or more of the following: Cachexia or wasting syndrome; severe and chronic pain; severe nausea; seizures, including but not limited to those characteristic of epilepsy; or severe and persistent muscle spasm, including but not limited to those characteristic of multiple sclerosis. 
3.	Any other medical condition or its treatment approved by the department, as provided for in MCL 333.26425. 
Decibel: The unit of measure used to express the magnitude of sound pressure and sound intensity. 
Deck line: The intersection of two roof surfaces of a mansard or gambrel roof forming the highest horizontal line of the steeper roof slope. 
Development: The construction of a new building or other structure on a zoning lot, the relocation of an existing building on another zoning lot, or the use of open land for a new use. 
Dirt tract: An earth track on which motorized recreational vehicles such as motorcycles, mopeds, all terrain vehicles, and similar vehicles are operated. 
District: A portion of the incorporated area of the township within which certain regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this ordinance. 
Drive-in: An establishment where food, frozen desserts or beverages are sold to the customers in a ready-to-consume state and where the customer consumes food, frozen desserts or beverages in an automobile parked upon the premises or at other facilities provided for customers which are located outside the building. 
Drive-through: An establishment so developed that some portion of its retail or service character is dependent upon providing a driveway approach and staging area specifically designed for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in their motor vehicles, rather than within a building or structure, for carrying out and consumption or use after the vehicle is removed from the premises. 
Drug paraphernalia: All equipment, products and materials of any kind, which is used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance as defined in Section 7104 of the Michigan Public Heath Code (Act No. 368 of the MI Public Acts of 1978 as amended) in violation of the laws of the State of Michigan. 
Dwelling: Any building, or part thereof, containing sleeping, kitchen, and bathroom facilities designed for and occupied by one family. In no case shall a travel trailer, motor home, automobile, tent or other portable building not defined as a recreational vehicle be considered a dwelling. In the case of mixed occupancy where a building is occupied in part as a dwelling unit, the part so occupied shall be deemed a dwelling unit for the purposes of the zoning ordinance. 
1.	Manufacture dwelling unit. A dwelling unit which is substantially built, constructed, assembled, and finished off the premises upon which it is intended to be located. 
2.	Site built dwelling. A dwelling unit which is substantially built, constructed assembled, and finished on the premises upon which it is intended to serve as its final location. Site built dwelling units shall include dwelling units constructed of precut materials, and panelized wall roof and floor sections when such sections require substantial assembly and finishing on the premises upon which it is intended to serve as its final location. 
3.	One-family or single-family detached dwelling. An independent, detached residential dwelling designed for and used or held ready for use by one family only. 
4.	Two-family or duplex dwelling. A detached building, designed exclusively for and occupied by two families living independently of each other, with separate housekeeping, cooking, and bathroom facilities for each. 
5.	Single-family attached dwelling. A self-contained single-family dwelling unit attached to a similar single-family attached dwelling unit with party or common walls, designed as part of a series of three or more dwelling units, each with: 
a.	A separate entryway with direct access to the outdoors at ground level; 
b.	Each dwelling shall comprise of a single unit from the lowest floor to the highest floor of the structure between the common walls (i.e. units shall not be stacked on top of each other); 
c.	A separate basement, if applicable; 
d.	A separate utility connections, and; 
e.	Defined front and rear yards. 
Single-family attached dwelling units may also be known as townhouses, row houses, or clustered single-family dwellings. Any three or more attached dwellings not meeting the above criteria shall be considered a multiple-family dwelling. 
6.	Multiple-family dwelling. A building designed for and occupied by three or more families living independently, with separate housekeeping, cooking, and bathroom facilities for each. Multiple-family dwelling units may also be known as apartments. 
7.	Apartment dwelling. An apartment is an attached dwelling unit with party or common walls, contained in a building with other dwelling units or sharing the occupancy of a building with other than a residential use. Apartments are commonly accessed by a common stair landing or walkway. Apartments are typically rented by the occupants. Apartment buildings often may have a central heating system and other central utility connections. Apartments typically do not have their own yard space. Apartments are also commonly known as garden apartments or flats. 
Erected: Built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on the premises which are required for construction, excavation, fill, drainage and the like shall be considered a part of erection. 
Essential services: The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments of underground, surface, or overhead gas, electrical, steam, fuel or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police callboxes, traffic signals and hydrants in connection therewith that are necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or municipal departments for the general health, safety and welfare. Wireless communication towers or antennas, utility buildings and other associated structures shall not be considered essential services under this article. 
Excavation: Any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and ground care. 
Family:
1.	A single individual or a number of individuals domiciled together whose relationship is of a continuing nontransient, domestic character and who are cooking and living together as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit, related by the bonds of consanguinity, marriage, or adoption, together with servants of the principal occupants and not more than one additional unrelated person, with all of such individuals being domiciled together as a single, domestic, housekeeping unit in a dwelling. 
2.	The functional equivalent of the domestic family, that is, persons living together in a dwelling unit whose relationship is of a permanent and distinct character and is the functional equivalent of a domestic family, with a demonstrable and recognizable bond which constitutes the functional equivalent of the bonds which render the domestic family a cohesive unit. This definition shall not include any rooming house, society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, coterie organization or group whose association is temporary or seasonal in character or nature. For the purposes of enforcement, it is presumed that a functional equivalent of a domestic family is limited to six or fewer persons. 
Farm: The carrying on of any agricultural activity or the raising of livestock, small animals or poultry not including household gardening. 
Feeder road: A street or road intersecting with a limited access freeway and having traffic interchange facilities with such limited access freeway. 
Fence: see section 2114. 
Floor area, residential: For the purpose of computing the minimum allowable floor area in a residential dwelling unit, the sum of the horizontal areas of each story of the building shall be measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two dwellings. The floor area measurement is exclusive of areas of basements, unfinished attics, attached garages, breezeways, and enclosed and unenclosed porches. 
Floor area, usable (for the purposes of computing parking): That area used for or intended to be used for the sale of merchandise or services, or for use to serve patrons, clients or customers. Such floor area which is used or intended to be used principally for the storage or processing of merchandise, hallways or for utilities or sanitary facilities, shall be excluded from this computation of "usable floor area." Measurement of usable floor area shall be the sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls. 
 
USABLE FLOOR AREA 

Garage, private: An accessory building or portion of a main building designed or used solely for the storage of motor-driven vehicles, boats and similar vehicles and such other lawn and home care equipment owned and used by the occupant of the building to which it is accessory. 
Garage sale: Any sale of personal effects, jewelry, or household items, furnishings and equipment belonging to the owner or occupant of the property held in any district by the owner, occupant or his personal representative. 
Garage, service: Any premises used for the storage or care of motor-driven vehicles, or where any such vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired or kept for remuneration, hire or sale. 

Gasoline service station: A place for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuels directly to users of motor vehicles, together with the sale of minor accessories and services for motor vehicles but not including major automobile repair. 
Grade: The ground elevation established for the purpose of regulating the number of stories and the height of buildings. The building grade shall be the level of the ground adjacent to the walls of the building if the finished grade is level. If the ground is not entirely level, the grade shall be determined by averaging the elevation of the ground for each face of the building. 
Greenbelt: A planting of trees and shrubs to serve as a screening device between abutting land uses. 

 
GREENBELT PLANTING SCREEN ILLUSTRATIONS 

Guarantee: A cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or such other instrument acceptable to the city. 
Hardship: Situations created by circumstances unique to an individual property that do not generally occur to land or buildings in the neighborhood or zoning district of the property in question and which circumstances make the use of such property in question infeasible under conditions imposed by the zoning ordinance. Hardship shall not include personal or financial hardship or economic disadvantage nor shall it constitute circumstances that are self-created. 
Home occupation: An occupation carried on by an occupant of a dwelling unit as a secondary use which is clearly subservient to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. 
Hospice: A lodging place for the ill where persons are housed and furnished meals and attendant care. 
Hotel: A building or part of a building, with a common entrance or entrances, in which the dwelling units or rooming units are used primarily for transient occupancy, and in which one or more of the following services are offered: maid service, furnishing of linen, telephone, secretarial or desk service, and bellboy service. A hotel may include a restaurant or cocktail lounge, public banquet halls, ballrooms, or meeting rooms. This definition does not include apartments. 
House of worship: A site used for or intended for the regular assembly of persons for the conducting of religious services and accessory uses therewith. 
Improvements: Those features and actions associated with a project which are considered necessary by the township to protect natural resources or the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the township, and future users or inhabitants of the proposed project or project area, including parking areas, landscaping, roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, screening and drainage. Improvements do not include the entire project which is the subject of zoning approval. 
Institutional farm: A farm utilized as a working and learning environment where resident patients reside on the premises for short periods of time not exceeding nine consecutive months. 
Junkyard: An open area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled including but not limited to: scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. A junkyard includes automobile wrecking yards and includes any area of more than 200 square feet for storage, keeping or abandonment of junk but does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings. A junkyard shall also include any premises upon which two or more motor vehicles, which cannot be operated under their own power, are kept or stored for a period of 15 days or more. 
Kennel, commercial: Any lot or premises on which three or more dogs, cats or other household pets are either permanently or temporarily boarded or bred and raised for remuneration. 
Lighting: The following definitions are related to lighting: 
[1.]	Canopy structure - Any overhead protective structure that is constructed in such a manner to allow pedestrian vehicles to pass under. 
[2.]	Flood or spot light - Any light fixture or lamp that incorporates a reflector or refractor to concentrate the light output into a directed beam in a particular direction. 
[3.]	Footcandle - A unit of illuminance, which is the quantity of light, or luminous flux, arriving at a surface divided by the area of the illuminated surface, amounting to one lumen per square foot. 
[4.]	Glare - Director light emitted by a lamp, luminous tube lighting or other light source. 
[5.]	Light fixture - The assembly that holds a lamp and may include an assembly housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a lamp holder, a ballast, a reflector or mirror, and a refractor or lens. A light fixture also includes the assembly for luminous tube and fluorescent lighting. 
[6.]	Light pollution - Artificial light which causes a detrimental effect on the environment, enjoyment of the night sky or causes undesirable glare or unnecessary illumination of adjacent properties. 
[7.]	Light trespass - The shining of light produced by a luminaire beyond the boundaries of property in which it is located. 
[8.]	Luminaire - The complete lighting system including the lamp and light fixture. 
[9.]	Luminaire cut-off angle - The angle, measured up from the nadir, between the vertical axis and the first line of sight at which the bare source is not visible. 
[10.]	Luminaire, fully shielded - A luminaire constructed or shielded in such a manner that all light emitted by the luminaire, either directly from the lamp or indirectly from the luminaire, is projected below the horizontal plane through the luminaire's lowest light emitting part as determined by photometric test or certified by the manufacturer. 
[11.]	Luminous tube lighting - Gas filled tubing which, when subjected to high voltage, becomes luminescent in a color characteristic of the particular gas used, e.g. neon, argon, etc. 
[12.]	Outdoor light fixtures - Outdoor artificial laminating devices, outdoor fixtures, lamps and other similar devices, permanently installed or portable, used for flood lighting, general illumination or advertisement. 
[13.]	Shielded fixture - Outdoor light fixtures shielded or constructed so that light rays emitted by the fixture are projected below the horizontal plane passing through the lowest point on the fixture from which light is emitted, i.e. "shoe-box type" fixtures. 
A luminaire mounted in a recessed fashion under a canopy or other structure such that the surrounding structure effectively shields the light in the same manner is also considered fully shielded for the purposes of this ordinance. 
Livestock: Means and includes horses, stallions, colts, geldings, mares, sheep, rams, lambs, bulls, bullocks, steers, heifers, cows, calves, mules, jacks, jennets, burros, goats, kids, swine, poultry, and fur-bearing animals being raised in captivity. 
Loading space: An off-street space on the same lot with a building, or group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials. 
Lot: A parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a main building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for the principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such yards and open spaces as are required under the provisions of this ordinance. A lot may or may not be specifically designated as such on public records. Lot shall mean the same as homesite and condominium unit in site condominium developments. 
 
INTERIOR, THROUGH AND CORNER LOTS

Lot area: The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot. 
Lot, corner: A lot where the interior angle of two adjacent sides at the intersection of two streets is less than 135 degrees. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot for the purposes of this ordinance if the arc is of less radius than 150 feet and the tangents to the curve, at the two points where the lot lines meet the curve or the straight street line extended, form an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
Lot coverage: The part or percent of the lot occupied by buildings including accessory buildings and including but not limited to: patios, decks, pools and similar structures. 
Lot depth: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along the median between the side lot lines. 
Lot, interior: Any lot other than a corner lot. 
Lot lines: The lines bounding a lot as defined herein: 
1.	Front lot line. In the case of an interior lot, is that line separating said lot from the street. In the case of a through lot, is that line separating said lot from each street. 
2.	Rear lot line. That lot line opposite the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet long lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot. On a corner lot the rear yard shall be that yard opposite the front facade of the main building. 
3.	Side lot line. Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line. 

Lot of record: A parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a document or map on file with the county register of deeds or in common use by municipal or county officials, and which actually exists as so shown, or any part of such parcel held in a record ownership separate from that of the remainder thereof. 
Lot, through: Any interior lot having frontage on two more or less parallel streets as distinguished from a corner lot. In the case of a row of double frontage lots, all yards of said lots adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and front yard setbacks shall be provided as required. 
Lot width: The horizontal straight line distance between the side lot lines, measured between the two points where the required front setback line intersects the side lot lines. 
 
LOT WIDTH AND SETBACK

Lot, zoning: A single tract of land, located within a single block which, at the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. A zoning lot shall satisfy this ordinance with respect to area, size, dimensions and frontage as required in the district in which the zoning lot is located. A zoning lot, therefore, may not coincide with a lot of record as filed with the county register of deeds, but may include one or more lots of record. 
 
EXAMPLES OF ZONING LOTS

Main building: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot upon which it is situated. 
Main use: The principal use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for which the premises exist. 
Marginal service road: A roadway parallel to a major or collector thoroughfare as designated on the township master plan which provides access to abutting properties and separation from through traffic. 
Marihuana: That term as defined in section 7106 of the Public Heath Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.7106. 
Marina: A privately owned commercial facility which extends into or over Ford Lake and offers service to the general public or members of the marina for launching, docking, loading or other servicing of watercraft. 
Massage: A method of treating external parts of the body for remedial or hygienic purposes, consisting of rubbing, stroking, kneading, adjusting or tapping with the hand or any instruments, electric, magnetic or otherwise, with or without supplementary aids. 
Massage establishment: Any Turkish bath parlor, steam bath, sauna bath, magnetic healing institute or any room, place, establishment or institution where treatment of any nature for the human body as given by means of massage, as herein defined, and where a massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, bath, physiotherapy manipulation of the body or similar treatment is given. 
Major thoroughfare: An arterial street which is intended to serve as a large volume trafficway for both the immediate municipal area and the region beyond, and is designated as a major thoroughfare, parkway, freeway, expressway or equivalent term on the major thoroughfare plan to identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the major thoroughfare plan. 
Master deed: The condominium document recording the condominium project as approved by the township to which is attached as exhibits and incorporated by reference the bylaws for the project and the condominium subdivision plan for the project and all other information required by section 8 of the Condominium Act, Act No. 59 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq.), as amended. 

Master plan: The comprehensive community plan including graphic and written proposals indicating the general location for streets, parks, schools, public buildings and all physical development of the township, and includes any unit or part of such plan, and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof. 
Mechanical amusement device: Any machine or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, currency, slug, token, plate or disc, operates or may be operated as a game or contest of skill or amusement when the element of skill in such operation predominates over chance or luck. It shall include mechanical, electrical, or electronic video games, mechanical grabbing devices, pinball games, mechanical, electrical, or electronic baseball, football, basketball, hockey and similar sports-type games, mechanical, electrical, or electronic card games, shooting games, target games, or any other machine, device or apparatus which may be used as a game of skill and wherein the player initiates, employs or directs any force generated by such machine. 
Medical clinic: A place for the care, diagnosis, and treatment of sick or injured persons and those in need of medical or minor surgical attention. A clinic may incorporate laboratories and pharmacies, but may not include facilities for in-patient care or major surgery. 
Medical marihuana dispensary: Any structure used for dispensing marihuana by a primary caregiver or caregivers to one or more qualifying patient(s). A medical marihuana dispensary does not include a qualifying patient's residence if the marihuana transferred is exclusively for the qualifying patient's use. 
Medical marihuana nursery: Any structure which is used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, producing, processing, preparing, packaging, repackaging, or storing medical marihuana for one or more qualifying patients. A medical marihuana nursery does not include a qualifying patient's residence if the marihuana is exclusively for the qualifying patient's use. 
Medical office: The place of work for physicians, dentists, or similar professionals where persons are examined or treated on an outpatient basis only. An office may not include facilities for outpatient surgery, laboratories, pharmacies, or facilities for in-patient care. 
Mezzanine: An intermediate floor in any story occupying not less than one-third of the floor area of such story. 

 
BASIC STRUCTURAL TERMS

Ministorage units: Storage buildings for lease to the general public for storage of personal and household effects and for dry storage of office or business effects not including the warehousing of products or supplies. 
Mobile home: Any building or structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a chassis and designed to be sold as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained in the structure. Mobile home does not include recreational equipment. 
Mobile home park: Any plot of ground upon which three or more mobile homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located. 
Motel: A series of attached, semidetached or detached rental units containing a bedroom, bathroom and closet space. Units shall provide for overnight lodging, have separate entrances and are offered to the public for compensation. This definition does not include apartments. 
Multiple dwelling, high-rise: A multiple-family dwelling of over four stories in height. 
Multiple dwelling, mid-rise: A multiple-family dwelling of four stories in height. 
Municipality: The Charter Township of Ypsilanti. 
Nonconforming lots, structures, sites or uses of land: See Article 22 (XXII). 
Nuisance factors: An offensive, annoying, unpleasant or obnoxious thing or practice, a cause or source of annoyance, especially a continuing or repeating invasion of any physical characteristics of activity or use across a property line which can be perceived by or affects a human being, or the generation of an excessive or concentrated movement of people or things, such as, but not limited to: (a) noise, (b) dust, (c) smoke, (d) odor, (e) glare, (f) fumes, (g) flashes, (h) vibration, (i) shock waves, (j) heat, (k) electronic or atomic radiation, (l) objectionable effluent, (m) noise of congregation of people, particularly at night, (n) passenger traffic, (o) invasion of nonabutting street frontage by traffic, (p) a burned structure, (q) a condemned structure. 
Nursery, plant materials: A space, building or structure, or combination thereof, for the storage of live trees, shrubs or plants offered for retail sale on the premises including products used for gardening or landscaping. The definition of nursery within the meaning of this ordinance does not include any space, building or structure used for the sale of fruits, vegetables or Christmas trees. 
Nursing home: A structure with sleeping rooms where persons are housed or lodged and are furnished with meals, nursing and medical care. 
Obscene material: Any "material" as defined in MCL 752.362.2(4) as amended and found to be "obscene" as also defined in MCL 752.362.2(5) as amended. 
Off-grid energy system: An energy production facility or device that is not connected to the available public utility. 
Off-street parking lot: A facility providing off-street vehicular parking spaces and drives or aisles for the parking of more than three vehicles. 
On-grid energy system: A supplemental energy production facility or device that is connected to the available public utility. 
On-site use wind energy systems: An on-site use wind energy system is intended to primarily serve the needs of the property owner and/or occupant. 
Open front store: A business establishment so developed that service to the patrons may be extended beyond the walls of the structure, not requiring the patron to enter the structure. The term "open front store" shall not include automobile repair or gasoline service stations. 
Open storage: The storage of any materials or objects outside the confines of a building. 
Over speeding: The uncontrolled rotation of a wind powered turbine/generator in excess of its design specification. 
Parking space: An area of definite length and width, said area shall be exclusive of drives, aisles or entrances giving access thereto, and shall be fully accessible for the parking of permitted vehicles. 
Parole and/or probation offices: A facility for the offices of parole supervisory officials or probation supervisory officials, as further described below: 
Parole: A term of community supervision afforded by the parole board to a prisoner who has served the minimum portion of his or her sentence, less good time or disciplinary credits if applicable. While on parole, a parolee is supervised by an agent who is an employee of the department of corrections. At the successful completion of the parole period, the offender is "discharged" from his or her sentence. If a parolee violates the parole terms, he or she can be sent back to prison. The parole board retains jurisdiction until the maximum-sentence is served in prison or the offender discharges from parole. 
Probation: A term of supervision afforded either a convicted felon or a convicted misdemeanant by a court as an alternative to prison or jail, although some judges may sentence offenders to a combination of both probation and jail or boot camp. 
The Michigan Department of Corrections supervises convicted felons who are serving probation sentences under the jurisdiction of the sentencing court. 
Pawnbroker: Any person, corporation, or member of a copartnership or firm who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal property, or other valuable thing, other than securities or printed evidence of indebtedness, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other valuable thing on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price. 
Physician: An individual licensed as a physician under Part 170 of the Pubic Heath Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.17001 to 333.17084, or an osteopathic physician under Part 175 of the Public Heath Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.17501 to 333.17556. 
Places of worship: A site used for or intended for the regular assembly of persons for the conducting of religious services and accessory uses therewith 
Primary caregiver: A person who has agreed to assist with a patient's medical use of marihuana and has a valid registry identification card issued by the Michigan Department of Community Health. 
Principal building: A building or structure in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. 
Principal use: The main use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for which the premises exist. 
Public access launch site: A publicly owned facility which extends into or over Ford Lake and offers to the general public a site for launching, docking, loading or other servicing of recreational watercraft or parking of watercraft trailers. 
Public utilities: A person, firm, corporation, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal, state or municipal regulations or franchise agreements to the public: gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, telegraph, transportation or water. Wireless communications towers or antennas shall not be considered public or private utilities under this section. 
Qualifying patient: A person who has been diagnosed by a physician as having a debilitating medical condition and has a valid registry identification card issued by the Michigan Department of Community Health. 
Recreational equipment: Travel trailers, pickup campers or coaches, motorized dwellings, tent trailers, boats, and boat trailers, snowmobiles, horse trailers, dune buggies, and other similar equipment and conveyances. 
Registry identification card: A document issued by the Michigan Department of Community Health that identifies a person as a registered qualifying patient or registered primary caregiver. 
Resident patient: A person under treatment for substance abuse but not including persons under the jurisdiction of the department of corrections. 
Retail establishment: Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. A retail establishment does not include establishments whose principal business is that of a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer. 
Ridgeline: The intersection of two roof surfaces forming the highest horizontal line of the roof. 
Roof: The outside top covering of a building. 
Room: For the purpose of determining lot area requirements and density in a multiple-family district, a room is a living room, dining room or bedroom, equal to at least 80 square feet in area. A room shall not include the area in kitchen, sanitary facilities, utility provisions, corridors, hallways and storage. Plans presented showing one-, two- or three-bedroom units and including a "den," "library" or other extra room shall count such extra room as a bedroom for the purpose of computing density. 
Rooming house:
1.	A residential building where rooms or suites of rooms are rented, for compensation whether under a written lease or not, by arrangement for definite periods, where the renters use common facilities, such as hallways and bathrooms. A rooming house shall not include hotels, motels, apartment houses, tourist homes, one-family dwellings, two- and multi-family dwellings or fraternity and sorority houses. 
Rotor: An element of a wind energy system that acts as a multi-bladed airfoil assembly, thereby extracting through rotation, kinetic energy directly from the wind. 
Satellite earth station: A structure designed, intended or used to receive communications or other signals from geostationary, communications satellites or other extraterrestrial sources. 
Secondhand apparel: Personal property designed to be worn as clothing which has been previously worn by another person. 
Secondhand dealer or junk dealer: Any person, corporation, or member of a copartnership or firm whose principal business is that of purchasing storing, selling, exchanging and/or receiving secondhand personal property of any kind or description. A secondhand dealer or junk dealer does not include any person, corporation, or member of a copartnership or firm whose principal business is antique goods or secondhand apparel. 
Setback: The distance required to obtain minimum front, side or rear yard open space provisions of this ordinance. Setbacks for a public street shall be measured from existing or proposed right-of-way lines, whichever is greater. Setbacks for buildings shall be measured from the foundation wall. 
Sidewalk sales area: A paved sidewalk surface abutting a principal building on a zoning lot for display and sales of merchandise. 
Sign definitions: See section 2109. 
Single housekeeping unit: All of the associated rooms in a dwelling unit available to and occupied by all of the occupants with a single set of cooking facilities also available to and utilized by all of the occupants of the dwelling unit. 
Site condominium definitions:
1.	Condominium Act. Act No. 59 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq.), as amended. 
2.	Condominium unit. Means that portion of a condominium project designed and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the master deed and is a parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a main building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for the principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such yards and open spaces as are required under the provisions of this ordinance. A lot may or may not be specifically designated as such on public records. Lot shall mean the same as homesite and condominium unit in site condominium developments. 
3.	Master deed. Means the condominium document recording the condominium project as approved by the township to which is attached as exhibits and incorporated by reference the bylaws for the project and the condominium subdivision plan for the project, and all other information required by section 8 of the Condominium Act. 
4.	Site condominium (condominium subdivision). A method of subdivision where the sale and ownership of sites is regulated by the Condominium Act, as amended, as opposed to the Subdivision Control Act of 1967 (Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.), as amended. Condominium subdivision shall be equivalent to the term "subdivision" as used in this zoning ordinance and the township subdivision regulations ordinance. 
5.	Site condominium subdivision plan. Means the site, survey and utility plans; floor plans; and sections, as appropriate, showing the existing and proposed structures and improvements including the location thereof on the land. 
Smoking lounge: Smoking lounge shall mean an establishment that allows smoking of tobacco products or non-tobacco products or substances on the premises. The term "smoking lounge" includes, but is not limited to facilities commonly described as cigar bars and lounges, hookah bars, cafes and lounges, tobacco bars and lounges, tobacco clubs or zero percent nicotine establishments. 
Sound pressure: Average rate at which sound energy is transmitted through a unit area in a specified direction. The pressure of the sound measured at a receiver. 
Sound pressure level: The sound pressure mapped to a logarithmic scale and reported in decibels (dB). 
Specified anatomical areas:
1.	Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.	Human genitals, pubic region, 
b.	Buttock, and 
c.	Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
2.	Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities:
1.	Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal 

2.	Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy. 
3.	Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast. 
Story: That part of a building, except a mezzanine as defined herein, included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the next floor, or if there is no floor above, then the ceiling next above. A story thus defined shall not be counted as a story when more than 50 percent, by cubic content, is below the height level of the adjoining ground. 
Story, half: An uppermost story lying under a sloping roof having an area of at least 200 square feet in area with a clear height of seven feet six inches. For the purposes of this ordinance, the usable floor area is only that area having at least four feet clear height between floor and ceiling. 
 
BASEMENT AND STORY

Street: A public dedicated right-of-way, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground. 
Subdivision: The partitioning or dividing of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns for the purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development, where the act of division creates five or more parcels of land, each of which is ten acres or less in area; or five or more parcels of land, each of which is ten acres or less in area are created by successive divisions within a period of ten years. 
Tattoo: One or more of the following: 
(a)	An indelible mark made upon the body of another individual by the insertion of a pigment under the skin; 
(b)	An indelible design made upon the body of another individual by production of scars other than by branding. 
Tattoo facility: A structure or building at which one or more of the following procedures is done for compensation: 
(a)	Tattooing; 
(b)	Branding; 
(c)	Body-Piercing. 
Temporary use or building: A use or building permitted to exist during a specified period of time. 
Tent sale: A temporary structure of demountable construction in which merchandise is displayed and sold. 
Transition: For the purposes of this ordinance, the word "transition" or "transitional" shall mean one or more of the following: 
1.	A zoning district which may serve as a district of transition, i.e., a buffer zone between various land use districts or land use types. 
2.	A residential rear or side yard lot or land parcel arrangement abutting a land use of more intense development character. 
3.	A device such as an earth berm, wall, screening fence, heavy shrub and tree planting or a combination of such devices providing a buffer between land use types. 
 
LAND USE TRANSITION THROUGH ZONING DISTRICT

 
TRANSITION DETAILS

Usable marihuana: The dried leaves and flowers of the marihuana plant, and any mixture or preparation thereof, but does not include the seeds, stalks, and roots of the plant. 
Use: The principal purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be occupied. 
Visiting qualifying patient: A patient who is not a resident of this state or who has been a resident of this state for less than 30 days. 
Wall, obscuring: A structure of definite height and location to serve as an obscuring screen in carrying out the requirements of this ordinance. 
Watercraft: A contrivance used or designed for navigation on water, including a vessel, boat, motor vessel, steam vessel, vessel operated by machinery either permanently or temporarily affixed, scow, or any marine equipment or device capable of carrying passengers. 
Wholesale, establishment: Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users, or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies. 
Wind energy system: A wind energy conversion system which converts wind energy into electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator and includes the turbine, blades and tower as well as related electrical equipment. This does not include wiring to connect the wind energy system to the grid. 
Written certification: A document signed by a physician, stating the patient's debilitating medical condition and stating that, in the physician's professional opinion, the patient is likely to receive therapeutic or palliative benefit from the medical use of marihuana to treat or alleviate the patient's debilitating medical condition or symptoms associated with the debilitating medical condition. 
Yards: The open spaces on the same lot with a main building unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, and as defined herein: 
1.	Front yard. An open depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest point of the main building. 
2.	Rear yard. An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest point of the main building. In the case of a corner lot, the rear yard shall be opposite the front building facade side of such lot. 
3.	Side yard. An open space between a main building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point on the side lot line to the nearest point of the main building. 
(Ord. No. 95-137, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 96-145, 3-5-96; Ord. No. 97-169, 6-17-97; Ord. No. 98-182, 2-17-98; Ord. No. 99-205, 3-16-99; Ord. No. 99-209, 5-4-99; Ord. No. 99-227, 11-16-99; Ord. No. 2000-238, 7-18-00; Ord. No. 2000-249, § 1, 10-3-00; Ord. No. 2000-260, § 1, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 2000-261, § 1, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 2001-266, § 1, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 2001-273, 8-21-01; Ord. No. 2001-289, § 1, 11-20-01; Ord. No. 2004-333, § 1, 4-20-04; Ord. No. 2004-334, § 1, 4-20-04; Ord. No. 2009-390, 4-7-09; Ord. No. 2010-402, § 1, 3-16-10; Ord. No. 2010-404, § I, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 2016-462 , § 1, 3-15-16; Ord. No. 2016-471 , §§ I—III, 12-6-16; Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 1, 2-20-18; Ord. No. 2020-491 , § 1, 7-21-20)
 
YARDS

 
ARTICLE III. ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
 
Sec. 300. Districts established:
For the purpose of this ordinance the Charter Township of Ypsilanti is hereby divided into the following districts: 
R-1 	One-family residential district 
R-2 	One-family residential district 
R-3 	One-family residential district 
R-4 	One-family residential district 
R-5 	One-family residential district 
RM-1 	Multiple-family residential district 
RM-2 	Multiple-family residential district 
RM-3 	Multiple-family residential district 
RM-4 	Multiple-family residential district 
RM-5 	Townhouse residential district 
MHP 	Mobile home park district 
OS-1 	Office service district 
B-1 	Local business district 
B-2 	Community business district 
B-3 	General business district 
FS 	Freeway service district 
IRO 	Industrial research office district 
I-1 	Light industrial district 
I-2 	General industrial district 
I-3 	Heavy industrial district 
I-C 	Industrial and commercial districts 
P-1 	Vehicular parking district 
PD 	Planned development district 

(Ord. No. 99-224, § I, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 2001-284, 12-18-01; Ord. No. 2001-285, 12-18-01; Ord. No. 2001-286, 12-18-01; Ord. No. 2001-287, 12-18-01; Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 2, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 301. District boundaries:
The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the zoning map, Charter Township of Ypsilanti zoning ordinance, which accompanies this ordinance, and which map with all notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this ordinance as if fully described herein. 
 
Sec. 302. District boundaries interpreted:
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
1.	Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys, shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
2.	Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
3.	Boundaries indicated as approximately following township limits shall be construed as following township limits. 
4.	Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be the midway between the main tracks. 
5.	Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
6.	Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections 1. through 5. above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
7.	Where physical or natural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections 1 through 6 above, the board of appeals shall interpret the district boundaries. 
8.	Insofar as some or all of the various districts may be indicated on the zoning map by patterns or lines which, for the sake of map clarity, do not cover public rights-of-way, it is intended that such district boundaries do extend to the center of any public right-of-way. 
 
Sec. 303. Text interpreted:
Where uncertainty exists with respect to uses permitted in any district, or any condition set forth in this appendix, the following rules shall apply: 
1.	No use of land shall be permitted in any use district except those uses specifically set forth in the district. 
2.	Uses or structures not specifically permitted in a zoning district shall be prohibited in such district. 
3.	Unless otherwise provided for in this appendix where uses of yard areas are indicated as being permitted, the use of any other yard area for such use shall be prohibited. 
 
Sec. 304. Zoning of vacated areas:
Whenever any street, alley or other public way, within the Township of Ypsilanti shall be vacated, such street, alley, or other public way or portion thereof, shall automatically be classified in the same zoning district as the property to which it attaches. 
 
Sec. 305. District requirements:
All buildings and uses in any district shall be subject to the provisions of article XXI, "General Provisions" and article XXII "General Exceptions." 
 
Sec. 306. Schedule of uses:
1.	In all districts, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this article. The following land use schedules show the uses which are permitted, permitted as a special use, permitted as an accessory use, or prohibited in specific districts or zones in the Charter Township of Ypsilanti. The land use schedules are intended to serve as a guide for the convenience of the user of this zoning ordinance. More detailed standards regarding uses are contained within the individual district standards within article XVIII, specific use standards. 
2.	The schedules of use regulations identifies uses as follows: 
a.	P: Principal permitted uses. Uses permitted by right in the applicable zoning district, subject to compliance with all other applicable requirements of this zoning ordinance. 
b.	S: Special conditional uses. Uses which may be permitted upon the granting of a permit for such use by the planning commission, subject to the compliance with all applicable requirements of this zoning ordinance, and subject further to such other reasonable conditions which in the opinion of the planning commission are necessary to provide adequate protection to the neighborhood and to abutting properties and subject further to a public hearing in accord with section 2309 and further shall be reviewed as provided for in section 2119. 
c.	A: Accessory uses. Uses which may be permitted as an accessory use incidental to the principal use of the premises, subject to compliance with all other applicable requirements of this zoning ordinance. 
d.	—: Not permitted. Uses not permitted within the district. 
3.	Residential districts schedule of uses identifies the uses allowed in the following residential districts: 
a.	R-1 to R-5 one-family residential districts: The intent is to provide for an environment of predominantly low-density, one-family dwellings along with other residentially related facilities which serve the residents in the district. 
b.	RM-1 and RM-2 multiple-family residential districts: The intent is to provide sites for low- to moderate-density multiple-family dwelling structures, and related uses. 
c.	RM-3 and RM-4 multiple-family residential districts: The intent is to provide sites for high-density multiple-dwelling developments. 
d.	RM-5 townhouse residential districts: The intent is to provide for moderate density infill housing. 
e.	MHP mobile home park districts: The intent is to provide for mobile home and manufactured housing communities. 
Residential Districts Use Table	R-1 to R-5	RM-1 and RM-2	RM-3 and RM-4	RM-5	MHP	Notes
P = Permitted Use S = Special Conditional Use A = Accessory Use — = Not permitted 
Residential Uses

Detached single-family residential 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	Subject to regulations in section 1801
Two-family residential 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	Must have with individual entrances and garages for each dwelling unit 
Attached single-family residential/townhouses with individual entrances and garages 	— 	P 	P 	P 	— 	
Multiple-family dwelling units 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	Subject to design regulations in each zoning district 
Senior independent and assisted living 	— 	P 	P 	— 	— 	
Convalescent and nursing homes 	— 	S 	S 	— 	— 	Subject to conditions in section 1816
Mobile home parks/mobile homes 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	Subject to conditions in section 7.03 and 7.04 
Accessory Uses

Accessory home occupations 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	Subject to conditions in section 1802
Retail uses accessory to high-rise multiple-family dwelling 	— 	— 	A 	— 	— 	Subject to conditions in section 1817
Keeping of up to four hens 	A 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Subject to conditions in section 1803
Keeping of more than four dogs 	S 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Subject to conditions in section 1815
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the permitted uses in this table 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	
State-licensed residential child and adult care facilities

Adult/child family day care homes 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	Subject to the conditions in section 1861
Adult/child group day care homes 	S 	S 	S 	— 	— 	Subject to the conditions in section 1861
Adult/child day care center + preschools 	S 	S 	S 	— 	— 	Subject to the conditions in section 1861. Accessory to an allowed non-residential use in the R-1 to R-5 zoning districts 
Adult and child foster care family home 	P 	P 	P 	— 	— 	Subject to the conditions in section 1861
Adult foster care, small group home 	S 	S 	S 	— 	— 	Subject to the conditions in section 1861
Adult foster care, large group home 	— 	S 	S 	— 	— 	Subject to the conditions in section 1861
Adult foster care congregate facility 	— 	S 	S 	— 	— 	Subject to the conditions in section 1861
Child foster care family group home 	S 	S 	S 	— 	— 	Subject to the conditions in section 1861
Agricultural

Farm operation 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Five-acre minimum lot size. Subject to conditions in section 1804
Seasonal sale of produce on farms 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Subject to conditions in section 1813
Farms with sales and entertainment facilities 	S 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Subject to conditions in section 1855
Institutional farms 	S 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Subject to conditions in section 1814
Private stables 	A 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Subject to conditions in section 1810
Public riding and/or boarding stables 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Subject to conditions in section 1809
Greenhouse and plant material nursery (materials grown and sold on-site) 	S 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Subject to conditions in section 1811
Lodging

Bed and Breakfasts 	S 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Subject to conditions in section 1808
Civic/Institutional

Cemeteries 	S 	— 	— 	— 	— 	Subject to conditions in section 1812
House of worship 	S 	P 	P 	— 	P 	
Publicly owned and operated libraries 	S 	P 	P 	— 	P 	
Public, parochial and other private elementary schools offering courses in general education, and not operated for profit. 	S 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Public, parochial and private intermediate and/or secondary schools offering courses in general education, not operated for profit. 	S 	P 	P 	— 	— 	— 
Colleges, universities and other such institutions of higher learning, public and private, offering courses in general, technical, or religious education and not operated for profit 	S 	S 	S 	— 	— 	Subject to conditions in section 1807
Utility and public service buildings and uses (without storage yards) when operating requirements necessitate the locating of said building within the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity. 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	
Recreation

Parks, common greens, plazas, public gathering places and open space 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Publicly owned and operated recreational facilities 	S 	P 	P 	— 	P 	Subject to conditions in section 1805
Golf courses 	S 	P 	P 	— 	— 	Subject to conditions in section 1806 and footnote 4 in the schedule of regulations 
Institutional or community recreation centers and nonprofit swimming pool clubs 	S 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Community buildings for use by the tenants of the mobile home park as well as recreation areas and playgrounds 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	
Private or public recreation vehicle campgrounds 	P* 	— 	— 	— 	— 	* Principal use in R-4 only. Subject to conditions in section 1852
Other

One office building to be used exclusively for conducting the business operation of the mobile home park 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	
Utility buildings for laundry facilities and auxiliary storage space for mobile home tenants 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	
Storage of recreation vehicles 	— 	— 	— 	— 	P 	Subject to conditions in section 1853
Wireless communication towers and antennas 	See section 1850	

  
4.	Office and business districts schedule of uses identifies the uses allowed in the following residential districts: 
a.	OS-1 office service districts: The intent is to accommodate uses such as offices, banks and personal services. 
b.	B-1 local business districts: The intent is to meet the day-to-day convenience shopping and service needs of persons residing in immediately adjacent residential areas. 
c.	B-2 community business districts: The intent is to cater to the needs of a larger consumer population than is served by the local business districts. 
d.	B-3 general business districts: The intent is to provide sites for more diversified business types which would often be incompatible with the pedestrian movement in the local business district or the community business district. 
Office and Business Districts Use Table	OS-1	B-1	B-2	B-3	Notes
P = Permitted Use S = Special Conditional Use A = Accessory Use — = Not permitted 
Retail and Services

Retail 	A 	P 	P 	P 	
	— 	— 	— 	S 	With drive-through or drive-in facilities, subject to conditions in section 1823
Antique businesses 	— 	— 	P 	P 	Pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers and junk dealers are not included in this use 
Secondhand apparel businesses 	— 	— 	— 	P 	Pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers, and junk dealers are not included in this use 
Commercial kennel 	— 	— 	— 	S 	All activities are conducted within enclosed main building; all buildings are set back at least 200 feet from abutting residential districts on the same side of the street 
Mortuary establishments 	S 	P 	P 	P 	Subject to conditions in section 1818
Personal service establishments 	— 	P 	P 	P 	
	A 	— 	— 	— 	Up to 15,000 square feet in size 
Adult/child day care center + preschools 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Subject to the conditions in section 1861
Smoking lounges 	— 	— 	— 	S 	Subject to the conditions in section 1836
Veterinary clinics 	S 	P 	P 	S 	Subject to conditions in section 1820
Veterinary hospitals 	— 	— 	— 	S 	Subject to conditions in section 1821
Temporary sidewalk, outdoor and tent sales for principal use 	— 	— 	— 	A 	Subject to conditions in section 1832
Temporary sales unrelated to principal use 	— 	— 	— 	* 	* Temporary use subject to approval by the zoning board of appeals. See section 2404.3.f 
Retail sales of plant material not grown on the site, lawn furniture, playground equipment and/or garden supplies. 	— 	— 	S 	S 	Subject to conditions in section 1828
Outdoor storage or display of merchandise, goods or items associated with a permitted use 	— 	— 	— 	S 	Subject to conditions in section 1824
Banks, credit unions, savings and loan establishments and similar financial institutions 	— 	P 	P 	P 	With no drive-through 
	— 	— 	— 	S 	Up to two drive-through teller windows or automated teller windows and stand-alone automatic bank teller machines, subject to conditions in section 1823
	— 	— 	— 	S 	With drive-through, subject to conditions in section 1823
Medical offices 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Medical offices up to 15,000 square feet in size 
	P 	S 	S 	P 	Medical offices over 15,000 square feet in size 
Medical clinics 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Urgent care facilities 	— 	— 	— 	P 	
Office buildings and uses 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Restaurants 	S 	S 	P 	P 	SCU is subject to conditions in section 1822
Drive-through restaurants 	— 	— 	— 	S 	Subject to conditions in section 1823
Outdoor or sidewalk cafes 	S 	S 	P 	P 	Accessory use to existing restaurant, subject to conditions in section 1825
Hotels 	— 	— 	— 	P 	
Motels 	— 	— 	— 	S 	Subject to conditions in section 1827
Civic/Institutional

Houses of worship 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Public/government buildings 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Public utility buildings, without storage yards; water and sewage 	S 	S 	S 	S 	Water and sewage pumping stations are excluded in the OS-1 and B-1 districts. 
Business schools and colleges or private schools operated for profit 	— 	— 	P 	P 	
Recreation

Arcades and similar uses 	— 	— 	— 	S 	Subject to conditions in section 1102.8 
Theaters, public assembly halls, concert halls or similar places of public assembly 	— 	— 	P 	P 	Conducted completely within enclosed buildings. 
Halls for private clubs, civic organizations, unions and membership organizations or similar places of private assembly 	S 	P 	P 	P 	In OS-1, subject to conditions in section 1819
Outdoor batting cages, archery ranges and similar uses 	— 	— 	— 	S 	Subject to conditions in section 1835
Outdoor children's amusement parks, miniature golf courses, golf driving ranges and similar uses 	— 	— 	— 	S 	Subject to conditions in section 1834
Health clubs, fitness centers, gyms and aerobic clubs, health and fitness center 	— 	— 	S 	P 	
Indoor recreational facility, including bowling alley, archery range, tennis/racquet ball court, skating rink, athletic field, swimming pool, and other similar uses 	— 	— 	S 	P 	Must be located at least 100 feet from any front, rear or side yard of any residential lot in an adjacent residential district 
Automotive/Transportation

Automobile car wash, automatic or self-service 	— 	— 	— 	S 	Subject to conditions in section 1833
Bus passenger stations 	— 	— 	— 	P 	
Gasoline service station with or without minor repair and sale of incidental minor accessories or convenience items. 	— 	— 	— 	S 	Subject to the conditions in section 1829
Minor automotive repair businesses 	— 	— 	— 	S 	Subject to conditions in [section] 1830
Dealership for sale of new or used automobiles, boats, house trailers or rental of trailers and/or automobiles 	— 	— 	— 	S 	Subject to conditions in [section] 1826
Off-street parking lots as primary use 	S 	S 	S 	S 	Subject to conditions in section 1202. 
Railroad lines, rail spurs and similar rail transport access facilities 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Subject to conditions in section 1851
Towing services without an impound or storage yard, taxi terminals and dispatch facilities, limousine services and bus depots 	— 	— 	— 		Subject to conditions in section 1862
Accessory Uses

Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any permitted use in this table 	A 	A 	A 	A 	
Other

Wireless communication towers and antennas 	See section 1850	

  
5.	Town center districts: Schedule of uses identifies the uses allowed in the following residential districts: 
a.	TC-1 districts: The intents is for a non-residential zone with a mixture of commercial, office, research and development and recreational uses. 
b.	TC-2 districts: The intent is for a mixture of commercial, office, residential and recreational uses. 
c.	TC-3 districts: The intent is for commercial and office uses that provide convenience goods and services to residents of the township. 
d.	TC-4 districts: The intent is for primarily residential uses. 
e.	TC-5 district: The intent is for this area to be the civic zone with governmental and civic uses including the township hall, district court, National Guard Armory and library. 
Town Center Districts Use Table	TC-1	TC-2	TC-3	TC-4	TC-5	Notes

P = Permitted Use S = Special Conditional Use A = Accessory Use — = Not permitted 
Residential Uses

Detached single-family residential 		P 	P 	P 		Subject to regulations in section 1801
Two-family residential with individual entrances and garages 		P 		P 		
Attached single-family residential/townhouses with individual entrances and garages 		P 		P 		
Residential dwellings on upper floors within mixed-use buildings 		P 	P 			
Live/work units with a dwelling unit on the upper floor above a first floor space under the same ownership that can be used for a commercial use 		P 	P 	S 		
Senior assisted living 		P 	P 	P 		
Nursing homes 		P 	P 	S 	P 	
Accessory Uses

Accessory home occupations 		P 	P 	P 		Subject to conditions in section 1802
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any permitted use in this table 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	
Retail and Services

Retail establishments within an enclosed building 	P 	P 	P 			Floor area 30,000 sq. ft. or less 
	S 	S 	S 			Floor area above 30,000 sq. ft. 
Drive-thru service accessory to a retail use 	S 	S 	S 			
Child care centers, preschool and commercial day care 	P 	P 	P 			Subject to the conditions in section 1861
Dry cleaning drop-off stations 	P 	P 	P 			
Gasoline service stations and carwashes 	S 					
Personal service establishments such as barber/beauty shops dry cleaning drop-off stations, shoe repair shops and tailoring 	P 	P 	P 			
Lodging and Restaurants

Restaurants, taverns, bars, delicatessen, food carryout, and similar establishments serving food or beverages, including sidewalk cafes, but excluding drive-through 	P 	P 	P 			Sidewalk cafes are subject to conditions in section 1825
Drive-through restaurants 	S 					
Hotels 	P 	P 	P 			
Bed and breakfast inns 	P 	P 	P 	S 		
Banquet halls 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	
Office and Financial

Banks with up to three drive-through teller lanes 	P 	S 	S 			
Medical offices, clinics and hospitals 	P 	P 	P 			
Professional offices 	P 	P 	P 			
Real estate, insurance and investment brokers 	P 	P 	P 			
Research and development, including laboratories, prototype development and testing facilities 	S 					
Veterinary hospital, small animal 	S 	S 	S 			
Recreation

Assembly halls, recreational clubs, fraternal order halls, lodge halls or other similar places of assembly 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Golf courses 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Health clubs, fitness centers, gyms and aerobic clubs 	P 	P 	P 			
Indoor recreation such as bowling alleys, racket ball courts, skating rinks and swimming pools 	P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	
Parks, common greens, plazas, public gathering places and open space 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Civic

Houses of worship 	P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	
Public, private or parochial schools 	P 	P 	P 	S 	P 	
Public/government buildings such as; township/state/county offices, public museums, libraries and community centers 	P 	P 	P 		P 	
Essential public services 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Other

Wireless communication towers and antennas 	See section 1850

  
6.	Industrial districts schedule of uses identifies the uses allowed in the following residential districts: 
a.	IRO industrial research office districts: The intent is to provide for a mixture of office, research and industrial facilities. 
b.	I-1 light industrial districts: The intent is to primarily accommodate wholesale activities, warehouses, and industrial operations whose external, physical effects no manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding districts. 
c.	I-2 general industrial districts: The intent is for manufacturing, assembling and fabrication activities including large scale or specialized industrial operations, whose external physical effects will be felt to some degree by surrounding districts. 
d.	I-3 industrial districts: The intent is to provide locations for industrial uses which, due to the nature of activities conducted, are not well suited to locations within I-1 or I-2 districts and whose effects on abutting property as well as beyond the district may impair the use of such abutting property. 
e.	I-C industrial and commercial districts: The intent is to accommodate manufacturing, assembling and fabrication activities including business activities which are not well suited to locations in business districts due to their impact on abutting neighborhoods or due to their requirements for large site areas not available in the township's limited business districts. 
Industrial Districts Use Table	IRO	I-1	I-2	I-3	I-C	Notes
P = Permitted Use S = Special Conditional Use A = Accessory Use — = Not permitted 
Industrial Uses

Blast furnace, steel furnace, blooming or rolling mill 			P 	P 	P 	Located not less than 800 feet distance from any residential district and not less than 300 feet distant from any other district 
Central dry cleaning plant, service to more than one facility 		P 	P 	P 		
Garbage, refuse and rubbish transfer stations 			P 	P 	P 	Subject to conditions in section 1858
Heating and electric power generating plants, and all necessary uses 			S 	S 	S 	
Incineration of garbage or refuse when conducted within an approved and enclosed incinerator plant 			P 	P 	P 	Located not less than 800 feet distance from any residential district and not less than 300 feet distant from any other district 
Junkyards and places for dismantling, wrecking and disposing or salvaging of the junk and or refuse material of agricultural and automotive vehicles, paper, glass and other materials of a similar nature, including processing of materials for recycling 			P 	P 	P 	Subject to conditions in section 1842 and article V, junkyards and automobile dismantling, of the Code of Ordinances Charter Township of Ypsilanti 
Lumber and planing mills 		S 	S 		S 	Must be in enclosed building and located in the interior of the district so that no property line shall form the exterior boundary of the zoning district 
Manufacture of corrosive acid or alkali, cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris. 			P 	P 	P 	Located not less than 800 feet distant from any residential district and not less than 300 feet distant from any other district 
Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties and metal or rubber stamps, or other small molded rubber products 	S 	P 	P 			In IRO, must be in enclosed building 
Manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or gas 	S 	P 	P 			In IRO, must be in enclosed building 
Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radios and phonographs 	S 	P 	P 			In IRO, must be in enclosed building 
Manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles or merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, precious or semiprecious metals or stones, sheet metal (excluding large stamping such as: automobile fenders or bodies), shell, textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, wood (excluding saw and planing mills) and yarns. 	S 	P 	P 			In IRO, must be in enclosed building 
Manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of such products as: bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, toiletries, food products, hardware and cutlery; tool, die, gauge and machine shops 	S 	P 	P 			In IRO, must be in enclosed building 
Metal plating, buffing and polishing 		S 	S 		S 	Subject to appropriate measures to control the type of process to prevent noxious results and/or nuisances 
Mini-warehouses and storage buildings for lease to the public 		S 	S 			Subject to conditions in section 1839
Petroleum or other inflammable liquids, production, refining or storage 			P 	P 		Located not less than 800 feet distant from any residential district and not less than 300 feet distant from any other district 
Sand and gravel extraction 			P 			Subject to conditions in section 1854
Smelting of copper, iron or zinc ore 			P 	P 		Located not less than 800 feet distant from any residential district and not less than 300 feet distant from any other district 
Storage facilities for building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber, storage of contractor's equipment and supplies 		P 	P 			Subject to conditions in section 1863
Warehouses and storage 		P 	P 			
Uses which have an industrial character in terms of either their outdoor storage requirements or activities such as, but not limited to: lumberyard, building materials outlet, upholsterer, cabinetmaker, outdoor boat, house trailer, automobile garage or agricultural implement sales 		S 	S 	S 	S 	
Research

Laboratories, experimental, film or testing 	S 	P 	P 			In IRO, must be in enclosed building 
Medical laboratories 	P 	P 	P 			
Research and development, including laboratories, prototype development and testing facilities, design and pilot or experimental product development 	P 	P 	P 			In IRO, must be in enclosed building 
Agricultural

Farm operation 		P 	P 	P 		
Greenhouse and plant material nursery (materials grown and sold on-site) 		P 	P 	P 	P 	
Office and Financial

Office buildings 	P 					
Data processing and computer centers, including service and maintenance of electronic data processing equipment 	P 					
Retail and Services

Adult entertainment facilities 					S 	Subject to conditions in section 1844
Adult/child day care center + preschools 	S 	S 				
Commercial kennels 		P 	P 			
Massage establishment 					S 	Subject to conditions in section 1845
Medical marihuana dispensaries and medical marihuana nurseries 		S 	S 			Subject to conditions in section 1841
Pawnbroker, secondhand dealer and junk dealer facilities 					S 	Subject to conditions in section 1846
Personal service establishments 	S 					Permitted as accessory use only in IRO, subject to conditions in section 1837
Retail 	S 					Such uses shall comprise not more than 20 percent of the land area of an overall development, subject to conditions in section 1837
Tattoo facilities 					S 	Subject to conditions in section 1847
Lodging and Restaurants

Hotels 	P 					
Motels 	P 					Subject to conditions in section 1837
Restaurants 	S 					Subject to conditions in section 1822.b 
Civic/Institutional

Hospitals 	P 					
House of worship 	S 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Trade or industrial schools 		P 	P 			No outdoor storage 
Parole or probation offices 					S 	Subject to conditions in section 1849
Public/government buildings 	P 					
Public utility buildings, excluding wastewater treatment plants 		P 	P 			
Transfer and electricity and gas service buildings and yards 		P 	P 			
Wastewater treatment plants 				P 	S 	Subject to conditions in section 1860
Recreation

Assembly halls, display halls, convention center, theater or similar places of assembly 	P 					Conducted in completely enclosed building 
Health clubs, fitness centers, gyms and aerobic clubs, health and fitness center 	P 	S 	S 			Permitted as accessory use only in IRO 
Indoor recreational facility, including bowling alley, archery range, tennis/racquet ball court, skating rink, athletic field, swimming pool, and other similar uses 	P 	S 	S 			Permitted as accessory use only in IRO. Must be located at least 100 feet from any front, rear or side yard of any residential lot in an adjacent residential district 
Lighted outdoor commercial sports centers, including baseball and other intense activities 			P 	P 		Subject to conditions in section 1859
Outdoor spat ball, simulated war games and similar activities 			P 			Subject to conditions in section 1857
Outdoor theaters 			S 		S 	Subject to conditions in section 1843
Racetracks (including midget auto and karting tracks) and dirt tracks 			P 			Subject to conditions in section 1856
Automotive/Transportation

Airports 		S 				Subject to conditions in section 1402.3 
Auto engine and body repair, and undercoating shops 		S 				When conducted in enclosed building 
Automobile mechanical component dismantling and recycling 					S 	Subject to conditions in section 1848
Freight terminals 		P 	P 			
Railroad transfer and storage tracks, railroad rights-of-way 		P 	P 			
Railroad lines, rail spurs and similar rail transport access facilities 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Subject to conditions in section 1851
Accessory Uses

Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any permitted use in this table 	A 	A 	A 	A 	A 	
Other

Wireless communication towers and antennas 	See section 1850	

( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 2, 2-20-18; Ord. No. 2020-491 , §§ 2, 3, 7-21-20)
 
ARTICLE IV. R-1 THROUGH R-5 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 400. Intent:
The R-1 through R-5 one-family residential districts are designed to be the most restrictive of the residential districts. The intent is to provide for an environment of predominantly low-density, one-family dwellings along with other residentially related facilities which serve the residentis in the district. 
(Ord. No. 99-224, § II, 8-3-99)
 
Sec. 401. Principal uses permitted:
See schedule of uses in section 306.3. 
( Ord. No. 2017-473 , §§ I, II, 3-21-17; Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 3, 2-20-18)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2017-473 , § I, adopted March 21, 2017, repealed § 401 in its entirety, and section II of said ordinance enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former § 401 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2010-404, § II, adopted May 18, 2010. 
 
Sec. 402. Uses permitted subject to special conditions:
See schedule of uses in section 306.3. 
(Ord. No. 95-139, 10-17-95; Ord. No. 99-205, 3-16-99; Ord. No. 2006-368, 1-16-07; Ord. No. 2016-468 , § I, 10-18-16; Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 3, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 403. Area and bulk requirements:
See article XX, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, the maximum density permitted, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 3, 2-20-18)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 3, adopted Feb. 20, 2018, repealed former § 403 and renumbered § 404 as § 403. Former § 403 pertained to required conditions, and derived from Ord. No. 2003-322, adopted Aug. 19, 2003. 
 
ARTICLE V. RM-1 AND RM-2 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
 
Sec. 500. Intent:
The RM-1 and RM-2 multiple-family residential districts are designed to provide sites for low- to moderate-density multiple-family dwelling structures, and related uses, which will generally serve as zones of transition between nonresidential districts and single-family districts. 
 
Sec. 501. Principal uses permitted:
See schedule of uses in section 306.3. 
(Ord. No. 99-224, § III, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 4, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 502. Uses permitted subject to special conditions:
See schedule of uses in section 306.3. 
(Ord. No. 99-205, 3-16-99; Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 4, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 503. Required conditions:
1.	In the case of multiple-dwelling developments, all site plans shall be submitted to the planning commission and township board for review and approval in accord with section 2115 of this ordinance prior to issuance of a building permit. Approval shall be contingent upon a finding that: 
a.	The site plan shows that a proper relationship exists between local streets and any proposed service roads, driveways and parking areas to encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety; and 
b.	All the development features including the principal building or buildings and any accessory buildings, or uses, open spaces, and any service roads, driveways and parking areas are so located and related to minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent property, such as, but not limited to: channeling excessive traffic onto local residential streets, lack of adequate screening or buffering of parking or service areas, or building groupings and circulation routes located as to interfere with police or fire equipment access. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 4, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 504. Area and bulk requirements:
See article XX, "Schedule of Regulations" limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, maximum density permitted, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
 
ARTICLE VI. RM-3 AND RM-4 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
 
Sec. 600. Intent:
The RM-3 and RM-4 multiple-family residential districts are designed to provide sites for high-density multiple-dwelling developments adjacent to high traffic generators and in areas abutting major thoroughfares and expressways. 
 
Sec. 601. Principal uses permitted:
See schedule of uses in section 306.3. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 5, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 602. Uses permitted subject to special conditions:
See schedule of uses in section 306.3. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 5, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 603. Required conditions:
1.	In the case of multiple-dwelling developments, all site plans shall be submitted to the planning commission and township board for review and approval in accord with section 2115 of this ordinance prior to issuance of a building permit. Approval shall be contingent upon a finding that: 
a.	The site plan shows that a proper relationship exists between local streets and any proposed service roads, driveways and parking areas to encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety; and 
b.	All the development features including the principal building or buildings and any accessory buildings, or uses, open spaces, and any service roads, driveways and parking areas are so located and related to minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent property, such as, but not limited to: channeling excessive traffic onto local residential streets, lack of adequate screening or buffering of parking or service areas, or building groupings and circulation routes located as to interfere with police or fire equipment access. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 5, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 604. Area and bulk requirements:
See article XX, "Schedule of Regulations" limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, maximum density permitted, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
 
ARTICLE VI-A. RM-5 TOWNHOUSE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
 
Sec. 650. Intent:
The RM-5 (townhouse residential district) is intended to provide for moderate density infill housing in older developed areas of the township. This district provides strict design standards to ensure that development is consistent with existing neighborhoods and includes characteristics typical of traditional neighborhood design. Specific design requirements and standards are provided to allow for a more compact and pedestrian friendly form of development while ensuring a high quality of development and the preservation of open spaces for residents. 
(Ord. No. 2001-284, 12-18-01)
 
Sec. 651. Principal uses permitted:
See schedule of uses in section 306.3. 
(Ord. No. 2001-284, 12-18-01; Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 6, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 652. Uses permitted subject to special conditions:
See schedule of uses in section 306.3. 
(Ord. No. 2001-284, 12-18-01; Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 6, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 653. Required conditions:
Site plans for condominium and multiple-family residential projects in the RM-5 district must comply with the following design standards: 
1.	Building layout and architecture. The following architectural standards shall be met for all structures: 
a.	Porches: All main entrances to the units shall have a porch or stoop facing the street that is at least six-feet in depth and 70 square feet in area. 
b.	Material: All of the exterior finish material on all facades that are visible from the street shall be limited to glass, brick, cut stone, cast stone, smooth stucco or wood. Concrete block, EIFS or other synthetic materials shall not be allowed on any portion of the building visible from a street. 
c.	Color: The primary color of building exteriors shall be compatible with the colors of adjacent buildings and in character with the surrounding area, provided the trim may be of a contrasting color. 
d.	Facades: Walls visible from a public street, adjacent off-street parking areas or other residential uses shall include windows and architectural features similar to the front facade of the building, including, but not limited to awnings, cornice work, edge detailing or other decorative finish materials. 
e.	Roofs: All buildings shall have pitched roofs. The roofline may also include varying lines customary with gable or hip style roofing. Functional dormer window features are encouraged. Permitted roofing materials include asphalt shingles, cedar shake and slate. Standing seam metal roofing is not permitted on residential structures. 
f.	[Buildings that terminate a view or are located at street intersections:] Buildings that terminate a view or are located at street intersections shall provide distinct and prominent architectural features or otherwise create a distinctive visual landmark. 
g.	Garages: All attached or detached garages shall be located within the established rear yard with access provided by an alley. 
h.	Orientation: Buildings shall be oriented towards a public street, except the planning commission may allow dwellings to front onto a common green or pedestrian right-of-way easement. Parking, garages and any other accessory structures and uses shall be located to the rear. A minimum of 75 percent of the unit entrances shall also be positioned at the front facade of the building, facing the street. 
2.	Street design:
a.	Street connections: All townhouse residential developments shall utilize internal public streets that conform to township and Washtenaw County Road Commission street design standards, and other conditions set forth by the township board. Street connections shall be encouraged where it will unify neighborhoods and provide more convenient access to businesses and community facilities such as schools and parks. Where it is not possible or desirable to provide a through street, the planning commission may allow a roundabout or a looped drive with a common green in the center. The circular drive around the green shall be at least 20 feet wide, measured face to face of curb, and the central green shall be no less than 40 feet at its narrowest dimension. 
b.	Alleys: Alleys shall be provided where necessary for access to rear yard garages. Such alleys shall have a minimum pavement width of 18 feet and shall be located within a minimum 30-foot wide private access easement. An alley shall be designed to provide only secondary frontage and access to dwellings. 
3.	Pedestrian circulation:
a.	Sidewalks: Minimum five-foot wide concrete sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of all internal streets within the development and within all open space areas. Sidewalks along collector roads and thoroughfares shall be at least six feet wide. 
b.	Pedestrian connections: All developments shall provide pedestrian linkages between public sidewalks and the building entrances. Sidewalk and safety path connections are required to adjacent uses and activity areas. 
4.	Parking:
a.	Guest parking: Guest parking of up to one space for each four dwelling units may be required by the planning commission. Such parking shall be located in the established rear yard and conveniently located near each dwelling unit. 
b.	On-street parking: The planning commission may give credit towards parking requirements where abutting on-street parking is provided. 
c.	Location: A minimum of 80 percent of required off street parking spaces shall be located in the rear yard, completely behind the principal building(s). The remaining may be permitted in the side yard of buildings provided they are located behind the front line of the principal building(s). 
d.	Screening: All off-street parking spaces must be screened from view of any public road, pedestrian path, or adjacent residential use by a decorative wall or hedge. 
5.	Lighting: A consistent type of pedestrian-scale ornamental lighting shall be provided along all streets and sidewalks and within any off street parking lots. Such lighting shall be provided at a frequency and height to provide safe and comfortable light levels, and shall be in compliance with section 2110 (exterior lighting) requirements. 
6.	Open space: Residential projects shall meet the open space requirements of footnote "cc" of section 2000 (schedule of regulations), and shall be subject to the following: 
a.	Design: Open space areas shall be set aside for passive or active recreation and should include seating areas, playgrounds, open lawn area, swimming pools, walking paths and other recreational elements in accordance with the intended character of the neighborhood. 
b.	Location: Open space areas shall be centrally and conveniently located to be physically and visibly accessible to residents. Open space areas shall not be located entirely within the rear yards. The township board may permit the required open space to be located off-site as part of [a] new public park, or an improvement or expansion of an existing public park. 
(Ord. No. 2001-284, 12-18-01)
 
Sec. 654. Area and bulk requirements:
See article XX, "Schedule of Regulations" limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lots by permitted land use and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2001-284, 12-18-01)
 
ARTICLE VII. MHP MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICTS
 
Sec. 700. Intent:
The purpose of the MHP mobile home park district is to give recognition to the fact that mobile homes can provide satisfactory living conditions, provided certain minimum standards are maintained. Mobile home parks possess site development, use and density characteristics and private drive systems similar to multiple-family residential development. They are, in this ordinance, provided for as a transitional use between nonresidential development and residential districts or between multiple-family residential districts and one-family residential districts. 
 
Sec. 701. Principal uses and special conditional uses permitted:
See schedule of uses in section 306.3. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 7, 2-20-18)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 7, adopted Feb. 20, 2018, changed the title of § 701 from "Principal uses permitted" to read as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 702. Locational requirements:
1.	Access to any mobile home park shall be to a major thoroughfare or secondary thoroughfare as designated on the master plan. The intent being to avoid higher density traffic movements through existing or planned single-family developments. An emergency means of ingress and egress to a mobile home park, not used for general access, may be permitted to other than a major thoroughfare. 
2.	Mobile home parks shall not be permitted on parcels of less than 15 acres in area. 
 
Sec. 703. Area, height and bulk requirements:
No mobile home shall be permitted to occupy any mobile home park site if the home and/or site fails to comply with the following requirements: 
1.	All mobile homes shall comply with state mobile home commission requirements with respect to the space between homes and other facilities. 
2.	All mobile home sites shall contain at least 5,500 square feet of site area. This site area, however, may be reduced to not less than 4,400 square feet; provided, that for each square foot of reduction in site area, at least a corresponding amount of open space land be established for common use. 
3.	A setback of at least 50 feet shall be provided between any mobile home and an office building, community center or service building and any abutting public thoroughfare right-of-way line. This area shall be maintained in an open landscaped area. A setback of at least 25 feet, the computation of which shall include the ten-foot required distance established in rule 944(1) of the mobile home commission rules, shall be provided between any mobile home, office building, community center or service building and any other exterior property line. This latter setback area may be used as yard areas for permitted buildings. This area may also be used for parking subject to the screening requirements of sec. 2108. This area may also be part of the required open space when it is part of a functionally usable open space area. 
 
Sec. 704. Required conditions:
1.	All mobile home park development shall further comply with Act No. 419 of Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 125.1101 et seq., MSA 19.855(1) et seq.), as adopted. 
2.	Mobile home parks shall provide land for open space use by residents of the park. These areas shall be so located and arranged that they functionally serve the residents to be served and meet or exceed mobile home commission rules, as adopted. 
3.	The outside storage of household effects, other than normal patio furniture, etc., is prohibited. The storage of recreational vehicles, i.e., boats, campers, trailers, motor homes or snowmobiles, on mobile homes sites and/or required parking spaces for longer than 48 hours is also prohibited. 
The storage or parking of recreational vehicles, motor homes, boats, snowmobiles, or other vehicles or items ordinarily towed, driven or used for a special purpose, if storage or parking of such is permitted in the mobile home park, shall be in accordance herewith. The storage of the vehicles or items in the mobile home development is specifically prohibited except in the storage area. The storage area shall be screened by solid-type fence five feet in height around its perimeter or by some other similar screening device. 
4.	All utility connections shall comply with state and local codes. 
5.	The proposed site plan for the mobile home park shall be submitted to the planning commission for their review and approval prior to any consideration. The suggestion of any changes or modifications shall be based on such reasonable requirements as are applied to the review and approval of all other uses in the township. Any items determined to be undesirable or inadequate shall be made known to the applicant and a copy of such objections shall immediately be forwarded to the state mobile home commission for their consideration in reviewing the proposed mobile home park plans. 
6.	The township engineer shall also review the proposed park plans with respect to drainage patterns to adjacent properties, water and sewage needs which would be generated and the township's ability to accommodate such mobile home park needs. In addition, any connections to municipal facilities shall meet applicable township engineering design requirements. A copy of any deficiencies noted shall be transmitted immediately, with the recommendations of the planning commission, to the state mobile home commission. 
7.	Each occupied mobile home shall be skirted and anchored with materials meeting mobile home commission specifications. 
8.	A mobile home, in a mobile home park, shall only be made available for human occupancy on a lot approved for such occupancy by the Charter Township of Ypsilanti and the Michigan Mobile Home Commission, in accordance with the approved plans for the mobile home park. Every mobile home proposed, to be located on a lot in a mobile home park, shall be certified to comply with the requirements of the "Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards" as promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) under the provisions of 24 CFR 3280 as the same are from time to time amended. Additionally, all mobile homes shall meet or exceed all applicable roof, snow load, and strength requirements. Compliance with the mobile home construction and safety standards shall be shown by a HUD seal affixed to the mobile home and evidence of the existence of a HUD seal shall be presented to the township community and economic development department prior to the issuance of a land use permit for a mobile home. 
9.	The selling of new and/or used mobile homes as a commercial operation in connection with the operation of a mobile home development is prohibited. New or used mobile homes located on lots within the mobile home development to be used and occupied within the mobile home park may be sold by a licensed dealer and/or broker. This section shall not prohibit the sale of a new or used mobile home by a resident of the mobile home development, provided the development permits the sale. 
(Ord. No. 2005-362, 10-4-05; Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 7, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 705. Other requirements:
For other applicable requirements, see article XX, "Schedule of Regulations" and article XXII, "General Exceptions." 
 
ARTICLE VIII. OS-1 OFFICE SERVICE DISTRICTS
 
Sec. 800. Intent:
The OS-1 districts are designed to accommodate uses such as offices, banks and personal services which can serve as transitional areas between residential and commercial districts and to provide a transition between major thoroughfares and residential districts. 
 
Sec. 801. Principal uses permitted:
See schedule of uses in section 306.4. 
(Ord. No. 99-205, 3-16-99; Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 8, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 802. Uses permitted subject to special conditions:
See schedule of uses in section 306.4. 
(Ord. No. 99-205, 3-16-99; Ord. No. 2005-354, 3-7-05; Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 8, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 803. Required conditions:
1.	No interior display shall be visible from the exterior of the building. 
2.	The outdoor storage of goods or material shall be prohibited. 
3.	Warehousing or indoor storage of goods or material, beyond that normally incident to the above permitted uses, shall be prohibited. 
4.	Marginal service roads may be required in accord with section 2115.5.d. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 8, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 804. Area and bulk requirements:
See article XX, "Schedule of Regulations" limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
 
ARTICLE IX. B-1 LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS
 
Sec. 900. Intent:
The B-1 local business districts, as herein established, are designed to meet the day-to-day convenience shopping and service needs of persons residing in immediately adjacent residential areas. 
 
Sec. 901. Principal uses permitted:
See schedule of uses in section 306.4. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 9, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 902. Required conditions:
1.	All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with customers. 
2.	All business, servicing, processing, except for off-street parking or loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
3.	Marginal service roads may be required in accord with section 2115.5.d. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 9, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 903. Uses permitted subject to special conditions:
See schedule of uses in section 306.3. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 9, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 904. Area and bulk requirements:
See article XX, "Schedule of Regulations" limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
 
ARTICLE X. B-2 COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICTS
 
Sec. 1000. Intent:
The B-2 community business districts are designed to cater to the needs of a larger consumer population than is served by the local business districts, and are generally characterized by an integrated or planned cluster of establishments served by a common parking area and generating large volumes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
 
Sec. 1001. Principal uses permitted:
See schedule of uses in section 306.3. 
(Ord. No. 97-169, 6-17-97; Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 10, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1002. Required conditions:
1.	All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. 
2.	All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking, loading and those open air uses indicated as being subject to special conditions in section 1003 below, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
3.	Marginal service roads may be required in accord with section 2115.5.d. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 10, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1003. Uses permitted subject to special conditions:
See schedule of uses in Section 306.4. 
(Ord. No. 96-145, 3-5-96; Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 10, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1004. Area and bulk requirements:
See article XX, "Schedule of Regulations" limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
 
ARTICLE XI. B-3 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
 
Sec. 1100. Intent:
The B-3 general business districts are designed to provide sites for more diversified business types which would often be incompatible with the pedestrian movement in the local business district or the community business district. 
 
Sec. 1101. Principal uses permitted:
See schedule of uses in section 306.3. 
(Ord. No. 97-169, 6-17-97; Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 11, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1102. Uses permitted subject to special conditions:
See schedule of uses in section 306.3. 
( Ord. No. 2016-462 , § 2, 3-15-16; Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 11, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1103. Required conditions:
1.	Marginal service roads may be required in accord with section 2115.5.d. 
(Ord. No. 96-145, 3-5-96; Ord. No. 99-204, 3-16-99; Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 11, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1104. Area and bulk requirements:
See article XX, "Schedule of Regulations" limiting the height and bulk of buildings and minimum size of lot by permitted land use. 
(Ord. No. 96-145, 3-5-96)
 
ARTICLE XI-A. ECORSE ROAD FORM BASED DISTRICT (ERFB) 
 
Sec. 1140. General intent and purpose:
A.	Intent. The Ecorse Road form based district (ERFB) is intended to implement the vision established by the township master plan and the E. Michigan Avenue and Ecorse Road placemaking plan, to transform the Ecorse Road corridor into a vibrant, dynamic area through placemaking and the attraction of new investment. The Ecorse Road form based district allows for the consolidation and creative redevelopment of parcels. 
Development of buildings and sites, including retrofitting and redevelopment of existing sites and buildings, can include residential, retail, office, and service uses. Uses designed to support the residents and local workers are also encouraged, such as mixed-use developments with small scale retail or restaurant uses incorporated with housing units. The redeveloped corridor will help diversify the township housing and commercial stock and incorporate architecturally interesting buildings. 
Consolidation of parcels in the district is encouraged in order to provide for a quality and consistent development pattern. Incentives include additional building forms and more permitted uses. 
B.	Purpose. The general purpose of these regulations is as follows: 
a.	Promote new investment opportunities by allowing a wide range of potential uses and techniques to expand the employment and economic base. 
b.	Ensure that development is of human scale, primarily pedestrian-oriented, and designed to create attractive streetscapes and pedestrian spaces. 
c.	Ensure that development is designed for all modes of transportation. 
d.	Promote mixed-use development. 
e.	Ensure reasonable transition between higher intensity development and adjacent neighborhoods. 
f.	Improve mobility options and reduce the need for on-site parking by encouraging all modes of transportation, through shared parking, and through on-street parking. 
g.	Provide predictable development approval process. 
h.	Encourage lot consolidation to provide for larger consistent developable sites. 
C.	Factors for regulation. These regulations are based on two significant factors: site context and building features. 
1.	Site context is derived from existing and desired characteristics of an area and recognizes the inherent conditions of the areas where these regulations are applied. Regulated sites types are organized by shape, size, orientation and location. 
2.	Building feature addresses the manner in which buildings and structures relate to their lots, surrounding buildings, and street frontage. The shape of the building, the land area to volume ratio, and the orientation of the building has a significant impact upon the character of an area. Building form standards control height, placement, building configuration, parking location, and building transparency applicable to the site context. 
( Ord. No. 2019-487 , § 1, 7-16-19)
 
Sec. 1141. Applicability and organization.
A.	Applicability.
1.	Any new use or expansion of existing use that requires site plan review shall comply with the requirements of this article and other applicable requirements of this ordinance. 
2.	The requirements of this article shall not apply to: 
a.	Continuation of a permitted use within an existing structure. 
b.	Changes of use within existing structures that do not require increased parking. 
c.	Normal repair and maintenance of existing structures that do not increase its size or parking demand. 
B.	Regulating plan. The Ecorse Road form based district shall be governed by a regulating plan that is specific to the area. 
1.	The regulating plan based on the site type determines building form and allowable use for each property within a form-based district. 
2.	The regulating plan is based on three factors: site type; building form; and use group. 
a.	Site types. Site types, as set forth in section 1142.A., are determined by street orientation, lot size, lot configuration, location, and relationship to neighboring sites. Site type provides the basis for building forms and authorized use groups. 
b.	Building form standards and types. Building form standards and types, set forth in section 1142.B. and C., establish the parameters for building form, height, and placement, and are specifically applied to each district based upon the regulating plan. 
c.	Authorized use groups. Authorized land uses are organized by use groups. Authorized use groups, as set forth in section 1142.D., are specifically applied to each district based upon the regulating plan. 
3.	The steps to determine the regulations that apply to a specific property within a form-based district are as follows: 
a.	Find the site in question on the regulating plan map. 
b.	Identify the site type for the site in question. Sites will be classified site type A, B, or C. 
c.	Consult the use groups and building forms permitted table in which the site is located. The table will identify if a use group or building form is permitted, permitted with conditions, or not permitted for the site type and street type combination of the site in question. 
d.	Follow the regulations for the chosen building form when designing the development application. Building form regulations are established in section 1142.B. and 1142.C. 
e.	Follow the design standards as listed in section 1142.G. 
f.	Obtain site plan approval or special use approval for the chosen building form and use, as appropriate. 
 
C.	Design standards. General design standards, set forth in section 1142.G., are supplementary to other requirements of the ordinance. Generally, the design standards regulate building placement, parking orientation, landscaping, and other site design requirements. 
D.	Modification of district boundaries. Any modification to the boundaries of any form-based district shall require rezoning, in accordance with the provisions of article XXVII, changes and amendments. 
E.	Modification of regulating plan. Specific building form, use group, and design standards applied within each regulating plan are based upon the designation of site type. Any modification of site type may be determined by the planning commission, notice and after conducting a public hearing in accordance with section 2703. 
The planning commission shall consider the following in making a determination to modify a site type or street type designation: 
1.	The applicant's property cannot be used for the purpose permitted in the form-based district. 
2.	Area has been added to or deleted from the subject property in question, requiring the modification. 
3.	The proposed modification and resulting development will not alter the essential character of the area. 
4.	The proposed modification meets the intent of the district. 
5.	Existing streets have been improved and/or new streets constructed that may result in the modification of a specific site type. 
6.	Modification to the regulating plan is in conformance to the master plan and placemaking plan. 
F.	Nonconformities. Nonconformities shall be regulated in accordance with article XXII of the zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 2019-487 , § 1, 7-16-19)
 
Sec. 1142. Standards.
A.	Site types.
1.	Site type A (neighborhood residential or mixed-use sites). Site type A is composed of lots one-half acre or smaller and is reserved primarily for residential use and for smaller non-residential use which is compatible with a residential setting. Site type A is generally located in areas which serve as a transition between the Ecorse Road and neighboring residential areas. The building form selected for these sites must consider both the front elevation that fronts on the street but also the rear/side elevation that is adjacent to residential in order to maintain compatibility with adjacent uses. 
2.	Site type B (neighborhood commercial/office or mixed-use sites). Made up mostly of lots between one-half and one acre in area, the site type B category may include free standing single-use sites developed for commercial and office uses serving the surrounding neighborhood or mixed-use developments. Size and character may vary based on the unique characteristic of each parcel. Small retail and food-service uses would often be found in this category, as well as small single or multi-tenant commercial or office buildings. 
3.	Site type C (community commercial/office and mixed-use sites). The sites in site type C are mostly larger than one acre in area. Site type C size and character may vary based on the unique characteristic of each parcel. This category can include free standing single-use or mixed-use developments that are designed to serve a broader community-wide market. 
B.	Building form standards.
1.	The ERFC district permit a series of building forms, dependent on the site context. The building forms, set forth in [section] 1142.C., are designated within the district location based on the regulating plan. Building forms are classified in the following manner: 
a.	Permitted building forms. These building forms are permitted as of right in the locations specified. 
b.	Prohibited building forms. Building forms that are not identified as permitted in the locations specified are prohibited. 
c.	Exceptions: For all building forms in all locations, awnings, signs, other projections (architectural projections, bay windows, etc.) may project beyond the required building line by up to five feet. Projections will be reviewed by the township to ensure public safety. 
2.	The regulating plan dictates the site type for each individual property in the district. Building forms are identified within each district as permitted or not permitted based upon the site type. 
3.	Non-residential development height, setback, and greenbelt provisions when adjacent to any residentially zoned or used property. 
a.	Setback and greenbelt: 
i.	Site type A and B. The following setback and greenbelt shall be provided for any parcel zoned site type A or B that is adjacent to a residentially zoned or used parcel. 
a.	When a parcel is abutting or adjacent to a residentially zoned or used parcel without an intervening constructed alley or street, the building setback from the property line of the residentially zoned or used parcel shall be no less than the height of the building on the parcel zoned ERFB. 
b.	When a parcel is abutting or adjacent to a residentially zoned or used parcel without an intervening alley or street, a minimum ten-foot landscaped greenbelt shall be maintained from the property line of the residentially zoned or used parcel. The greenbelt shall be landscaped and screened with a solid fence or decorative wall up to six feet in height erected parallel to any common lot line, with a ten-foot wide planting strip along the base of the wall or fence that consists of one evergreen tree and one canopy tree per 30 lineal feet along the property line. 
c.	The planning commission may deviate from these setback and greenbelt provisions in the course of its site plan review process; however, the planning commission shall not permit a setback or greenbelt that is less than required in the building form. In the review of the deviation, the planning commission shall consider the standards as set forth in section 1142.B.3.b. 
ii.	Site type C. The following setback and greenbelt shall be provided for any parcel zoned site type C that is adjacent to a residentially zoned or used parcel. 
a.	When a property is abutting or adjacent to a residentially zoned or used parcel without an intervening alley or street, the setback from the property line of the residentially zoned or used parcel shall be no less than one and one-half times the height of the building on the non-residential parcel. 
b.	When a property is abutting or adjacent to a residentially zoned or used parcel without an intervening alley or street, a minimum 20-foot landscaped greenbelt shall be maintained from the property line of the residentially zoned or used parcel. The greenbelt shall be landscaped in accordance with section 2108.C. 
c.	The planning commission may deviate from these setbacks and greenbelt provisions in the course of its site plan review process; however, the planning commission shall not permit a setback or greenbelt that is less than required in the building form. In the review of the deviation, the planning commission shall consider the standards set forth in section 1142.B.3.b. 
b.	Deviation standards: 
i.	Height, setback, and greenbelt deviations may be granted by the planning commission if the following is found: 
a.	The deviation shall not adversely impact public health, safety, and welfare. 
b.	The deviation shall maintain compatibility with adjacent uses. 
c.	The deviation shall be compatible with the master plan and in accordance with the goals and objectives of the master plan and any associated subarea and corridor plans. 
d.	The deviation shall not adversely impact essential public facilities and services, such as: streets, pedestrian or bicycle facilities, police and fire protection, drainage systems, refuse disposal, water and sewage facilities, and schools. 
e.	The deviation shall be in compliance with all other zoning ordinance standards. 
f.	The deviation shall not adversely impact any on-site or off-site natural features. 
C.	Building form types.
Table 1142a-1
Building Form A.1

Building form A.1: Small, generally single-purpose buildings for residential. Typically situated on a smaller lot, adjacent to single-family residential. 
Building Height

Minimum 1 story, 14-foot height, maximum 2 stories, 28-foot height (site type A and B), Max: 2 stories, 38-foot height (site type C) 
Building Placement

Front yard: 10-foot required build-to line1 
75% of the building facade must meet the required build-to line, while up to 25% of the facade can be set back to allow for architectural consideration. 	Side yard: No minimum side setback 
If provided, minimum 5 feet. 
For corner lots, side street yard, minimum 5 feet. 	Rear yard: Minimum 10-foot rear setback 
Lot

Impervious surface: Maximum 80% 
  
Access and circulation: Driveways may access the site from any side, pedestrian pathways must be provided from the right-of-way. 	Parking location: Parking shall be located in a side or rear yard; when located in a side yard and abutting the required build-to-line adjacent to the right-of-way, parking shall be screened with a minimum 30-inch masonry wall on the required build-to-line, or within 5 feet of the required build-to line, provided that a landscape treatment is added between the wall and the required build-to line. 
1 The planning commission may adjust the required build-to line to a maximum of 30 feet beyond the property line for projects incorporating a permanent space for an outdoor café, public space, or a cross access drive with an adjacent parcel. Outdoor cafés or public spaces must be developed as part of the primary building and must incorporate a permanent wall or landscaping area along the required build-to line. 



Table 1142a-2
Building Form A.2

Building Form A.2: Small, generally single-purpose buildings for retail, office, restaurant, or service uses. Typically situated on a smaller lot within the district, adjacent to single-family residential. 
Building Height

Minimum 1 story, 14-foot height, maximum 2 stories, 30-foot height 
Building Placement

Front yard: 10-foot required build-to line1 
75% of the building facade must meet the required build-to line, while up to 25% of the facade can be set back to allow for architectural consideration. 	Side yard: No minimum side setback 
If provided, minimum 5 feet. 
For corner lots, side street yard, minimum 5 feet. 	Rear yard: Minimum 10-foot rear setback 
Lot

Impervious surface: Maximum 80% 
  
Access and circulation: Driveways may access the site from any side, pedestrian pathways must be provided from the right-of-way. 	Parking location: Parking shall be located in a side or rear yard; when located in a side yard and abutting the required build-to-line adjacent to the right-of-way, parking shall be screened with a minimum 30-inch masonry wall on the required build-to-line, or within 5 feet of the required build-to line, provided that a landscape treatment is added between the wall and the required build-to line. 
1 The planning commission may adjust the required build-to line to a maximum of 30 feet beyond the property line for projects incorporating a permanent space for an outdoor café, public space, or a cross access drive with an adjacent parcel. Outdoor cafés or public spaces must be developed as part of the primary building and must incorporate a permanent wall or landscaping area along the required build-to line. 



Table 1142a-3
Building Form B

Building Form B: Small, generally single-purpose buildings for retail, office, restaurant, or service uses. Typically situated in an out lot of a larger classification building form, or on a smaller, more remote site location within the district. 
Building Height

Minimum 1 story, 14-foot height, maximum 2 stories, 28-foot height (Site type B), Max: 3 stories, 38-foot height (Site type C) 
Building Placement

Front yard: 10-foot required build-to line1 
75% of the building facade must meet the required build-to line, while up to 25% of the facade can be set back to allow for architectural consideration. 	Side yard: No minimum side setback 
If provided, minimum 5 feet. 
For corner lots, side street yard, minimum 5 feet. 	Rear Yard: Minimum 10-foot rear setback 
Lot

Impervious surface: Maximum 80% 
  
Access and circulation: Driveways may access the site from any side, pedestrian pathways must be provided from the right-of-way. 	Parking location: Parking shall be located in a side or rear yard; when located in a side yard and abutting the required build-to-line adjacent to the right-of-way, parking shall be screened with a minimum 30-inch masonry wall on the required build-to-line, or within 5 feet of the required build-to line, provided that a landscape treatment is added between the wall and the required build-to line. 
1 The planning commission may adjust the required build-to line to a maximum of 30 feet beyond the property line for projects incorporating a permanent space for an outdoor café, public space, or a cross access drive with an adjacent parcel. Outdoor cafés or public spaces must be developed as part of the primary building and must incorporate a permanent wall or landscaping area along the required build-to line. 



Table 1142a-4
Building Form C

Building Form C: Single or multiple-tenant buildings for retail, restaurant, office, service, or residential uses. This category also includes multiple-tenant development, although it requires a second story to encourage a mix of use. 
Building Height

Minimum 1 story, 14-foot height, maximum 3 stories, 38-foot height, Ground floor 14-foot minimum height 
Building Placement

Front yard: Maximum 60-foot required build-to line 	Side yard: No minimum side setback 
If provided, minimum 5 feet. 	Rear Yard: Minimum 30-foot rear setback 
Lot

Impervious surface: Maximum 80% 
  
Access and circulation: Driveways may access the site from any side, pedestrian pathways must be provided from the right-of-way. 	Parking location: Parking shall be located in a side or rear yard; when located in a side yard and abutting the required build-to-line adjacent to the right-of-way, parking shall be screened with a minimum 30-inch masonry wall on the required build-to-line, or within 5 feet of the required build-to line, provided that a landscape treatment is added between the wall and the required build-to line; if parking is provided in the front yard only one row is permitted. 


D.	Authorized use groups.
1.	Authorized uses are categorized by use groups as set forth in table 1142.D. Use groups generally contain similar types of uses in terms of function, character, and intensity. 
2.	Use groups are designated in locations within each district based on the regulating plan. Use groups are classified in the following manner: 
a.	Permitted use groups. These use groups are permitted as of right in the locations specified. 
b.	Special use groups. These use groups are permitted after review and approval by the planning commission, in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 2119 and the standards in this ordinance. 
c.	Prohibited use groups. These use groups not indicated as permitted are prohibited in the locations specified. 
d.	Uses permitted in all locations within the district. Public parks and essential public services are permitted by right in all locations. 
e.	Similar uses. If a use is not listed but is similar to other uses within a use group, the zoning administrator may make the interpretation that the use is similar to other uses within a use group. 
The zoning administrator may also make the determination whether the use is permitted as of right, permitted in upper stories only, or permitted as a special use. The zoning administrator may obtain a recommendation from the planning commission as to whether or not the proposed use is similar to a use permitted as of right, permitted in upper stories only, or permitted as a special use. 
Table 1142.D
Use Groups by Category
Use Group 1
Residential Uses:
One-family detached and attached dwellings, subject to regulations in section 1801
Two-family dwellings 
Use Group 2
Misc. Residential/Related Uses:
Multiple-family dwellings 
Live/work units 
Child care centers, subject to regulations in section 1861
Bed and breakfast, subject to regulations in section 1808
Use Group 3
Office/Institutional:
Civic buildings 
General office 
Professional and medical office 
Primary/secondary schools (private) 
Publicly owned/operated office and service facilities 
Veterinary clinics or veterinary hospitals, subject to regulations in section 1820 and section 1821, respectively 
Use Group 4
Retail, Entertainment, and Service Uses:
Financial institutions 
General retail 
Food use without a drive-through 
Personal services 
Business services 
Use Group 5
Misc. Uses:
Commercial kennels/pet day care 
Medical clinics and hospitals 
Technology centers/office research/data center 
Funeral homes 
Senior assisted/independent living 
Group day care homes, subject to regulations in section 1861
Lodging 
Places of worship 
Fitness, gymnastics, and exercise centers 
Theatres and places of assembly 
Indoor commercial recreation establishments 

E.	Ecorse Road form based code district regulating plan.
 
  
F.	Ecorse Road form based code district regulating plan table.
Site Type	Building Form	Use Group
Site type: A 	Permitted building form 	A1, A2 	Permitted use group 	1, 2, 3, 4 
			Special use group 	— 
Site type: B 	Permitted building form 	A1, A2, B 	Permitted use group 	2, 3, 4 
			Special use group 	
Site type: C 	Permitted building form 	B, C 	Permitted use group 	2, 3, 4 
			Special use group 	5 

G.	Design standards. In addition to standards set forth in this ordinance, all proposed development shall comply with the standards set forth herein. 
1.	Pedestrian/non-motorized access.
a.	Intent. To ensure that site layout and building design provides safe and convenient pedestrian and bicycle access both to and within a site and between adjacent sites. 
b.	Standards.
i.	A pedestrian connection shall provide a clear connection between the primary street upon which the building fronts and the building. Connection may include pavement striping. 
ii.	Pedestrian access shall be clearly identified from parking areas and all entrances to a building. 
iii.	Where appropriate, sidewalks fronting the public right-of-way should be designed to accommodate space for activities such as outdoor dining. 
iv.	All sites shall provide a bike rack for at least two bicycles within 50 feet of the building entrance. 
2.	Building placement and orientation.
a.	Intent. To require building placement that provides a strong visual and functional relationship with its site, adjacent sites, and the primary street upon which the site is located. Ensure consistency within sites and to adjacent sites to provide distinct building groups which exhibit similar orientation, scale, and proportion. 
b.	Standards.
i.	Setbacks and building orientation shall reinforce a consistent pattern of siting. 
ii.	Primary building entrances shall be located so that they are easily identifiable with convenient public access. 
iii.	Buildings should enhance street corners through the use of prominent architectural or site features. 
3.	Parking placement, orientation, and screening.
a.	Intent. To provide a circulation system that efficiently moves vehicles in a well-defined manner, while reducing the visual impact of parking areas and mitigating conflict between pedestrians, bicycles, and automobiles. 
b.	Standards.
i.	Required parking. Off-street parking shall be provided for a principal use erected, altered, or expanded after the effective date of this ordinance in accordance with the standards set forth in section 2104. 
a.	The form based districts are intended to encourage pedestrian and friendly design and compact mixed-use developments. Applicants are encouraged to consider the provisions for shared parking and flexibility in application set forth in section 2104. 
b.	The placement and design of parking areas and structures shall foster safe pedestrian access and circulation and clearly identifiable public access and visitor parking. Pedestrian access shall be provided between all parking areas and public building entrances. 
ii.	Location. 
a.	When parking is located in a side yard (behind the front building line) but fronts on the required building line, no more than 25 percent of the total site's linear feet along the required building line or 60 feet, whichever is less, shall be occupied by parking. 
b.	For a corner lot, no more than 25 percent of the site's cumulative linear feet along the required building lines or 60 feet, whichever is less, shall be occupied by parking. The building shall be located in the corner of the lot adjacent to the intersection. 
c.	Where off-street parking is visible from a street, it should be screened in accordance with the standards set forth in [section] 2108. 
4.	Architectural design and building materials.
a.	Intent. To create a character for the form-based district that encourage the greatest amount of visual interest, architectural consistency, and high-quality material use. The standards are not intended to limit imagination, innovation, or variety. 
b.	Architectural design standards.
i.	Building massing and scale. 
a.	Rooflines and pitches shall be proportionate to nearby structures so as to provide transition or mitigation of significant changes to scale. Variety in massing can occur though step-backs as a building ascends upward. 
b.	Buildings shall maintain a consistent street wall with the longest edge of the buildings oriented parallel to the roadway, where possible. 
c.	Buildings within the same development shall be designed to provide a unified and easily identifiable image. Methods to achieve this include using similar architectural styles and materials, complementary roof forms, signs, and colors. 
ii.	Façade variation.
a.	Façade articulation or architectural design variations for building walls facing the street are required to ensure that the building is not monotonous in appearance, using the following architectural techniques: Building wall offsets (projections and recesses); cornices, varying building materials or pilasters used to break up the mass of a single building; staggering of vertical walls; recessing of openings; providing upper-level roof overhangs; contrasting compatible building materials; use of variety and rhythm of window and door openings; use of horizontal and vertical architectural elements, use of horizontal bands of compatible colors; and providing changes in roof shape or roof-line. 
b.	Materials shall be selected for suitability to the type of buildings and the architectural design in which they are used. 
c.	Material selection shall be consistent with architectural style in terms of color, shades, and texture, however monotony shall be avoided. 
5.	Transparency.
a.	Intent. The first floors of all buildings shall be designed to encourage and complement pedestrian-scale activity and crime prevention techniques. It is intended that this be accomplished principally by the use of windows and doors arranged so that active uses within the building are visible from or accessible to the street, and parking areas are visible to occupants of the building. 
b.	Transparency standards. These standards apply only to buildings with non-residential uses on the ground floor: 
1.	Façade transparency shall be defined as the use of glass or transparent material that provides from the building exterior a view into the building of interior habitation and human scale. Signs covering windows, and the use of tinted, reflective or opaque glass do not meet the definition of façade transparency. 
2.	The first floors of all buildings shall be designed to encourage and complement pedestrian-scale activity and crime prevention techniques. It is intended that this be accomplished principally by the use of windows and doors arranged so that active uses within the building are visible from or accessible to the street, and parking areas are visible to occupants of the building. The first floor of any front façade facing a right-of-way shall be no less than 50 percent windows and doors, and the minimum transparency for facades facing a parking area shall be no less than 30 percent of the façade. 
3.	First-floor transparency is measured between two and eight feet above the first-floor elevation. 
4.	Nothing shall be placed on or inside window to reduce transparency less than the 50-percent requirement. 
5.	For multiple tenant buildings, the minimum transparency requirement must be met by each suite or tenant. 
6.	Landscaping.
a.	Intent. To incorporate appropriate landscaping to enhance visual appearance, provide transitions between properties, and screen unsightly areas. 
b.	Landscaping standards.
1.	In addition to the standards set forth in section 2108, the following standards shall be met. 
2.	Landscaping shall conform and incorporate existing landscape and topographic features. 
3.	Landscaping within courtyards, patios, and pedestrian realm may include hardscape and softscape materials. 
4.	Landscaping shall maintain adequate sight lines for visual safety, visibility and efficient security. 
5.	Landscaped areas, including landscaped parking islands and medians, shall be separated from vehicular and pedestrian encroachment by curbs and raised planting areas. 
8.	Loading and storage areas.
a.	Intent. To ensure that loading, storage, and other building utility features are designed to be a part of the overall building as so to reduce the visual impact. 
b.	Standards.
1.	Utilities and mechanical screening.
a.	Utility structures located between the building and the public right-of-way shall be screened as set forth in article XXI. Screening may include walls, fencing, or landscaping that is consistent with the character and materials of the development. 
b.	Trash enclosures shall be placed adjacent to the rear wall of corresponding buildings or shall be located away from portions of the site which are highly visible from public roadways or private properties with dissimilar improvements. Trash enclosures shall be screened as set forth in article XXI with walls, fencing or landscaping that are consistent with the character and materials of the development. 
2.	Loading.
a.	Service areas shall be designated by markings and/or signage to delineate them from pedestrian access and limit conflicts between service/delivery vehicles and patrons (e.g. pedestrians, bicyclists and transit users). 
b.	Loading and service areas shall be located on the sides or rears of the buildings. 
c.	Loading and service areas shall be screened from the public right-of-way with the use of fencing, landscaping, or walls. 
( Ord. No. 2019-487 , § 1, 7-16-19)
 
ARTICLE XI-D. TOWN CENTER DISTRICT
 
Sec. 1170. Intent.
The town center district is provided specifically for the development or redevelopment of land within the town center designated in the Master Plan and the Huron/Whittaker Corridor Study along Huron and Whittaker Road Corridor, from I-94 to just south of Stony Creek Road. The intent is to facilitate the development of a traditional, pedestrian-oriented town center with mixed-use buildings containing retail and service uses on the first floor and residential or office on upper floors, similar to a traditional downtown. The commercial components are to be complemented by surrounding residential development within a walkable distance consisting of townhouses and single family residential that follow traditional neighborhood design principles, with pedestrian oriented streetscapes and a system of neighborhood open spaces. Development shall be in accordance with the guidelines outlined in the Ypsilanti Township Master Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2007-378, § 2(11.70), 2-19-08)
 
Sec. 1171. Town center zones.
Town center zones. Zones are established within the town center district for the purpose of prescribing requirements for building form, lot dimensions, architectural design, parking lot location and streetscape treatments. Each site shall be regulated based upon its zone as follows: 
1.	TC-1. The TC-1 Zone is a non-residential zone for the northern portion of the Huron Street Corridor nearest the I-94 interchange. This district is intended for a mixture of commercial, office, research and development and recreational uses. It serves at the entryway to the town center transitioning from the north. 
2.	TC-2. The TC-2 Zone is a mixed-use zone for the central part of the town center north of the intersection of Huron Street and Huron River Drive. This district is intended for a mixture of commercial, office, residential and recreational uses. It serves as the central mixed-use core for the town center creating a focal point at the intersection of Huron Street and Huron River Drive. 
3.	TC-3. The TC-3 Zone is a commercial zone for the southern part of the town center along Whittaker Road. This district is intended for commercial and office uses that provide convenience goods and services to residents of the township. It serves as a transitional area to the residential neighborhoods further south. 
4.	TC-4. The TC-4 Zone applies to the areas on the outer edges of the town center and is intended to develop primarily for residential use. These serve as transitional areas to the residential zoning districts that surround the town center. 
5.	TC-5. The TC-5 Zone is the civic zone of the town center. Governmental and civic uses are located in this zone including the Township Hall, District Court, National Guard Armory and Library. 
(Ord. No. 2008-378, § 2(11.71), 2-19-08)
 
Sec. 1172. Types of buildings and uses permitted.
1.	Uses permitted. See section 306.5. 
2.	Use requirements. Uses in the town center district shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.	Detached single family and two family residential. Single family residential shall meet the design standards in section 1174.2. Two family residential shall be subject to the same dimensional and design requirements as single family residential. 
b.	Attached single family residential/townhouses. Attached single family residential, also commonly known as townhouses, shall be attached units that each provide a separate entryway with direct access to the outdoors at ground level by way of a front porch or stoop. Each unit shall have defined front and rear yards. Each unit shall be provided with an individual garage, which may be attached or detached. Attached single family residential shall meet the design standards in section 1174.2. 
c.	Residential dwellings on upper floors within mix-use buildings. Multiple family residential shall only be permitted above the first floor of a mixed-use building that contains retail, service, office or restaurant uses on the main floor. Mixed-use buildings shall meet the design standards in section 1174.1. 
d.	Live/work units. Live/work units shall be dwelling units attached with common side walls wherein the main floor of each unit is designed to accommodate a small business with upper floors utilized for dwelling purposes. The first floor space of each unit shall be designed to be utilized as an office or retail store with a commercial storefront that is at-grade with the sidewalk. The upper floors shall include a dwelling unit with the unit designed to be under single occupancy as an integral unit. Live/work units shall meet the design standards applicable to mixed-use buildings in section 1174.1. 
e.	Retail and service uses. All retail and service businesses shall be establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods provided on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced. All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking, loading and outdoor restaurant seating, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. Non-residential uses shall meet the design standards in section 1174.1. 
f.	Drive-thru service. Accessory drive-through windows may only be permitted with special conditional use approval. There shall be no more than one drive-through lane, except banks which may have up to three. The drive-through shall be located on the rear or side of the building where it is least visible from a public street. 
g.	Residential care facilities. Adult and child residential care facilities that are permitted or allowed as special conditional uses shall be allowed, subject to the requirements contained in section 2122. 
(Ord. No. 2008-378, § 2(11.72), 2-19-08; Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 13, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1173. Dimensional requirements.
1.	TC-1. All uses in the TC-1 Zone shall meet the following dimensional requirements: 
TC-1	All Uses	
Lot Area	No minimum. 	
Lot Width	No minimum. 	
Front Yard	Minimum 0-foot front yard setback. 
Maximum 75-foot front yard setback. 	
Side Yard	A zero side setback may be permitted where a fire wall is provided along the side lot line. 
Where a fire wall is not provided, buildings shall be spaced a minimum of 10 feet. 	
Rear Yard	Minimum 25-foot rear yard setback. 	
Building Height	Minimum 20-foot building height. 
Maximum 6 stories/75-foot building height. 
The first story shall be a minimum of 12 feet in height measured from floor to ceiling. 	
Parking	Parking shall be permitted in the side or rear yards. 
A maximum of one row of parking shall be permitted in the front yard. 	

2.	TC-2. All uses in the TC-2 Zone shall meet the following dimensional requirements: 
TC-2	Non Residential/Mixed Use Buildings	
Lot Area	No minimum lot area. 
3,000 square feet per dwelling unit in mixed use building. 	
Lot Width	No minimum. 	
Front Yard	Huron Street/ Huron River Drive Frontage: Minimum 0-foot; maximum 75-foot front yard setback. 
Other Street Frontage: Minimum 0-foot; maximum 10-foot front yard setback. 	
Building Frontage Requirements	Building facade shall occupy a minimum of 40% of the frontage length between the min. and max. setback. 	
Side Yard	A zero side setback may be permitted where a fire wall is provided along the side lot line. 
Where a fire wall is not provided, buildings shall be spaced a minimum of 10 feet. 	
Rear Yard	Minimum 25-foot rear yard setback. 	
Building Height	Minimum 20-foot building height. 
Maximum 3 stories/40-foot building height. 
The first story shall be a minimum of 12 feet in height measured from floor to ceiling. 	
Parking—Huron Street frontage	Parking shall be permitted in the side or rear yards. 
A maximum of one row of parking shall be permitted in the front yard facing Huron Street. 	
Parking—All other street frontages	No parking shall be allowed in the front yards facing Huron River Drive and other streets. 
Parking shall not be permitted between the building facade and the front lot line within 30 feet of the corner of any roadway intersection. 	


TC-2	Single/Two Family

Residential	Attached
Residential	
Lot Area	5,000 square feet per lot. 	4,300 square feet per unit. 	
Lot Width	50 feet per lot. 	25 feet per unit. 	
Front Yard	Minimum 15-foot front yard setback. 	Minimum 10-foot front yard setback. 	
Side Yard	Minimum 5 feet, 15 feet total both. 	A zero side setback between units where a fire wall is provided. 
Minimum 10 feet, 20 foot spacing between buildings. 	
Rear Yard	Minimum 25-foot rear yard setback. 	
Building Height	Minimum 20-foot building height. 
Maximum 3 stories/40-foot building height. 	
Parking	Parking shall only be permitted in the side or rear yard, except in a residential driveway extending from the street to the side or rear yard. 	

3.	TC-3. All uses in the TC-3 Zone shall meet the following dimensional requirements: 
TC-3	All Uses	
Lot Area	No minimum. 	
Lot Width	No minimum. 	
Front Yard	Whittaker and Stony Creek Frontage: Minimum 0-foot; maximum 75-foot front yard setback. 
Other Street Frontage: Minimum 0-foot; maximum 10-foot front yard setback. 	
Side Yard	A zero side setback may be permitted where a fire wall is provided along the side lot line. 
Where a fire wall is not provided, buildings shall be spaced a minimum of 10 feet. 	
Rear Yard	Minimum 25-foot rear yard setback. 	
Building Height	Minimum 20-foot building height. 
Maximum 3 stories/40-foot building height. 
The first story shall be a minimum of 12 feet in height measured from floor to ceiling. 	
Parking	Parking shall be permitted in the side or rear yards. 
A maximum of one row of parking shall be permitted in the front yard. 	

4.	TC-4. All uses in the TC-4 Zone shall meet the following dimensional requirements: 
TC-4	Single/Two Family

Residential	Attached Residential	
Lot Area	5,000 square feet per lot. 	4,300 square feet per unit. 	
Lot Width	50 feet per lot. 	25 feet per unit. 	
Front Yard	Minimum 15-foot front yard setback. 	Minimum 10-foot front yard setback. 	
Side Yard	Minimum 5 feet, 15 feet total both. 	Minimum 10 feet, 
20 foot spacing between buildings. 	
Rear Yard	Minimum 25-foot rear yard setback. 	
Building Height	Minimum 2 stories. 
Maximum 3 ½ stories 
Maximum 35-foot building height. 	
Parking	Parking shall only be permitted in the side or rear yard, except in a residential driveway extending from the street to the side or rear yard. 	

5.	TC-5. All uses in the TC-5 Zone shall meet the following dimensional requirements: 
TC-5	All Uses
Lot Area	No minimum 
Lot Width	No minimum 
Front Yard	No minimum 
Side Yard	Minimum 10 foot side yard setback 
Rear Yard	Minimum 25-foot rear yard setback 
Building Height	Minimum 20-foot building height 
Maximum 3 stories/45-foot building height 
Parking	Parking shall be permitted in the side or rear yards. 
A maximum of one row of parking shall be permitted in the front yard. 

6.	Additional building height. In TC-1, TC-2 and TC-5 Zones, buildings may have up to three additional stories and 35 feet of building height noted above where one or more of the following are provided as part of the development. 
a.	A multi-level parking structure. 
b.	A mixed use building that provides residential dwelling units above first-floor commercial where a minimum of 50 percent of the buildings floor area is residential. 
c.	Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) building design, accredited based upon the rating system of the United States Green Building Council. 
(Ord. No. 2008-378, § 2(11.73), 2-19-08)
 
Sec. 1174. Architectural requirements.
1.	Non-residential and mixed use architecture. Non-residential buildings, mixed-use buildings (with residential in upper floors) and live/work units shall meet the following architectural design requirements: 
a.	Front facade requirements.
(1)	Buildings shall front onto the sidewalk with windows, doors, and architectural detailing customary of traditional storefronts and contain varying materials, and appearances. 
(2)	All buildings shall have a main entrance that is located on at least one street front. 
(3)	Main entrances shall have design details that enhance the appearance and prominence of the entrance so that it is recognizable from the street and parking areas. 
(4)	For buildings longer than 100 feet, there shall be a minimum of one usable entrance every full 50 feet of frontage and architectural variation shall be provided to visually break the building up. 
b.	Corner buildings.
(1)	Buildings situated at a corner shall possess a level of architectural design that incorporates accents and details that accentuate its prominent location. This can be accomplished through height projections incorporated into a design feature such as additional height, a building peak, tower, or similar accent with the highest point located at the intersecting corner. Alternatively, a pedestrian plaza may be provided at the corner of the intersecting streets. 
(2)	A main entrance must be on a street-facing wall and either at the corner or within 25 feet of the corner. 
c.	Building materials.
(1)	The following exterior finish materials are required on the front facade and any facade facing a street, or parking area. These requirements do not include areas devoted to windows and doors. These requirements apply in lieu of section 2125. 
(2)	All walls exposed to public view from the street, or parking area shall be constructed of not less than 75 percent modular brick or stone, not including window or door areas. 
(3)	Panel brick and tilt-up brick textured paneling shall not be permitted. 
(4)	The remaining facade may include wood siding or fiber cement siding. 
(5)	Exterior insulation finish systems (EFIS) may be used for architectural detailing above the first floor only. 
(6)	Buildings that have upper stories shall be designed to create a distinct and separated ground floor area through the use of accent such as a cornice, change in material or textures, or an awning or canopy between the first and second stories. 
d.	Windows and doors.
 
(1)	No less than 70 percent of the storefront/ground floor front facade shall be clear glass panels and doorway. 
(2)	Required window areas shall be either windows that allow views into retail space, working areas or lobbies, pedestrian entrances, or display windows set into the wall. 
(3)	Windows shall not be blocked with opaque materials or the back or shelving units. 
(4)	The bottom of the first floor window must be no more than four feet above the adjacent exterior grade. 
(5)	Openings above the first story shall be a maximum of 50 percent of the total facade area. 
e.	Roof design.
f.	Awnings.
2.	Residential architecture. Attached single family, detached single family and two-family residential dwellings shall meet the following architectural design requirements: 
a.	Building Design.
 
(1)	Residential buildings shall utilize high-quality traditional architecture, such as but not limited to: Arts & Crafts/Bungalow, Colonial, Gothic Revival, Italianate, Tudor, Victorian and other traditional styles characteristic of the Mid-western United States and with historic buildings characteristic of Washtenaw County. 
(2)	For any residential development that contains five or more dwelling units, typical elevations shall be approved by the planning commission as part of the development's design guidelines or a pattern book. 
(3)	Identical or similar buildings or elevations may not be repeated more frequently than every sixth house along the same side of any street. 
b.	Front facade.
 
(1)	Each residential unit shall provide its own individual pedestrian door facing the front lot line. 
(2)	All dwellings shall include a front porch or front stoop with steps. 
(3)	A stoop or porch (plus steps) shall not extend any nearer than three feet to the sidewalk in front of the lot. 
(4)	The front facade of all residential units shall be at least 15 percent windows or doors. 
(5)	The finished floor elevation shall be no less than three feet and no more than seven feet above the exterior sidewalk elevation in front of the building or from the ground elevation once construction is complete. 
c.	Building material.
d.	Garages.
3.	Modifications. The planning commission may approve deviations to the architectural requirements of this section in order to achieve the objectives of this the town center district through the use of creativity and flexibility in development and design. Each deviation shall be evaluated based upon all of the following criteria: 
a.	Innovations in architectural design may be permitted, provided the building design shall be in keeping with the desired character of the town center, as articulated in the master plan, and the proposed building fits within the context of adjacent buildings along the block. 
b.	The building shall be oriented towards the front sidewalk and maintain or enhance the continuity of the pedestrian-oriented environment. 
c.	The exterior finish materials shall be of equal or better quality and durability as those permitted herein, with the intent to allow for new technologies in building material while maintaining the desired character of the town center. 
d.	Ground floor windows shall be provided along the front sidewalk to maintain the pedestrian orientation of the streetscape and upper story windows shall not be incompatible with the rhythm and proportions of windows on other buildings along the block. The ground floor front facade window and door requirement may be reduced for research and development uses. 
(Ord. No. 2008-378, § 2(11.74), 2-19-08)
 
Sec. 1175. Streetscape requirements.
1.	Streets. An interconnected street and sidewalk network shall be provided to unify neighborhoods and provide more convenient access to businesses and community facilities. Streets shall be designed to meet the following requirements based upon the frontage of the site: 
a.	Huron Street, Whittaker Road or Huron River Drive Frontages. All frontages along Huron Street, Whittaker Road or Huron River Drive shall meet the following requirements: 
Huron Street, Whittaker Road or Huron River Drive Frontages
Street Width	As determined by road commission. 
Right-of-Way Width	120 feet. 
Sidewalks	Sidewalks shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide concrete and provided on both sides of the street. 
Street Trees	One canopy tree for every 40 feet of frontage planted within a 20 foot wide greenbelt. 
Street Lights	Pedestrian scale ornamental street lighting shall be provided along all sidewalks and within parking areas. 
Street lighting shall be spaced no more than 100 feet. 

 
b.	Town center street frontages. All newly developed streets that contain non-residential uses or mixed use buildings shall meet the following requirements: 
 
c.	Residential Street Frontages. All newly developed residential streets shall meet the following requirements: 
 
2.	Street design standards. Except as provided for in this section, streets shall be constructed to meet the requirements of the Washtenaw County Road Commission. Streets shall meet the width requirements noted in the tables above; provided, streets may be narrower at curb bump-outs, crosswalks and at intermediate points along long blocks to calm traffic and enhance pedestrian safety. Sidewalks shall be constructed to meet the requirements of section 2114.5, except as provided for in this section. Roads intersecting Huron Street, Whittaker Road and Huron River Drive shall incorporate full crosswalks at all legs of the intersection. 
3.	Traffic calming. The use of traffic calming devices such as raised intersections, lateral shifts, and traffic circles are encouraged as alternatives to conventional traffic control measures. Whenever an irreconcilable conflict exists among vehicular and pedestrian usage, the conflict should be resolved in favor of the pedestrian unless in the best interest of public safety. 
4.	Alleys. Alleys shall be permitted in all areas of the town center district and shall be required where necessary to provide access to parking lots, loading areas and garages on the rear of dwelling units. Alleys serving as access to residential garages shall have a minimum pavement width of 20 feet and be located within a 30 foot wide easement. Alleys accessing commercial parking lots and loading areas shall have a minimum width of 24 feet. 
5.	Sidewalk cafes. For uses with outdoor seating or temporary display areas a minimum of five feet of sidewalk along the curb and leading to the entrance to the establishment shall be maintained. Pedestrian circulation and access to the building entrance shall not be impaired by tables, chairs, and other encumbrances. 
6.	Street connections. The town center district shall be developed as an integrated area with an interconnected street network. Street connections shall be provided to all adjacent parcels within the district. The use of cul-de-sacs and dead-end streets shall be prohibited. In locations where it is not possible to provide a through street, the planning commission may allow a looped drive with a common green in the center. The circular drive around the green shall be at least 20 feet wide, measured face to face of curb. The green shall be no less than 40 feet at its narrowest dimension. 
7.	Street furniture. Benches and trash receptacles shall be provided in park and plaza areas and along sidewalks where the planning commission determines that pedestrian activity will benefit from these facilities. 
8.	Bicycle facilities. Developments shall be designed to accommodate bicycle travel, including the provision of bike paths, bike lanes and bike racks at destination points such as shopping and recreational facilities. 
 
9.	Street lights. Street lights shall be provided in accordance with the spacing standards in subsection (1) above. 
a.	Street lights shall be of an ornamental style acceptable to the planning commission. Where the township has adopted street lighting specifications, these specifications shall be used on all sites in the town center. 
b.	Site plans for all uses in the town center shall indicate the location and specifications for street lights. 
c.	The applicant may petition the township board to establish a special assessment district for purpose of paying electrical cost of street light operation. 
10.	Street trees. Streets shall be designed with street trees planted in a manner appropriate to their function. Commercial streets shall have trees which compliment the face of the buildings and which shade the sidewalk. Residential streets shall provide for an appropriate canopy, which shades both the street and sidewalk, and serves as a visual buffer between the street and the home. Street trees shall meet the landscape plant material and size requirements of section 2108. 
(Ord. No. 2008-378, § 2(11.75), 2-19-08)
 
Sec. 1176. Parking and loading.
1.	Parking requirements. Parking lots shall conform to the requirements of section 2104. Because the regulations of this section are intended to encourage pedestrian/transit friendly design and compact mixed-use development that requires less reliance on automobiles, the planning commission shall have the discretion to reduce the number of parking spaces required by section 2104 by up to 30 percent. 
2.	On-street parking. On-street parking shall be permitted in all areas of the town center and may be credited towards meeting off-street parking requirements of section 2104. 
3.	Location. Off-street parking shall be located in the rear yard to the maximum extent practical. Parking may be permitted in the side yard where it is setback a distance equal to the building, does not occupy more than 50 percent of the frontage along a site and a 30 inch tall brick screenwall that serves as an extension of the adjacent building is provided between the parking and the sidewalk. 
4.	Huron Street Whittaker Road. One single row of parking may be provided along the Huron Street and Whittaker Road frontages. This parking shall be separated from Huron/Whittaker Road by a 20-foot deep greenbelt. 
5.	Screening and landscaping. Where parking is visible from a street, it shall be screened by a 30 inch tall brick screenwall located between the parking lot and the sidewalk. Where a parking lot for a non-residential use is adjacent to a residential use, a six foot tall brick screen wall shall be provided between the parking lot, including drives, and the residential use instead of the greenbelt required by section 2108. Where the commercial parking lot is separated from the residential use by an alley, then the screenwall may be reduced to 30 inches in height; provided however, the planning commission may also require a six foot tall brick wall or wood/vinyl fence on the residential side of the alley. Parking lot landscaping shall be provided as required by section 2108, except the area of landscape islands and number of parking lot trees may be reduced to half the normal requirement for parking that is located in the rear yard. 
6.	Loading areas. Loading areas shall be provided for uses required to have loading areas by section 2104. The planning commission may allow shared loading areas and waste receptacles between adjacent uses where shared use and maintenance easements are provided. All loading areas shall be screened from any adjacent residential areas and from view of any street by a six foot tall brick wall. Waste receptacle enclosures shall meet the requirements of section 2103(16). 
(Ord. No. 2008-378, § 2(11.76), 2-19-08)
 
Sec. 1177. Open space requirements.
All developments shall be designed to create cohesive community neighborhoods through a network of spaces such as parks, plazas and common open space areas for passive or active recreation and resident interaction. All site plan submissions shall include an open space and landscape plan that provides all of the following: 
1.	Residential open space. Areas dedicated to or associated with residential uses shall set aside a minimum of 25 percent of the land area for open space, which shall contain some form of active recreational facility such as a park or play-area. Each open space area shall be of a design, shape, size and location with street frontage to allow for use by residents for both active and passive recreation. Recreational improvements such as playground equipment, benches, picnic tables, gazebos and pathways shall be provided. 
2.	Non-residential open space. Areas dedicated to non-residential or mixed-use shall set aside a minimum of 15 percent of the land area for open spaces such as plazas, pavilions, common greens or parks; provided the planning commission may permit a portion of this open space to be transferred into an adjacent residential area that is part of the same development. The township board may approve use of open plaza areas for temporary open air markets, band-shells or ice-skating rinks. 
3.	Common green focal point. Open space needs to include at least one area that provides a focal point for the neighborhood and town center, such as the provision of one or more central squares or common greens. 
4.	Natural areas. The planning commission shall require any natural areas with significant mature woodlands or landmark trees to be preserved as open space or otherwise incorporated into the development's design to ensure the preservation of these natural features. Wooded areas and bluffs along Ford Lake with slopes in excess of 12 percent shall be preserved in a natural state. 
5.	Public art. Art shall be incorporated in the form of sculptures, fountains or murals as part of the open space system, within plazas and along sidewalks at key, highly visible locations. 
(Ord. No. 2008-378, § 2(11.77), 2-19-08)
 
Sec. 1178. Other requirements and review process.
1.	Other regulations. Development shall be in accordance with all other applicable regulations of this section. Where there is a conflict between the requirements of the town center district and the requirements of another article of the zoning ordinance, then the requirements of the town center district shall govern. 
2.	Review process. The site plan review procedures and requirements of section 2115 shall be followed for all development proposals within the town center district. All special conditional uses shall be reviewed following the procedures and requirements of section 2119. 
(Ord. No. 2008-378, § 2(11.78), 2-19-08)
 
ARTICLE XII. P-1 VEHICULAR PARKING DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 1200. Intent:
The P-1 vehicular parking districts are intended to permit the establishment of areas to be used solely for off-street parking of private passenger vehicles as a use incidental to a principal use. This district will generally be provided by petition or request to serve a use district which has developed without adequate off-street parking facilities. The following regulations shall apply to all P-1 districts. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 14, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1201. Principal uses permitted:
Premises in such districts shall be used only for an off-street vehicular parking area and shall be developed and maintained subject to such regulations as are hereinafter provided. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 14, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1202. Required conditions:
1.	The parking area shall be accessory to, and for use in connection with, one or more businesses, or industrial establishments, located in adjoining business or industrial districts, or in connection with one or more existing professional or institutional office buildings or institutions. 
2.	Such parking lots shall be contiguous to an RM or nonresidential district. Parking areas may be approved when adjacent to said districts, or on the end of a block where such areas front on a street which is perpendicular to that street servicing the district. There may be a private driveway or public street or public alley between such P-1 district and above-listed districts. 
3.	Parking area shall be used solely for parking of private passenger vehicles, for periods of less than one day and shall not be used as an off-street loading area. 
4.	No commercial repair work or service of any kind, or sale or display thereof, shall be conducted in such parking area. 
5.	No signs of any kind, other than signs designating entrances, exits and conditions of use, shall be maintained on such parking area. 
6.	No building other than those for shelter of attendants shall be erected upon the premises and they shall not exceed 15 feet in height. 
7.	Applications for P-1 district rezoning shall be made by submitting a dimensional layout of the area requested showing the intended parking plans in accordance with sections 2104 and 2105. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 14, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1203. Minimum distances and setbacks:
1.	Side and rear yards. Where the P-1 district is contiguous to the side or rear lot lines of premises within a residentially zoned district, the required wall shall be located along said lot line. 
2.	Front yards. Where the P-1 district is contiguous to a residentially zoned district which has a common frontage on the same block with residential structures, or wherein no residential structures have been yet erected, there shall be a setback equal to the required residential setback for said residential district, or a minimum of 25 feet, or whichever is the greater. The required wall shall be located on this minimum setback line unless, under unusual circumstances, the planning commission finds that no good purpose would be served. The land between said setback and street right-of-way line shall be kept free from refuse and debris and shall be planted with shrubs, trees or lawn and shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 14, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1204. Parking space layout, standards, construction and maintenance:
P-1 vehicular parking districts shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of article XXI, general provisions. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 14, 2-20-18)
 
ARTICLE XIII. IRO INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH OFFICE DISTRICT
 
Sec. 1300. Intent:
The IRO industrial research office districts is so designed as to provide for a "community of office, research and industrial facilities." The IRO industrial research office districts are designed to ensure the compatibility between the operations therein and the activities and character of the neighborhood in which the center is located. The district is established to encourage uses which have a high value per acre of land that will supplement the township's tax base. 
 
Sec. 1301. Principal uses permitted:
See section 306.6. 
(Ord. No. 99-205, 3-16-99; Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 15, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1302. Uses permitted subject to special conditions:
See section 306.6. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 15, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1303. Required conditions:
1.	The outdoor storage of goods or materials shall be prohibited. 
2.	Any use established in the IRO district shall be operated so as to comply with the performance standards set forth hereinafter in section 2120. 
3.	All uses shall receive site plan review and approval by the planning commission prior to the issuance of any building permit. 
4.	Marginal access roads may be required in accord with section 2115.5.d. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 15, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1304. Area and bulk requirements:
See article XX, "Schedule of Regulations" limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
 
ARTICLE XIV. I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
 
Sec. 1400. Intent:
The I-1 light industrial districts are designed so as to primarily accommodate wholesale activities, warehouses, and industrial operations whose external, physical effects are restricted to the area of the district and in no manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding districts. The I-1 district is so structured as to permit, along with any specified uses, the manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, assembly and/or treatment of finished or semifinished products from previously prepared material. 
The general goals of this use district include, among others, the following specific purposes: 
1.	To provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations, to meet the needs of the township's expected future economy for all types of manufacturing and related uses. 
2.	To protect abutting residential districts by separating them from manufacturing activities, and by prohibiting the use of such industrial areas for new residential development. 
3.	To promote manufacturing development which is free from danger of fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation and other hazards, and from offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor and other objectionable influences. 
4.	To promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with a well-considered plan. To protect the character and established pattern of adjacent development, and in each area to conserve the value of land and buildings and other structures, and to protect the township's tax revenue base. 
 
Sec. 1401. Principal uses permitted:
See section 306.6. 
(Ord. No. 99-224, § IV, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 2000-245, § I, 3-21-00; Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 16, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1402. Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions:
See section 306.6. 
(Ord. No. 95-140, 12-5-95; Ord. No. 98-181, 2-17-98; Ord. No. 99-206, 3-16-99; Ord. No. 2010-404, § III, 5-18-10; Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 16, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1403. Required conditions:
1.	Any land used for open storage facilities for materials or equipment used in a permitted or special conditional use shall be totally obscured by a wall on those sides abutting any residential, office, or business district, and on any front yard abutting a public thoroughfare except as otherwise provided in section 2113. In I-1 districts, the extent of such a wall may be determined by the planning commission on the basis of usage. Such a wall shall not be less than four feet six inches in height and may, depending upon land usage, be required to be eight feet in height and shall be subject further to the requirements of article XXI, general provisions. A chainlink fence, with intense evergreen shrub planting, shall be considered an obscuring wall. The height shall be determined in the same manner as the wall height as above set forth. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 16, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1404. Area and bulk requirements:
See article XX, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 16, 2-20-18)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 16, adopted Feb. 20, 2018, renumbered § 1403 as § 1404. 
 
ARTICLE XV. I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
 
Sec. 1500. Intent:
General industrial districts are designed primarily for manufacturing, assembling and fabrication activities including large scale or specialized industrial operations, whose external physical effects will be felt to some degree by surrounding districts. The I-2 district is so structured as to permit the manufacturing, processing and compounding of semifinished or finished products from raw materials as well as from previously prepared material. 
 
Sec. 1501. Principal uses permitted:
See section 306.6. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 17, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1502. Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions:
See section 306.6. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 17, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1503. Area and bulk requirements:
See article XX, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 17, 2-20-18)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 17, adopted Feb. 20, 2018, renumbered § 1502 as § 1503. 
 
ARTICLE XVI. I-3 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
 
Sec. 1600. Intent:
I-3 industrial districts are designed to provide locations for industrial uses which, due to the nature of activities conducted, are not well suited to locations within I-1 or I-2 districts and whose effects on abutting property as well as beyond the district may impair the use of such abutting property. 
 
Sec. 1601. Principal uses permitted:
See section 306.6. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 18, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1602. Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions:
See section 306.6. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 18, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1603. Area and bulk requirements:
See article [XX], schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, and minimum yard setbacks. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 18, 2-20-18)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 18, adopted Feb. 20, 2018, renumbered § 1602 as § 1603. 
 
ARTICLE XVII. I-C INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
 
Sec. 1700. Intent:
I-C industrial and commercial districts are designed to accommodate manufacturing, assembling and fabrication activities including business activities which are not well suited to locations in business districts due to their impact on abutting neighborhoods or due to their requirements for large site areas not available in the township's limited business districts. The I-C district is so structured as to permit the manufacturing, processing and compounding of semifinished or finished products from raw materials as well as from previously prepared material. 
 
Sec. 1701. Principal uses permitted:
See section 306.6. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 19, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1702. Uses permitted subject to special conditions:
See section 306.6. 
(Ord. No. 97-169, 6-17-97; Ord. No. 2000-249, § 2, 10-3-00; Ord. No. 2003-330, 1-20-04; Ord. No. 2009-390, 4-7-09; Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 19, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1703. Area and bulk requirements:
See article XX "Schedule of Regulations," limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
 
ARTICLE XVIII. SPECIFIC USE PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1800. Intent:
The intent of this article is to provide standards for specific uses, whether regulated as a principal permitted use, accessory use or a special conditional use. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1801. Detached single-family dwelling units:
All detached single-family dwelling units shall be reviewed by the building official subject to the following conditions: 
a.	Dwelling units shall conform to all applicable township codes and ordinances. Any such local requirements are not intended to abridge applicable state or federal requirements with respect to the construction of the dwelling. Dwelling units shall be constructed to the requirements of the Michigan Construction Code Act of 1972 (Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972, as amended) and the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended. 
b.	The setbacks, gross floor area and lot coverage of any proposed single-family dwelling unit shall comply with the standards set forth in section 2000. 
c.	Dwelling units shall be permanently attached to a perimeter foundation. In instances where the applicant elects to set the dwelling on piers or other acceptable foundations which are not at the perimeter of the dwelling, then a perimeter wall shall also be constructed. Any such perimeter wall shall be constructed of durable materials and shall also meet all local requirements with respect to materials, construction and necessary foundations below the frostline. Any such wall shall also provide an appearance which is compatible with the dwelling and other homes in the area. 
d.	Dwelling units shall be provided with exterior finish materials similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
e.	Dwelling units shall have a roof with a minimum 4:12 pitch and minimum eight-inch eave, and with a drainage system that will collect and concentrate the discharge of storm water or snow away from the sides of the dwelling. The roof shall have wood shake, asphalt or other acceptable shingles, and meet the snow load standards for southern Michigan. 
f.	Dwelling units shall be oriented on the lot to be consistent with the configuration of dwelling units on adjacent properties and in the surrounding residential neighborhood. All dwelling units shall have width to depth and depth to width ratio that does not exceed three to one (3:1). All dwelling units shall have a minimum width dimension of 24 feet. 
g.	Dwelling units shall be oriented toward the public right-of-way such that the facade that faces the street is manifestly designed as a front facade containing a door, windows and other architectural features customary of the front facade of a residence. There shall be a minimum of two exterior doors with one facing the street. All entrances shall be provided with steps, a stoop or porch that is permanently attached, on a frost depth foundation, either to the perimeter wall. 
h.	The dwelling shall contain storage capability in a basement located under the dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas, or in a separate structure of standard construction similar to or of better quality than the principal dwelling, which storage area shall be equal to ten percent of the square footage of the dwelling or 100 square feet, whichever shall be less. 
i.	Any such home shall be anchored by an anchoring system approved by the township. 
j.	The zoning administrator may request a review by the planning commission of any dwelling unit with respect to items d., e. and f., above. The planning commission shall review the proposed dwelling at a hearing where notice of such hearing shall be provided to all occupants of dwellings within 300 feet of the lot to contain the proposed dwelling. The zoning administrator or planning commission shall not seek to discourage architectural variation, but shall seek to promote the reasonable compatibility of the character of dwelling units, thereby protecting the economic welfare and property value of surrounding residential uses and the township at large. In reviewing any such proposed dwelling unit, the zoning administrator may require the applicant to furnish such plans, elevations and similar documentation as the zoning administrator deems necessary to permit a complete review and evaluation of the proposal. When comparing the proposed dwelling unit to similar types of dwelling areas, consideration shall be given to comparable types of homes within 300 feet. If the area within 300 feet does not contain any such homes, then the nearest 25 similar type dwellings shall be considered. 
k.	The provisions of this section shall not apply to manufactured homes situated in licensed manufactured housing communities. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1802. Home occupations:
Home occupation subject to the following: 
a.	No home occupation shall be permitted that: 
(1)	Changes the outside appearance of the dwelling or is visible from the street. 
(2)	Generates traffic, parking, sewerage or water use in excess of what is normal in the residential neighborhood. 
(3)	Creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or results in electrical interference, or becomes a nuisance. 
(4)	Results in outside storage or display of anything including a sign. 
(5)	Requires the employment of anyone in the home other than one dwelling occupant. 
(6)	Requires exterior building alterations to accommodate the occupation. 
(7)	Occupies more than 20 percent of the ground floor area of the dwelling, or 50 percent of a detached garage. 
(8)	Requires parking for customers or visits for business purposes that cannot be accommodated on the site and/or not exceeding one parking space at curb side on the street. 
(9)	Requires the delivery of goods or the visit of customers before 6:00 a.m. and after 8:00 p.m. 
(10)	Would generate 20 or more customers or visits for business purposes by persons per week. 
b.	The following are permitted home occupations provided they do not violate any of the provisions of the previous paragraph: 
(1)	Dressmaking, sewing and tailoring. 
(2)	Painting, sculpturing or writing. 
(3)	Telephone answering. 
(4)	Home crafts, such as model making, rug weaving and lapidary work. 
(5)	Tutoring, limited to four students at a time. 
(6)	Computer application not including sale of computers. 
(7)	Salesperson's office or home office of a professional person. 
(8)	Laundering and ironing. 
(9)	Repair of clocks, instruments or other small appliances which do not create a nuisance due to noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or result in electrical interference. 
(10)	Barbershops and beauty parlors; limited to one operator. 
(11)	Dance studios; limited to four students at a time. 
c.	The following are prohibited as home occupations: 
(1)	Private clubs. 
(2)	Repair shops which may create a nuisance due to noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference. 
(3)	Restaurants. 
(4)	Stables or kennels. 
(5)	Tourist homes. 
(6)	Automobile repair or paint shops. 
(7)	Medical marihuana dispensaries. 
(8)	Medical marihuana nurseries. 
d.	Any proposed home occupation that is neither specifically permitted by paragraph b. nor specifically prohibited by paragraph c. shall be considered a special use and be granted or denied upon consideration of those standards contained in paragraph a. above and under the procedures specified in section 402. 
e.	Home occupations are limited to those who legally reside in the residence. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1803. Keeping of chickens:
The keeping of up to four hens on those parcels of land separately owned outside the boundaries of either a proprietary, supervisor's plat or site condominium and having an area of not less than one acre; subject to the health and sanitation provisions of the Township of Ypsilanti subject to the following: 
a.	The principle use of the property where the hens are to be kept is as a single-family dwelling as defined by the township zoning ordinance. 
b.	Hens may only be kept by a person permanently residing at the subject residence. 
c.	The keeping of roosters shall be prohibited. 
d.	Chickens shall be provided with a secure, well-ventilated, roofed, and lockable structure (heretofore referred to as a "hen house") which shall not exceed 25 square feet in area. 
e.	A covered enclosure or fenced enclosure, constructed in a workmanlike manner, shall be erected around the hen house to prevent the hens from leaving the enclosed area. 
f.	No enclosure shall be located closer than 20 feet from a property line nor shall it be located closer than 40 feet to any adjacent residential structure. 
g.	Both the hen house and the fenced pen, run, or enclosure must be located in the rear yard. 
h.	All enclosures for the keeping of chickens shall be constructed or repaired to prevent rats, mice or other rodents from being harbored underneath, within, or within the walls of the enclosure. 
i.	All food shall be stored indoor and within a rodent-proof container. 
j.	The slaughtering of hens shall be prohibited. 
k.	Waste materials (feed, manure and litter) should be disposed of in an environmentally responsible manner. The materials can be composted or bagged and disposed of in the trash. It is not acceptable to pile waste materials on the property. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1804. Farm operations in one-family residential districts:
Farm operations in residential districts are limited to those parcels of land separately owned outside the boundaries of either a proprietary or supervisor's plat, having an area of not less than five acres, all subject to the Generally Accepted Agricultural Management Practices as adopted by the Michigan Commission of Agriculture and Rural Development. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1805. Institutional or community recreation centers and nonprofit swimming pool clubs:
Institutional or community recreation centers and nonprofit swimming pool clubs, all subject to the following conditions: 
a.	Front, side and rear yards shall be at least 80 feet wide, and shall be landscaped in trees, shrubs, and grass. All such landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy condition. There shall be no parking or structures permitted in these yards, except required entrance drives and those walls used to obscure the use from abutting residential districts. 
b.	Off-street parking shall be provided so as to accommodate not less than one-half of the member families and/or individual members. The planning commission may modify the off-street parking requirements in those instances wherein it is specifically determined that the users will originate from the immediately adjacent areas, and will therefore be pedestrian. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or zoning compliance permit, bylaws of the organization shall be provided in order to establish the membership involved for computing the off-street parking requirements. In those cases wherein the proposed use or organization does not have bylaws or formal membership, the off-street parking requirement shall be determined by the planning commission on the basis of usage. 
c.	Whenever a swimming pool is constructed under this ordinance, said pool area shall be provided with a protective fence, six feet in height, and entry shall be provided by means of a controlled gate. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18; Ord. No. 2020-491 , § 6, 7-21-20)
 
Sec. 1806. Golf courses:
Golf courses, which may or may not be operated for profit, subject to the following conditions: 
a.	The site plan shall be laid out to achieve a relationship between the major thoroughfare and any proposed service roads, entrances, driveways, and parking areas which will encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety. 
b.	In residential zoning districts where golf courses are allowed (R-1 to R-5, RM-1 to RM-4), development features including the principal and accessory buildings and structures shall be so located and related as to minimize the possibilities of any adverse effects upon adjacent property. All principal or accessory buildings shall be not less than 200 feet from any property line abutting residentially zoned lands; provided that where topographic conditions are such that buildings would be screened from view, the planning commission may modify this requirement. 
c.	Whenever a swimming pool is to be provided, said pool shall be provided with a protective fence, six feet in height, and entry shall be provided by means of a controlled gate. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18; Ord. No. 2020-491 , § 7, 7-21-20)
 
Sec. 1807. Colleges and universities:
Colleges, universities and other such institutions of higher learning, public and private, offering courses in general, technical, or religious education and not operated for profit, all subject to the following conditions: 
a.	Any use permitted herein shall be developed only on sites of at least 40 acres in area, and shall not be permitted on any portion of a recorded subdivision plat. 
b.	No building shall be closer than 80 feet to any property line. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18; Ord. No. 2020-491 , § 8, 7-21-20)
 
Sec. 1808. Bed and breakfasts:
Bed and breakfasts are subject to the following conditions: 
a.	Such dwelling units shall conform to all applicable township codes and ordinances. 
b.	Such dwellings shall be located only on major or secondary thoroughfares as designated on the township master plan and shall be located on lots or parcels of not less than 12,000 square feet area. 
c.	Not more than 49 percent of the total floor space of the dwelling unit may be used for leasable sleeping rooms. 
d.	The leasable sleeping rooms shall have a minimum size of 100 square feet for each two occupants with an additional 30 square feet for each additional occupant, not to exceed a maximum of four occupants per room. 
e.	Each leasable sleeping room must have a separate operating smoke detector alarm. 
f.	Lavatory and bathing facilities must be available to all persons using any leasable sleeping room. 
g.	There will be no separate cooking facilities available to persons using any leasable sleeping room. 
h.	There will be at least two exits from each level of the dwelling units. 
i.	The maximum length of stay for any person using any leasable sleeping room is 14 consecutive days. 
j.	Every operator of such dwelling unit must keep a list of the names and addresses of all persons staying at the dwelling unit. The guest register must be available for inspection by township officials at any time. 
k.	The operations of the dwelling unit will not be permitted to endanger, offend, or otherwise interfere with the safety or rights of others so as to constitute a public nuisance. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1809. Public riding and/or boarding stables:
Public riding and/or boarding stables may be permitted in residential districts under the following conditions: 
a.	The location, size, and setbacks must comply with the currently adopted Michigan Department of Agriculture and Rural Development Generally Accepted Agricultural and Management Practices for Site Selection and Odor Control for New and Expanding Livestock Facilities. 
b.	Manure management must comply with the currently adopted Michigan Department of Agriculture and Rural Development Generally Accepted Agricultural and Management Practices for Manure Management and Utilization. 
c.	Ingress and egress to the stable shall be solely through the parcel in question which shall abut a public right-of-way. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided on the site and shall be located at least 100 feet from the perimeter of the site. 
d.	Lighting for exterior illumination shall be directed away from and shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts. 
e.	A plot plan drawn to scale shall be submitted showing ingress and egress, parking and lighting. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1810. Private stables:
Private stables may be permitted in residential districts as an accessory use, for not more than one horse on a lot where said lot is not less than four acres in area and provided further, that for each additional horse stabled thereon one acre of land shall be provided. All confinement areas and/or stable buildings shall in all instances be located in the rear yard and shall not be less than 100 feet from any property line. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1811. Greenhouses and plant material nurseries in one-family residential districts:
Plant material nurseries and greenhouses may be permitted in residential districts subject to the following conditions: 
a.	The minimum site size shall be five acres and so located as to provide all ingress and egress directly onto a major thoroughfare. 
b.	All required yards shall be not less than 50 feet wide when abutting any R residential district. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1812. Cemeteries:
Cemeteries may be permitted subject to the following conditions: 
a.	The location of the cemetery shall be permitted in any quarter section of an R district when such quarter section does not have more than 51 percent of its land area in recorded plats. 
b.	All sides of the cemetery shall be adequately screened from any residential view. 
c.	Final approval shall be given contingent on a satisfactory drainage plan approved by the township engineer. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1813. Seasonal sale of produce on farm operations:
a.	Off-street parking shall be provided with ingress and egress provided to minimize traffic hazards on public streets. Paving of parking areas as required in section 2105 shall not be required; however, parking areas shall be surfaced and maintained in a dustfree condition at all times. 
b.	Signs shall be limited to sizes and locations in keeping with section 2009. In addition to sign regulation provided in section 2009, not more than two temporary signs totaling not more than 12 square feet in the aggregate may be utilized. 
c.	Any buildings, or structures, to be erected and any produce to be sold in the open shall meet all setback requirements of the district in which it is located. 
d.	In those instances where produce is to be sold on a farm property with buildings already in existence on the site, sale of produce may be conducted within existing yards, provided setbacks meet the requirements of the district in which it is located. 
e.	All temporary buildings and structures shall be constructed, used, occupied and maintained in compliance with the provisions of the state construction code and all applicable ordinances by the township. Permits shall be issued for six-month periods. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1814. Institutional farms:
Institutional farms are subject to the following: 
a.	A site of not less than 60 acres shall be required. 
b.	A frontage of not less than 100 feet on a public road shall be required. 
c.	Farming shall be a primary activity conducted on the premises. Not less than 95 percent of such site shall be utilized as open land for crop cultivation. 
d.	The site shall be located on a major thoroughfare as designated on the township master plan and such thoroughfare shall have a paved surface. 
e.	Buildings shall be located no nearer than 80 feet to any property line. 
f.	A landscaped screening area not less than 40 feet wide shall be provided on those sides of the property where homes exist on abutting properties. 
g.	Activities which create any of the following impacts beyond the property line of the farm shall be prohibited: 
(1)	Activities which exceed noise levels of 70 decibels at the property line. 
(2)	Activities which generate vibration felt at the property line. 
(3)	Activities which generate electronic interference beyond the property line. 
(4)	Lighting of an intensity greater than for normal farming activities. 
h.	Farming activities that normally produce effects felt beyond the immediate farm property line that are consistent with those effects produced by other farms in the immediate area shall be permitted. 
i.	Parking areas shall be provided for all residents, caretakers, instructors and administrative personnel. Visitor parking and parking for any event conducted on the premises shall be provided as off-street parking. 
j.	A site plan prepared in accordance with section 2115 shall be drawn to scale and submitted for review under this section. 
k.	Landscape screening, where required, shall be provided in accord with section 2108. 
l.	Not more than 13 resident patients per acre may reside on that portion of the farm occupied by buildings. The portion of the farm occupied by buildings shall not exceed five percent of the total farm property. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1815. Keeping of more than four dogs in one-family residential districts:
The keeping of more than four dogs owned by the resident of a property as pets not boarded for others subject to the following conditions: 
a.	All dogs shall be licensed per chapter 14, article III of the Code of Ordinances of the Charter Township of Ypsilanti. 
b.	A nontransferable permit shall be required stating dog ownership and the number of dogs to be kept. The permit shall be required to be renewed annually. Such renewal may be given by the building official provided no increase in number of dogs or violation of any provision of this ordinance or other ordinances has occurred in the prior year or is evident at the time of renewal. 
c.	The yard area in which dogs are allowed to run shall be securely fenced and shall not be placed in such a location as to become a nuisance to abutting properties or the neighborhood. 
d.	Outdoor areas in which dogs are kept shall be kept free of dog droppings, decayed food and odors. Noticeable odors or an excessive accumulation of insects shall be reason for revocation of the special permit. 
e.	A plot plan shall be submitted showing the location and fencing of the outdoor areas in which dogs are kept and showing the relationship to public streets, abutting properties and buildings on abutting properties. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1816. Convalescent homes and nursing homes:
Convalescent homes or nursing home must meet following conditions: 
a.	The site shall be so developed as to create a land to building ratio on the lot or parcel whereby for each one bed in the convalescent home there shall be provided not less than 1,500 square feet of open space. The 1,500 square feet of land area per bed shall provide for landscape setting, off-street parking, service drives, loading space, yard requirements, employee facilities, and any space required for accessory uses. The 1,500 square foot requirement is over and above the building coverage area. 
b.	No building shall be closer than 40 feet to any property line. 
c.	Convalescent or nursing homes in the town center districts are not subject to the above regulations. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1817. Retail uses accessory to high-rise multiple-family dwelling:
Business uses shall be permitted on a high-rise multiple-dwelling site when developed as retail and/or service uses clearly accessory to the main use, within the walls of the main structure, and totally obscured from any exterior view. No identifying sign for any such business and/or service use shall be visible from any exterior view. Such businesses and/or services shall be prohibited on all floors above the first floor or grade level. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1818. Mortuary establishments:
Mortuary establishments must provide adequate assembly area off-street for vehicles to be used in funeral processions, provided further that such assembly area shall be provided in addition to any required off-street parking area. A caretaker's residence may be provided within the building of mortuary establishments. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1819. Private clubs, fraternal organizations and lodge halls in the OS-1 district:
Private clubs, fraternal organizations and lodge halls in the OS-1 zoning district must meet the following conditions: 
a.	The site abuts a major thoroughfare as designated on the township future land use plan. 
b.	Access to and from the site can be safely provided to the satisfaction of the county road commission. 
c.	No building or parking area shall be located closer than 50 feet to a property line. 
d.	All parking shall be screened from view of all abutting residential districts. 
e.	Outdoor lighting of a type and location which will not be a nuisance to abutting residential districts shall be provided and any outdoor lighting shall conform with the guidelines set forth in section 2110 of the zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1820. Veterinary clinics:
Veterinary clinics, when such use is conducted entirely within an enclosed building. No animal kennels or animal runs shall be allowed outside the principal building. Animal kennels or runs within a principal building shall provide no windows which can be opened to the outside. All buildings are set back at least 100 feet from abutting residential district on the same side of the street. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1821. Veterinary hospitals:
All activities are conducted within a totally enclosed main building and provided further that all buildings are set back at least 100 feet from abutting residential district on the same side of the street. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1822. Restaurants:
a.	In the OS-1 and B-1 zoning districts, restaurants must meet the following conditions: 
(1)	Service is wholly within the building and no drive-in facilities are provided. 
(2)	When adjacent to a residential zoning district boundary, the building shall have a minimum setback of 20 feet from the residential zoning district boundary. 
(3)	Parking areas shall be screened from adjacent residential areas in accord with section 2108 and such screening walls shall be constructed of finished materials in harmony with the residential character of abutting residential zones. 
(4)	Outdoor lighting, of a type and location which will not be a nuisance to abutting residential districts, shall be provided. The type of lighting and the location of such lighting shall be included on the plan for review by the planning commission. 
(5)	All access to the site shall be from an existing or planned major or minor thoroughfare, or from a collector street. 
b.	In the IRO zoning districts, restaurants or other places serving food and beverages are subject further to the following conditions: 
(1)	Drive-in, fast-food, carry-out or drive-through restaurants are not permitted. 
(2)	The use shall be located within an office structure, hotel or motel building or in a freestanding building within the IRO district directly adjacent to a permitted use in the IRO zoning district. 
(3)	The use is a part of an overall plan for development of not less than 30 acres and shall be part of a service establishment complex for such development. 
(4)	The use shall comprise not more than 20 percent of the land area of an overall development. 
(5)	The location of such uses shall be established at the time of site plan review and approval for the total development complex. 
c.	Drive-in and drive-through restaurants must meet the regulations in section 1823. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18; Ord. No. 2020-491 , § 9, 7-21-20)
 
Sec. 1823. Drive-in and drive-through facilities:
a.	The sale of alcoholic beverages via drive-through service is not permitted. The planning commission may include other restrictions on products sold via the drive-through as applicable. 
b.	A setback of at least 60 feet from the right-of-way line of any existing or proposed street must be maintained. 
c.	Access points shall be located at least 60 feet from the intersection of any two streets. 
d.	All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts. 
e.	When abutting or adjacent to districts zoned for R (residential), a six-foot high, completely obscuring wall, fence or landscaping shall be provided. A four-foot six-inch high partially obscuring wall, fence or landscaping shall be required when abutting all other occupancies. The height of the wall/landscaping/fence shall be measured from the surface of the ground. The wall/landscaping/fence shall extend only to the front yard setback line. 
f.	The stacking lane for the drive-through shall be located where it does not conflict with on-site circulation or block access to the site and shall promote pedestrian safety. 
g.	A bypass lane for vehicles not utilizing drive-through facilities must be provided. Clear identification and delineation between the drive-through facility and the parking lot shall be provided. 
 
Sec. 1824. Outdoor storage or display of merchandise, goods or items associated with a permitted use:
a.	Such storage shall be strictly and clearly incidental to the principal use and only products and materials owned or produced by the principal business, and equipment owned and operated by the principal use shall be permitted for storage under the subsection. 
b.	Location and size. 
(1)	The location and size of areas for such storage, nature of items to be stored therein, and details of the enclosure, including description of materials, height, and typical elevation of the enclosure shall be indicated on a site plan. 
(2)	Such storage shall not be located within the area between the front face of the building, as extended across the entire width of the lot, and to the right-of-way; in any required side or rear yard; or in any required transition strip. 
(3)	Such storage shall not be located in any required parking or loading space. 
c.	Screening. The area for such storage shall be screened from view on all sides. Screening shall be constructed of wood or masonry materials. Wire fences with inserted strips of metal, plastic and similar materials shall not be substituted for the required screening. The screen shall not be less than the maximum height of the product being stored. 
d.	The outdoor storage or display shall be located in the side or rear yards of the site. Any stockpiles of soils, fertilizer or similar loosely packaged materials shall be sufficiently covered or contained to prevent dust or blowing of materials. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1825. Sidewalk and outdoor cafes:
Sidewalk or outdoor cafes may be permitted subject to the issuance of a revocable permit to operate a sidewalk cafe or an outdoor cafe as an extension of or compatible with, the existing business on a portion of the public sidewalk or other public area adjacent to the business. The permit may be issued under the following terms and conditions: 
a.	Sidewalk or outdoor cafe permits may be issued if it is determined that the occupancy will not: 
(1)	Interfere with the use of the street for pedestrian or vehicular travel. 
(2)	Unreasonably interfere with the view of, access to or use of property adjacent to said street. 
(3)	Reduce any sidewalk width to less than six feet. 
(4)	Interfere with street clearing or snow removal activities. 
(5)	Cause damage to the street or to sidewalks, trees, benches, landscaping or other objects lawfully located therein. 
(6)	Cause a violation of any state or local laws. 
(7)	Be principally used for off-premises advertising. 
(8)	Be attached to or reduce the effectiveness of or access to any utility pole, sign or other traffic control device. 
(9)	Cause increased risk of theft or vandalism. 
(10)	Be in or adjacent to property zoned exclusively for residential purposes. 
b.	All businesses selling food or beverages to be consumed in a public sidewalk area or outdoor area adjacent to the business shall enclose the area with a temporary structure approved by the building inspector. All construction shall conform with existing building codes and regulations of the township. Such plans shall also include the location of adequate trash receptacles. 
c.	Prior to the issuance of a sidewalk or outdoor cafe permit, the applying business must provide the township with a certificate of liability insurance in an amount to be determined solely by the township. The certificate of insurance must be in effect for at least the period of the permit to be issued. In addition, the applying business shall, by written agreement with the township, indemnify and hold harmless the township from all claims or damages incident to the establishment and operation of a sidewalk cafe. 
d.	Prior to the issuance of a permit, a fee as specified from time to time by resolution of the township board, shall be paid by the requesting business for the period of the permit. The period of a sidewalk or outdoor cafe permit shall not exceed 180 days. The dates and duration shall be specified on the permit. The permit shall be subject to immediate revocation for failure to properly maintain the area being used as a sidewalk or outdoor cafe, or for any other violation of this section or any other section. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1826. Dealership for sale of new or used automobiles, boats, house trailers or rental of trailers and/or automobiles:
1.	Outdoor sales space for sale of new or used automobiles, boats, house trailers or rental of trailers and/or automobiles, all subject to the following: 
a.	The lot or area shall be provided with a permanent, durable and dustless surface, and shall be graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulated within the area. 
b.	Access to the outdoor sales area shall be at least 60 feet from the intersection of any two streets. 
c.	No major repair or major refinishing shall be done on the lot. 
d.	All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1827. Motels:
Motels are subject to the following conditions: 
a.	Access shall be provided so as not to conflict with adjacent business uses or adversely affect traffic flow on a major thoroughfare. 
b.	Each unit shall contain not less than 250 square feet of floor area. 
c.	No guest shall establish permanent residence at a motel for more than 30 days within any calendar year. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1828. Retail sales of plant material not grown on the site, lawn furniture, playground equipment and/or garden supplies:
Plant materials nursery for the retail sale of plant materials not grown on the site, and sales of lawn furniture, playground equipment and garden supplies subject to the following conditions: 
a.	The storage and/or display of any materials and/or products shall meet all setback requirements of a structure. 
b.	All loading and parking shall be provided off-street. 
c.	The storage of any soil, fertilizer, or other loose, unpackaged materials shall be contained so as to prevent any effects on adjacent uses. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1829. Gasoline service station:
Gasoline service station for the sale of gasoline, oil and minor accessories only and where incidental repair work is done; provided, however, that other uses permitted and as regulated in the B-3 general business district may be established in conjunction with such gasoline service station, subject to the following conditions: 
a.	Gasoline service stations shall directly abut a major thoroughfare as designated in the township's major thoroughfare plan. 
b.	The minimum lot area for gasoline service stations shall be 15,000 square feet for stations having no more than two service bays and no more than two pump islands. There shall be added 3,000 square feet for each additional service bay and 1,500 square feet for each additional pump island. At least one street lot line shall be at least 150 feet in length along one major thoroughfare. The lot shall be so shaped and the station so arranged, as to provide ample space for vehicles which are required to wait. 
c.	The driveway or curb cuts for access to a service station shall not be permitted at such locations that will tend to create traffic hazards in the streets immediately adjacent thereto. Entrances shall be located no less than ten feet from an adjoining property line, 25 feet if adjacent to residential districts, as extended to the curb or pavement. Entrances shall also be no less than 25 feet from an intersection street right-of-way line extended to the curb or pavement. 
d.	A four-foot six-inch masonry obscuring wall shall be provided and maintained on those property lines adjacent to or abutting a residential district. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1830. Minor automotive repair:
Minor automotive repair businesses are subject to the following conditions: 
a.	Access to such use shall be directly to a major or collector street or shall be to a minor street which has direct access to an abutting major or collector street. 
b.	Access to and from such use shall not be cause for traffic to utilize residential streets. 
c.	Outdoor storage of parts or materials shall be prohibited unless such storage is within a fenced and obscured area which meets all setback requirements. 
d.	Vehicles shall not be allowed to be stored outside the building for more than 48 hours unless awaiting repair for which a "work order," signed by the owner of the vehicle, is posted in the vehicle so as to be visible from outside the vehicle. 
e.	Areas for off-street parking required for customer use shall not be utilized for the storage of vehicles awaiting repair. 
f.	All vehicle servicing or repair, except minor repairs such as, but not limited to, tire changing and headlight changing, shall be conducted within a building. 
g.	Suitable containers shall be provided and utilized for the disposal of used parts and such containers shall be screened from public view. 
h.	A four-foot, six-inch obscuring wall shall be provided and maintained on those property lines adjacent to or abutting a residential district. 
i.	A site plan shall be submitted to the planning commission for its review and approval prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1831. Arcades and similar uses:
Business whose primary activity is maintaining and operating three or more coin-operated amusement devices which are to provide facilities and space for patrons to engage in the playing of pinball games or similar electronic gaming devices, pool, billiard, cards or similar activities, shall only be permitted in the B-3 districts, subject further to the following requirements and conditions: 
a.	The site shall not be contiguous to a one-family residential district. 
b.	The site shall be so located as to abut a major thoroughfare right-of-way, and all ingress-egress to the site shall be directly from said major thoroughfare. 
c.	No such business shall be located within 1,500 feet of a similar business. 
d.	No such business shall be located within 200 feet distance from the front door of the business to the front door of any residence in a residential district. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1832. Temporary sidewalk, outdoor and tent sales for principal use:
Temporary sidewalk, outdoor and tent sales may be permitted subject to the issuance of a revocable permit to operate a sidewalk, outdoor or tent sales as an extension of or compatible with, the existing business on a portion of the public sidewalk or other public area adjacent to the business. The permit may be issued under the following terms and conditions: 
a.	For all uses, the following conditions must be met: 
(1)	Signs shall be limited to sizes and locations in keeping with section 2109. 
(2)	Any buildings, tents or structures to be erected and any product to be sold in the open shall meet all setback requirements of the district in which it is located. 
(3)	All temporary buildings, tents and structures shall be constructed, used, occupied and maintained in compliance with the provisions of the state construction code and all ordinances of the township. 
(4)	Building and fire code requirements shall be complied with. 
(5)	The sale shall not interfere with the use of the sidewalk or street for pedestrian or vehicular travel. Sidewalk width must remain at least six feet wide. 
(6)	The sale shall not unreasonably interfere with the view of, access to or use of property adjacent to the street or neighboring businesses or properties. 
(7)	The sale shall not interfere with street clearing or snow removal activities. 
(8)	The sale shall not cause damage to the street or to sidewalks, trees, benches, landscaping or other objects lawfully located on the property. 
(9)	Sales areas shall be located so as to provide adequate access for fire and safety vehicles. 
(10)	A permit shall be required. The proprietor of the property shall apply for a building permit and provide a sketch plan drawn to scale showing the location of the sale, existing and proposed temporary and permanent structures on the entire parcel, parking areas, and parking calculations. 
(11)	Copies of permits required by any other agencies for the use must be included with the permit application. 
b.	Seasonal sale of produce from tents, stands or display racks subject to the following conditions: 
(1)	Permits may be issued for up to six-month periods. 
(2)	Off-street parking shall be provided in keeping with standards of sections 2104 and 2105. In those instances where usable floor area cannot be effectively measured, the sales space utilized shall be measured as usable floor area. 
c.	Sidewalk sales areas may be permitted subject to the following: 
(1)	The sidewalk sales area shall abut the building and shall not be placed abutting a parking area or vehicle travelway. 
(2)	Sidewalk sales areas shall not be fenced or enclosed in any manner. 
(3)	Sidewalk sales shall be conducted for no more than 14 consecutive days and permits shall not be issued for consecutive tent sales beyond a 14-day period. 
d.	Tent sales may be permitted subject to the following: 
(1)	No more than three tent sales shall be permitted for a business location within a single calendar year. 
(2)	A tent sale shall be conducted for no more than 14 consecutive days and permits shall not be issued for consecutive tent sales beyond a 14-day period. 
(3)	Tent sales when proposed to be conducted on parking areas shall not reduce required parking spaces by more than 15 percent. 
(4)	All tents shall be removed within 48 hours of expiration of the period for which the permit is issued. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1833. Automobile car wash:
Automobile car wash are subject to the following: 
a.	All buildings shall have a front yard setback of not less than 50 feet. 
b.	All washing facilities shall be within a completely enclosed building. 
c.	Vacuuming and drying areas may be located outside the building but shall not be in the required front yard and shall not be closer than 25 feet from any residential district. 
d.	All cars required to wait for access to the facilities shall be provided space off the street right-of-way and parking shall be provided in accordance with sections 2104 and 2105. 
e.	Ingress and egress points shall be located at least 60 feet from the intersection of any two streets. 
f.	All off-street parking and waiting areas shall be hard-surfaced and dustfree. 
g.	All lighting shall be shielded and directed away from adjacent residential districts. 
h.	A four-foot six-inch completely obscuring wall shall be provided where abutting to a residential district. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1834. Commercial outdoor recreational space for children's amusement parks, miniature golf courses, golf driving ranges and similar uses:
Commercial outdoor recreational space for children's amusement parks, miniature golf courses, golf driving ranges and similar uses, subject to the following: 
a.	All adjacent properties shall be zoned for other than residential or office use. 
b.	The use shall be fenced on all sides with a four-foot six-inch wall or fence. 
c.	Adequate parking shall be provided off the road right-of-way and shall be fenced with a four-foot six-inch wall or fence where adjacent to the use. 
d.	All lighting shall be shielded and directed away from adjacent residential districts or dwellings in close proximity to the site. 
e.	Devices for transmission or broadcasting of voices or music shall be directed or muffled to prevent said sound or music from being audible beyond the property line of the site. 
f.	A four-foot six-inch completely obscuring wall or fence must be provided where abutting or adjacent to a residential district. The height of the wall shall be measured from the surface of the ground. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1835. Batting cages, archery ranges and similar activities:
Commercial outdoor recreation facilities such as batting cages, archery ranges and similar activities all subject to the following: 
a.	No such activity shall be permitted within 200 feet of any residential dwelling. 
b.	The lot or area utilized for recreation activity shall be provided with a durable and dustless surface. 
c.	Off-street-parking shall be provided in accord with section 1801 et seq. of this ordinance. 
d.	Lighting shall be shielded to be directed only on the activity on the site. 
e.	Noise levels shall not exceed 70 decibels at the property line of the site. 
f.	Hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
g.	The planning commission may require setbacks or fencing in order to protect the safety of those on adjacent parcels. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1836. Smoking lounges:
Smoking lounges subject to the following: 
a.	No such business shall be located within 2,500 feet of a similar business. 
b.	A valid smoking lounge business license issued by the township clerk for the premises. 
c.	A minimum number of off-street parking calculated by utilizing the parking requirements for bars, lounges, taverns, and nightclubs. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1837. Accessory retail uses in IRO zoning district:
Retail and service uses may be permitted as secondary uses to the principal permitted office uses in the IRO zoning district and are limited to the following uses: 
a.	Retail businesses or service establishments. 
b.	Personal service establishments, such as but not limited to: repair shops (watches, radio, television, shoe, etc.), tailor shops, beauty parlors or barbershops, laundries or dry cleaners, printing or photographic reproduction, photographic, art or interior decorating studios. 
c.	Theaters, bowling alleys, billiard halls, health salons or similar forms of indoor recreation. 
d.	Restaurants or other places serving food and beverages, but not including drive-in, fast-food, carry-out or drive-through restaurants and subject further to the following conditions: 
(1)	Such uses shall be located within an office structure or motel building or shall be located in a freestanding building within the IRO district so as to be adjacent to a use designated as being allowed in section 1301, paragraphs 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, or 7. 
(2)	Such use shall be planned as a part of an overall plan for development of not less than 30 acres and shall be part of a service establishment complex for such development. 
(3)	The location of such uses shall be established at the time of site plan review and approval for the total development complex. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1838. Airports:
Airports subject to all state and federal regulations and subject to all township codes and ordinances and further subject to the following conditions: 
a.	An airport shall not be located at the edge of an industrial district which abuts land in the township planned for residential use. 
b.	The use shall provide maximum compatibility to abutting uses and to the future land use plan for the immediate area. 
c.	Runway location and/or extension shall be reviewed relative to potentials for flight interference in runway approach zones. 
d.	Runway location and/or extension shall be reviewed relative to effects on residential areas. 
e.	Buildings and structures shall comply with all setback requirements of the I-I district and shall be set back from all runways in accord with all Federal Aviation Agency regulations. 
f.	Traffic and parking for the proposed use shall be reviewed to ensure the adequacy of facilities. Parking locations for visitors will be required off the public right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1839. Mini warehouses:
Mini-warehouses and storage buildings for lease to the public including the office and dwelling of a caretaker and subject to the following conditions: 
a.	A front yard building setback of not less than 40 feet shall be provided, all of which, except for driveway access, shall be landscaped. 
b.	Side and rear yard building setbacks of not less than 40 feet shall be provided. Ten feet of width of such yard shall be planted materials sufficient to screen such yards from abutting uses. Side and rear yards may be reduced to 30 feet of width in those instances where a completely obscuring wall not less than six feet in height is provided along the property line for the entire length of the side and rear yards in place of the ten-foot wide plant material screening. 
c.	Building shall be spaced not less than 30 feet apart. 
d.	Outdoor storage of recreational equipment as an accessory use may be permitted provided that 85 percent of the site shall be occupied with storage buildings and required yards (setback areas) with not more than 15 percent utilized for outdoor storage of recreational equipment. All outdoor storage areas shall be located only in the rear yard of the site and shall be screened with a completely obscuring masonry wall not less than six feet in height located on the property line where such storage area abuts properties not a part of a mini-warehouse facility. Such outdoor storage area shall not be visible from a public street. All recreational equipment shall be in operable condition and appropriately licensed as may be required for such equipment. 
e.	Adequate maneuvering space for fire safety vehicles shall be provided. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1840. Indoor recreational facility:
a.	All recreational activities shall be conducted within an enclosed building. 
b.	Structures shall be set back 100 feet from any abutting residential district, except the planning commission may reduce the setback to 50 feet where the adjacent residentially zoned property is a public park or recreation area. 
c.	The off-street parking, passenger loading/unloading and general size layout and its relationship to the surrounding land uses and roads shall be reviewed by the planning commission, who may impose reasonable restrictions or requirements to insure contiguous residential areas will be adequately protected. 
d.	A parking study shall be prepared to determine the required number of parking spaces. The study shall indicate to the maximum capacity of the facility, the maximum number of participants that can be involved in the events, with an overlap between two consecutive events, and the maximum number of spectators. Such study shall utilize parking generation estimates based upon the Institute of Transportation Engineers Parking Generation Manual and also a comparison of three similar facilities in the area. 
e.	The applicant shall provide documentation showing that the size of the site is adequate, using national facility standards. 
f.	Operational hours may be restricted by the planning commission in consideration of adjacent land uses and zoning. All outdoor activities, including floodlighting, public address systems, etc. must cease at 11:00 p.m. 
g.	All buildings shall be permanent structures. Inflated domes are not permitted. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1841. Medical marihuana dispensaries and medical marihuana nurseries:
a.	No medical marihuana dispensary or medical marihuana nursery shall be located within 1,000 feet of any other medical marihuana dispensary or medical marihuana nursery nor within 1,000 feet of any of the following uses: 
(1)	Any church, synagogue, mosque or any house of worship. 
(2)	Any school, public or private, having a curriculum including kindergarten or any one or more of the grades one through 12. 
(3)	Any child care organization. 
(4)	Any public library. 
(5)	Any residentially zoned district or residential use. 
(6)	Any community college, university or professional school. 
b.	All activity related to a medical marihuana dispensary or medical marihuana nursery including, but not limited to, growing shall be done indoors in a locked structure. 
c.	Medical marihuana dispensary and medical marihuana nurseries shall be operated in compliance with the provisions of the Michigan Department of Community Health and the Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq. 
d.	Smoking, inhalation, or consumption of medical marihuana shall not be allowed on the site of the medical marihuana dispensary or medical marihuana nursery. 
e.	No qualifying patients under the age of 18 shall be permitted in the medical marihuana dispensary or medical marihuana nursery at any time except in the presence of qualifying patient's parent or legal guardian or their primary caregiver. 
f.	No retail sales of drug paraphernalia are permitted at the medical marihuana dispensary or medical marihuana nursery, except to qualifying patients or their primary caregivers. 
g.	Each medical marihuana dispensary or medical marihuana nursery shall display in a manner legible and visible to its clientele: 
(1)	Notice that qualifying patients under the age of 18 are not allowed in the medical marihuana dispensary or medical marihuana nursery except in the presence of his/her parent or legal guardian; 
(2)	No consumption, inhalation or consumption of medical marihuana shall occur within the vicinity of the medical marihuana dispensary or medical marihuana nursery. 
h.	Only operators and their employees, qualifying patients, parents or guardians of qualifying patients under 18 years of age, and their primary caregiver may be permitted to enter a medical marihuana dispensary or medical marihuana nursery for the purpose of obtaining medical marihuana or other goods or products associated with its use. 
i.	Medical marihuana nurseries can grow a maximum of 72 marihuana plants. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1842. Junkyards:
Junkyards and places for dismantling, wrecking and disposing or salvaging of the junk and or refuse material of agricultural and automotive vehicles, paper, glass and other materials of a similar nature, including processing of materials for recycling, subject to the following conditions: 
a.	All ordinances of the township, county and state as applied to these activities are complied with. 
b.	No such use shall be allowed within 200 feet of a residential district. 
c.	Open burning of materials or the open burning of junk cars shall be prohibited. 
d.	Storage areas shall be obscured from public view and the storage area shall be entirely enclosed by an eight-foot obscuring wall or fence. 
e.	A site plan in full detail and drawn to scale shall be submitted in accordance with section 2115 of the township zoning ordinance. 
f.	A plan shall be submitted showing proposed use of property as it relates to abutting properties where such property abuts a district other than an I-3 industrial district. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1843. Outdoor theaters:
Outdoor theaters subject to the following conditions: 
a.	The proposed internal design shall receive approval from the building official and the township engineer as to adequacy of drainage, lighting and other technical aspects. 
b.	All vehicles, waiting or standing to enter the facility, shall be provided off-street waiting space. No vehicle shall be permitted to wait or stand within a dedicated right-of-way. 
c.	The area shall be so laid out as to prevent the movie screen from being viewed from residential areas or adjacent major thoroughfares. All lighting used to illuminate the area shall be so installed as to be confined within, and directed onto, the premises of the outdoor theater site. 
d.	Outdoor theaters shall abut major thoroughfares and points of ingress and egress shall be available only from such major thoroughfare. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1844. Adult entertainment facilities:
Because minors are excluded from such facilities by virtue of age, the location of such activities shall be limited to I-C industrial commercial districts, subject to the following conditions: 
a.	No adult entertainment facility shall be permitted within 1,000 feet of a church or a public or private school property. 
b.	No adult entertainment facility shall be permitted within 1,000 feet of a district zoned for residential use. 
c.	All other requirements of the I-C district regarding height, area, setback, screening walls, signs, etc., shall be complied with. 
d.	The distances provided in this section shall be measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the nearest point of the property parcel line upon which the proposed use is to be located or the zoning district boundary, or major thoroughfare right-of-way line from which the proposed land use is to be separated. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1845. Massage establishments:
Massage establishment subject to the following conditions: 
a.	No massage establishment shall be permitted within 1,000 feet of a church or a public or private school property. 
b.	No massage establishment shall be permitted within 1,000 feet of a district zoned for residential use. 
c.	All other requirements of the I-C district regarding height, area, setback, screening walls, signs, etc., shall be complied with. 
d.	The distances provided in this section shall be measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the nearest point of the property parcel line upon which the proposed use is to be located or the zoning district boundary line from which the proposed land use is to be separated. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1846. Pawnbroker, secondhand dealer and junk dealer:
Pawnbroker, secondhand dealer and junk dealer facilities subject to the following conditions: 
a.	No pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer business shall be permitted within 1,000 feet of a district zoned for residential purposes. 
b.	Storage of all pawned property, secondhand goods and junk shall be within an enclosed building or within a secured area located on the zoning lot of the principal building. 
c.	The distances provided in this section shall be measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the nearest point of the property parcel line upon which the proposed use is to be located or the zoning district boundary, or major thoroughfare right-of-way line from which the proposed land use is to be separated. 
d.	A license shall be required in keeping with Charter Township of Ypsilanti Ordinance No. 123 as amended—Pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers and junk dealers regulation ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1847. Tattoo facilities:
a.	No tattoo facility shall be permitted within 1,000 feet of a district zoned for residential purposes; 
b.	The distances provided in this section shall be measured by the following: a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the nearest point of the property parcel line upon which the proposed use is to be located or the zoning district boundary, or major thoroughfare right-of-way line from which the proposed land use is to be separated. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1848. Automobile mechanical component dismantling and recycling:
Automobile mechanical component dismantling and recycling subject to the following conditions: 
a.	Such operations shall be limited to the dismantling of vehicle mechanical components, such as engines and transmissions, for reuse. The receiving, storage, processing or dismantling of whole vehicles shall be prohibited. There shall be no storage, processing or dismantling of vehicle body parts, frames or tires. There shall be no on-site retail sale of automobile parts. 
b.	All operations and storage shall be within an enclosed building and there shall be no outdoor storage. 
c.	The lot shall not be located within 200 feet of the boundary of a non-industrial zoning district. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1849. Parole or probation offices:
Parole or probation offices subject to the following conditions: 
a.	No parole or probation supervisory office facilities shall be permitted within 1,000 feet of a church or a public or private school property. 
b.	No such office facility shall be permitted within 1,000 feet of a district zoned for residential use. 
c.	No parole or probation supervisory office facilities shall be permitted within 1,000 feet of a state licensed child care facility. 
d.	All other requirements of the I-C district regarding height, area, setback, screening walls, signs, and similar mass and area requirements, shall be consistently maintained. 
e.	The distances provided in this section shall be measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the nearest point of the property parcel line upon which the proposed use is to be located or the zoning district boundary, or major thoroughfare right-of-way line from which the proposed land use is to be separated. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1850. Wireless communication towers and antennas:
Because the uses hereinafter referred to possess unique characteristics making it impractical to include them in a specific use district classification, they may be permitted by the township board under the conditions specified, and after public hearing by the planning commission held in accord with section 2309 and further shall be reviewed as provided in section 2119 and after a recommendation has been received from the planning commission. In every case, the uses hereinafter referred to shall be specifically prohibited from any residential districts unless otherwise specified. 
These uses require special consideration since they service an area larger than the township, creating problems of control with reference to abutting use districts. Reference to those uses falling specifically within the intent of this section is as follows: 
1.	Wireless communication towers and antennas:
a.	Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines for the location of wireless communications towers and antennas. The objectives of this section are to encourage the co-location of multiple antennas on a single tower, to consider public health and safety in the location and operation of such towers and antennas, to protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of towers and antennas, to limit visual impacts by promoting innovative design and screening of towers and to avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure by requiring careful engineering and proper location of tower structures. 
b.	Definitions:
(1)	Abandoned tower or antenna: An antenna that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months, or a tower constructed or maintained without an operational antenna shall be considered abandoned. 
(2)	Alternative tower structure: Manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, utility poles, flagpoles and similar decorative structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
(3)	AM array: One or more tower units with a supporting ground system that functions as one AM broadcasting antenna shall be considered as one tower with a perimeter equaling the smallest rectangular figure that can encompass all elements associated with the array. Setbacks and other distances shall be measured from this perimeter. Additional tower units may be added within the perimeter of an approved array by right. 
(4)	Antenna: Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital or analog signals, radio frequencies (except radar) or other wireless communication signals. 
(5)	Amateur radio communications antenna: An antenna and associated support structure that is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator for personal use. 
(6)	Backhaul network: The lines that connect a provider's towers or antennas to one or more switching offices, long-distance providers or public-switched telephone network. 
(7)	Satellite dish: An antenna structure designed to receive from or transmit to orbiting satellites. 
(8)	Tower: A structure, and any support thereto, designed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for wireless communication purposes. 
c.	Required conditions:
(1)	Reviews and approvals: Construction, installation, replacement, co-location or enlargement of wireless communication towers and antennas shall be reviewed and approved as indicated in Table 1820.1. Towers and antennas requiring planning commission review shall be subject to special land use approval in accordance with section 2119 (special land uses). Applications, reviews and approvals for wireless communication towers and antennas shall be in accordance with the following: 
a.	The application is considered to be complete when the planning and zoning coordinator or his or her designee makes that determination 14 business days after the planning and zoning coordinator or his or her designee receives the application, whichever is first. 
If the planning and zoning coordinator or his or her designee notifies the applicant before the expiration of the 14-day period, that the application is not complete, specifying the information necessary to make the application complete, or notifies the applicant that a fee required to accompany the application has not been paid, specifying the amount due, the running of the 14-day period shall be tolled until the applicant submits to the director of the office of community standards or his or her designee the specified information or fee amount due. The notice shall be given in writing or by electronic notification. 
b.	The planning commission shall approve or deny the application not more than 60 days after the application is considered complete for wireless communication antennas co-located on an existing tower or 90 days for a new wireless communication tower, unless an extension in time is mutually agreed to between the applicant and the planning commission. If the planning commission fails to timely approve or deny the application, the application shall be considered approved. 
c.	A building permit shall not be issued until special conditional use approval and site plan approval have been granted by the planning commission. If no building permit is required, a certificate of occupancy or business license shall not be issued until special use approval and site plan approval have been granted by the planning commission. 
d.	The wireless communication tower or antenna shall not be authorized by the township board until special conditional use approval and site plan approval have been granted by the planning commission, if required. 
e.	After approval for a special use has been granted, no change in that use may be made, nor may any addition or change in the building or improvements on the property take place until a new request for approval has been filed with the planning commission and the planning commission has approved the request for change. 
f.	After approval of a special use has been granted by the planning commission, application for a building permit, or if no building permit is required, application for a certificate of occupancy or business license shall be filed with the building department within 120 days thereafter, or such approval shall automatically be revoked unless an extension is granted. The planning commission may grant an extension of the first approval for good causes for a period not to exceed six months. 
Table 1850.1 
Required Review/Approval 
Situation/Use	Township
Board	Planning
Commission	Administrative
Permits	Exempt
Construction of cellular and similar communications towers. 	X 	X 		
Co-location of antennas on an existing approved tower. 			X 	
Replacement or enlargement of an existing tower within allowance of The Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended, M.C.L. 125.3101 et seq.). 			X 	
Enlargement, in excess of permitted in Act 110, The Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended, M.C.L. 125.3101 et seq.) 	X 	X 		
Construction of an alternative tower structure. 	X 	X 	X 	
Installation of antennas on an existing building. 	X 	X 	X 	
Installation of satellite dish antennas with a diameter of less than 1.5 meters. 				X 
Installation of satellite dish antennas with a diameter of 1.5 meters or larger. 			X 	
Installation of amateur radio communication antennas. 			X 	
Installation of new antennas or similar transmission devises on light poles and similar public utility structures in a manner visible from the public way. 	X 	X 		
Construction of television, radio, microwave, or public utility transmission towers, antennas, or antenna arrays, unless exempt under applicable federal or state law. 	X 	X 		

(2)	State or federal requirements: Towers and antennas shall meet or exceed current standards of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Federal Communications Commission (FCC), and any other agency of the state or federal government with regulatory authority. Failure to maintain a tower or antenna in compliance with current state and federal standards, or failure to bring such towers or antennas into compliance with revised standards within six months of their effective date, shall constitute grounds for removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. 
(3)	Site requirements and setbacks for wireless communication towers: The following shall apply to all wireless communication towers, and to antennas located on such towers: 
(a)	Permitted locations by district: Wireless communication towers shall be permitted in non-residential zoning districts. Such towers may be located in residential zoning districts only on parcels of land over 20 acres in area occupied by an institutional or a public recreational use. 
(b)	Height: Towers shall not exceed 150 feet in height as measured from grade-level to the highest point of the tower. 
(c)	Lot boundaries: Towers shall be set back from all zoning lot boundaries not less than 100 percent of the height of the tower or antenna. Anchoring cables and associated accessory structures shall satisfy minimum zoning district setback requirements with a minimum setback of 20 feet. If located on the same zoning lot with another permitted use, such towers or structures shall not be located in a front yard or side yard abutting a street. 
(d)	Residential dwellings: Towers shall be set back a minimum of 300 feet from the boundary of a parcel with an existing dwelling, except where separated by an interstate highway or otherwise provided for herein. 
(4)	Site requirements and setbacks for antennas located on buildings or similar structures:
(a)	The principal use is a conforming use in a multiple-family or non-residential zoning district and the building is a conforming structure in the district. 
(b)	The height of the building or similar structure shall be a minimum of 50 feet and the antenna and support structure shall not exceed the height of the building by more than ten feet. 
(c)	The antenna and support structure shall be set back from the outermost vertical wall or parapet of the building a minimum distance equal to 150 percent of the height of the antenna and support structure. 
(d)	The antenna and support structure shall be securely mounted to the building in a permanent manner. 
(5)	Site requirements and setbacks for amateur radio communications antennas: The following shall apply to all amateur radio communications antennas: 
(a)	One such antenna, with a maximum height of 60 feet and a minimum setback from all lot boundaries equal to 100 percent of its height, shall be permitted per zoning lot. 
(b)	Such antennas shall be accessory to a primary structure on the same zoning lot and shall be located in the rear yard of the zoning lot. 
(6)	Site requirements and setbacks for satellite dish antennas: The following shall apply to all satellite dish antennas: 
(a)	One such antenna, with a minimum setback from all lot boundaries equal to 150 percent of the height of the antenna and support structure, shall be permitted per zoning lot and shall be accessory to a primary structure on the lot. 
(b)	Such antennas shall be located in the side or rear yard of the zoning lot or permanently installed upon the primary structure in a manner not visible from any public right-of-way. 
d.	Required information: The following information shall be provided with an application for a tower or antenna, in addition to that required by section 2115 (site plan review) or section 2119 (special land uses): 
(1)	Site plan: The petitioner shall submit a site plan, and elevation drawings of all structures, for review in accordance with section 2115 (site plan review). For multiple locations, the plan shall show the location of all equipment, antennas or towers and shall provide a detail of typical site arrangements. Exterior treatments of all accessory structures shall comply with ordinance requirements for the zoning district in which it is located. 
(2)	Permission to locate: The petitioner shall submit copies of a signed lease or other proof, satisfactory to the township attorney, of permission to locate a tower or antenna on the site. 
(3)	Co-location agreement: Towers shall be designed and operated in a manner that encourages the co-location of multiple antennas on a single tower. The petitioner for a new tower shall submit a written agreement, transferable to all successors and assigns, stating that the tower operator shall make space available on the tower for co-location. Proposed antenna locations shall be indicated on the site plan. 
(4)	Insurance certificate: The petitioner shall submit a valid certificate of insurance, to be renewed annually, listing the Charter Township of Ypsilanti as the certificate holder and naming the Charter Township of Ypsilanti, its past, present and future elected officials, representatives, employees, boards, commissions and agents as additional named insured. The certificate shall also state that if any of the described policies are to be canceled before the expiration date thereof, the issuing company will mail 30 days' written notice to the township as certificate holder. The petitioner shall supply a $1,000.00 cash bond to the township, which may be used to reimburse township administrative expenses in the event the certificate is allowed to lapse. 
(5)	Removal agreement: The petitioner shall submit a signed removal agreement and a security bond or letter of credit, satisfactory to the township attorney, for the removal of towers or antennas as applicable. The petitioner shall demonstrate that adequate funds will be available to the township for the removal of such towers or antennas, restoration of the site and associated administrative costs incurred by the township in the event that the petitioner, property owner or their successors fail to remove the tower or antenna in a timely manner as required by this article. 
(6)	Tax-related information: The petitioner shall supply to the assessor all tax-related information as requested by the assessor's office for assessment purposes. The assessor's office shall provide notice to the community and economic development department that this condition has been satisfied. 
(7)	Engineering certification: Signed certification by a professional engineer, licensed by the State of Michigan, specifying the manner in which the tower or antenna structure will fall in the event of accident, damage or failure and verifying that the setback area provided would accommodate the structure and provide a reasonable buffer from adjacent parcels. 
(8)	Backhaul network information: The petitioner shall identify the entities providing the backhaul network for the towers or antennas described in the application and other sites owned or operated by the applicant in the township. 
e.	Criteria for approval of new towers and antennas: The following criteria for approval shall be found to exist for all tower or antenna installations: 
(1)	Operating requirements: The petitioner shall demonstrate that operating requirements necessitate locating within the township and the general area and shall provide evidence that existing towers, structures or alternative technologies cannot accommodate these requirements. 
(2)	Engineering requirements: The petitioner shall demonstrate that existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height or structural strength to meet engineering requirements, or are not located in a geographic area that meets these requirements. 
(3)	Impact on adjacent residences: Nearby residential districts and uses will not be negatively influenced by the location of the tower or antenna. 
(4)	Site characteristics: Topography, vegetation, surrounding land uses, zoning, adjacent existing structures and other inherent site characteristics are compatible with the installation of towers or antennas on the site. 
(5)	Site design: Tower design, lighting, color, construction materials, landscaping, screening and other design elements are in compliance with township ordinances and established land use policies. Wireless communication towers and associated ground equipment shelter areas shall be designed, constructed and maintained in a manner that accommodates the co-location of multiple antennas on a single tower. 
(6)	Security: Wireless communication towers and associated ground equipment shelter areas shall be secured against unauthorized entry and shall be completely enclosed by an ornamental or industrial fence of not less than six feet in height. 
f.	Tower address: Each tower shall be designated with a specific and unique mailing address. 
g.	Existing towers and antennas: A tower or antenna for which a building permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall be allowed to continue to be used as it presently exists, provided that such towers or antennas are maintained in a structurally safe condition, in accordance with section 2107.1b(2) [state and federal requirements] and in compliance with township ordinances and conditions of approval in effect when the building permit was issued. 
h.	Removal of abandoned towers and antennas: Abandoned towers or antennas shall be removed by the owner within 90 days of receipt of notice from the township notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure by the owner to remove abandoned towers or antennas shall be grounds for the township to seek court approval for such removal at the owner's expense. 
i.	Rescinding approval of a wireless communication tower or antenna: Failure of the owner, operator or lease holder of an approved tower or antenna to renew or replace any required bonds or insurance certificates, to maintain and operate the tower or antenna in compliance with state and federal requirements, approved permits, site plans or conditions of special land use approval or to provide information to the township about the tower or antenna as required by this article or conditions of special land use approval shall be grounds for the township board to rescind any previous approval to construct or operate the tower or antenna. Such action shall be subject to the following: 
(1)	Public hearing: Such action may be taken only after a public hearing has been held pursuant to reasonable advance notice, at which time the owner, operator or lease holder of the tower or antenna shall be given an opportunity to present evidence in opposition to rescission. 
(2)	Subsequent to the hearing, the township board's decision with regard to the rescission shall be made and written notification provided to said owner, operator or lease holder of the tower or antenna. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1851. Railroad lines, rail spurs and similar rail transport access facilities:
Railroad lines, rail spurs and similar rail transport access facilities may be permitted in any district subject to the following conditions: 
a.	The planning commission, after public hearing, shall recommend and the township board shall determine that operating requirements necessitate the locating of said facilities in the district in order to adequately service the township. 
b.	The proposed design, location, drainage and other technical aspects of such facility shall be approved by the township engineer. 
c.	When such facilities are proposed to be located within any district, other than an I-1, I-2 district, I-3 or I-C, the planning commission shall review and approve such facilities to insure a satisfactory and harmonious relationship between such development and adjacent land uses (existing and proposed). 
d.	In reviewing such development and prior to approval, the planning commission may require the development of such screening devices, access roads, and setbacks as will assure safe and convenient vehicular circulation and sound land use arrangements. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1852. Private or public recreation vehicle campgrounds:
Recreation vehicle campgrounds are intended to provide sites for persons seeking a temporary location for vacation or recreation purposes with recreational units such as, but not limited to: tents, travel trailers, camping trailers, motor homes, truck campers, slide-in campers and chassis-mounted campers. It is recognized that there are areas contained in the community that were subjected to extensive mining operations formerly for sand and gravel with little or no concern given to its ultimate reclamation and reuse. Recreation vehicle campgrounds are considered to be an adaptable use for these areas that due to present grade elevations, drainage conditions, headwall slopes and the like that otherwise could not be developed soundly as a conventional residential subdivision. Therefore, it is the intent of this ordinance to permit recreation vehicle campgrounds to be located so as to allow reasonable use of these areas and provide a transition of use between extensive nonresidential areas, i.e., light and heavy industrial uses and single-family residential areas. Recreation vehicle campgrounds shall further be subject to the following conditions: 
a.	Locational requirements.
(1)	Parcels being proposed for recreation vehicle campgrounds may be permitted in the R-4 one-family residential district when said recreation vehicle campgrounds afford a buffer to I-I, I-2, and/or MH districts and single-family districts. A recreation vehicle campground shall not be bounded on more than three sides by a single-family residential district, except that the planning commission and township board may waive this requirement where it can be shown that the abutting property will be developed for nonresidential purposes or for another recreation vehicle campground. 
(2)	The site shall have direct access to a major thoroughfare, as designated on the major thoroughfare plan, and with appropriate frontage thereon to provide for the design of entrances and exits. 
b.	Site conditions. Condition of soil, groundwater level, drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health or safety of the occupants. The site shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors or other adverse influences, and no portion subject to unpredictable and/or sudden flooding, subsidence or erosion shall be used for any purpose which would expose persons or property to hazards. 
c.	Uses permitted. Uses such as, but not limited to, campground sites, management headquarters, recreational facilities, toilets, showers, coin-operated laundry facilities, parking areas and other uses and structures customarily found incidental to this use, shall be permitted. Such uses shall be restricted in their use to occupants of the site, except that temporary storage of recreational vehicles may be permitted upon the site when it can be clearly demonstrated that such storage is ancillary to the recreation vehicle campgrounds and subject to the conditions set forth under [subsection] g(5) of this section. 
d.	Height and area requirements.
(1)	No building or structure hereafter erected or altered in a recreation vehicle campground shall exceed a height of one-story or 14 feet. 
(2)	Recreation vehicle campgrounds shall be permitted only on parcels of 25 acres or more. 
(3)	Each campground site shall have a minimum 40-foot road frontage and a minimum area of at least 2,400 square feet. 
e.	Yard and setback requirements.
(1)	No campground site shall be located closer than 200 feet to the right-of-way line of a major thoroughfare and 100 feet to the campground boundary when it abuts or is adjacent to a residential district. Where the campground abuts or is adjacent to a nonresidential district, no campground site shall be located closer than 35 feet. 
(2)	No service building or any other similar structure shall be located closer than 250 feet to a major thoroughfare or campground boundary. 
f.	Buffers and landscaping.
(1)	A greenbelt 20 feet in width and six feet in height shall be located and continually maintained along all campground borders. Where the campground borders a residential district, this greenbelt will provide a total obscuring effect. This greenbelt shall consist of such materials as trees and shrubs to provide privacy to occupants of the site and to visually shield the recreation vehicle campgrounds from surrounding property. Earthen berms are encouraged to be used to achieve this purpose. 
(2)	A chainlink fence of not less than four nor more than six feet in height shall be erected on the boundary line where any portion of the campgrounds abuts or is adjacent to a single-family residential district. 
g.	Other conditions.
(1)	All sanitary sewage and water facilities including connections provided to individual campground sites, shall meet the requirements of the Ypsilanti Township sewer and water departments and the Michigan State Health Department. 
(2)	Entrances and exits from county or state highways shall have the prior written approval of the highway authority having jurisdiction within the township. 
(3)	The campgrounds shall be located on a well-drained site properly graded to insure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools. 
(4)	All lighting shall be shielded to reduce glare and shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from abutting or adjacent properties. 
(5)	Areas provided for the storage of recreational vehicles may be permitted subject to the following: 
(a)	The area shall be enclosed with a chainlink fence of not less than five feet in height. 
(b)	A minimum setback distance of 250 feet is maintained from any abutting or adjacent residential district. 
(c)	Any areas established for this purpose shall not be more than ten percent of the total campgrounds. 
(6)	Occupants of any rented campground site shall not remain in the same recreation vehicle campground for more than 15 consecutive days within any calendar year. 
(7)	The licensee shall provide a sufficient number of containers for the storage of garbage and other refuse, and provide for the transportation of garbage and refuse, not less than once each week at the licensee's own expense to a licensed sanitary landfill. 
(8)	All recreational vehicle campground developments shall further comply with Act No. 171 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1970 (MCL 325.651 et seq., MSA 14.447(121) et seq.), as amended. 
h.	Procedures, permits and occupancy. To construct a recreation vehicle campground of facilities herein, a person shall: 
(1)	Obtain a health permit from the Michigan State Health Department. 
(2)	Present a plot plan to be approved by the planning commission and township board. No variance from this plan may be made without the approval of the planning commission and township board. 
(3)	Obtain a construction permit from the Michigan State Health Department in the manner prescribed by Act No. 171 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1970 (MCL 325.651 et seq., MSA 14.447(121) et seq.), as amended from time to time. 
(4)	Obtain necessary building permit from township building inspector. 
(5)	Obtain an annual license from the Michigan State Health Department in the manner prescribed by Act No. 171 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1970 (MCL 325.651 et seq., MSA 14.447(121) et seq.), as amended from time to time. 
(6)	Obtain from the township building inspector a certificate of occupancy and compliance as provided for in article [section] 2304. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1853. Storage of recreation vehicles:
a.	Locational requirements.
(1)	Recreational vehicle storage may be allowed in the MH mobile home park district when such district abuts an established mobile home park. Such MH district utilized for recreational vehicles storage shall not be bounded on more than two sides by any single-family residential district, except that the planning commission and township board may waive this requirement where it can be shown that the abutting property will be developed for nonresidential purposes or for a mobile home park. 
(2)	The site for recreational vehicle storage shall have direct access to a major thoroughfare, as designated on the major thoroughfare plan. 
(3)	Recreational vehicle storage shall not be permitted within a mobile home park. 
b.	Uses permitted. The storage of unoccupied recreational vehicles shall be permitted. 
c.	Height requirements. No building or structure shall hereafter be erected which shall exceed a height of one-story or 14 feet. 
d.	Yard and setback requirements.
(1)	No recreational vehicle storage shall be located closer than 100 feet to the right-of-way line of a major thoroughfare and 100 feet to the district boundary where it abuts or is adjacent to a residential district. Where the vehicle storage on the site abuts or is adjacent to a nonresidential district or to an MH district, no vehicle storage shall be located closer than 20 feet. 
(2)	No service building or any other similar structure shall be located closer than 100 feet to a major thoroughfare or MH district boundary. 
e.	Buffers and landscaping.
(1)	A greenbelt 20 feet in width and six feet in height shall be located and continually maintained along all borders. Where the storage area borders a residential district, this greenbelt will provide a total obscuring effect. This greenbelt shall consist of such materials as trees and shrubs to visually screen the recreational vehicle storage area from surrounding property. Said greenbelt shall be located inside fences which enclose the storage area. 
(2)	A chainlink fence or other secure fence of not less than five [and] no more than eight feet in height shall be erected to completely enclose the recreational vehicle storage area. 
f.	Other conditions.
(1)	All sanitary sewage and water facilities shall meet the requirements of the Ypsilanti Township sewer and water departments and the Michigan State Health Department. 
(2)	Entrances and exits from county or state highways shall have the prior written approval of the highway authority having jurisdiction within the township. 
(3)	The recreational vehicle storage area shall be located on a well-drained site properly graded to ensure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools. 
(4)	All lighting shall be shielded to reduce glare and shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from abutting or adjacent properties. 
(5)	The site plan shall receive the review and approval of the fire department for access lanes for firefighting equipment. 
g.	Review and permit.
(1)	A site plan shall be submitted for review and approval of the township, all in accord with section 2115 of this ordinance. 
(2)	A building permit and certificate of occupancy shall be required for a recreational vehicle storage area. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1854. Sand and gravel excavation:
The removal of sand and/or gravel or similar materials by excavation, stripping, mining or otherwise taking, and including on-site operations appurtenant to the taking, including washing, grading and sorting operations, may be carried on within the limits of I-2 districts provided all conditions herein required are met. All extraction from new pits begun subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance shall be washed, graded and further processed and/or stored within the limits of the approved extraction area, and no natural resource extracted outside the limits of the approved extraction area shall be brought in for washing, grading or further processing. Resource-related industries including, but not limited to, concrete batching plants and asphalt mix plants shall not be permitted as a part of a plan for sand and gravel excavation. 
a.	Filing of petition. Petitions for the granting of permits for natural resources operations shall be filed with the building official by the owners and leaseholders, if any, of the land proposed for natural resources development. Petition shall be submitted on letter form, fully supplemented by data, maps and aerial photographs specified, and shall be accompanied by a fee as established by resolution of the township board. A permit for such use may be issued for a one-year period by the township board after recommendation by the planning commission. Unless the owner of the petition ignores and/or violates the restoration plan, the permit is automatically renewable for one-year periods. Petitions shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)	Vertical aerial photograph, enlarged to a scale equal to one inch equals 200 feet, from an original photograph at a negative scale no smaller than one inch equals 1,000 feet. Area covered by the vertical aerial photograph shall include: 
(a)	All land requested in the petition. 
(b)	All contiguous land which is, or has been, used by the owner or leaseholder applicant for any extraction, treatment and/or storage. 
(c)	All public roads which can provide first point of access. 
(d)	The boundaries of the above listed items (a) through (c) shall be delineated on the aerial photograph and clearly marked as to [items] (a), (b) and (c). 
(2)	Identification survey, prepared by an engineer or surveyor certified by the State of Michigan to prepare such plats, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 200 feet, shall be submitted in five copies. This survey shall include: 
(a)	Boundary of entire tract by courses and distances. 
(b)	Boundary of exact area being petitioned for in permit. 
(c)	Means of vehicular access to the proposed operation. 
(3)	Report by a qualified soil scientist, soils engineer or geologist regarding the effect the proposed operation will have upon the watershed of the area, with particular attention being devoted to the water table, and, if water bodies are to be created, the anticipated permanence of such. Data to be provided shall include: 
(a)	Hydrological data: 
(i)	Groundwater levels; 
(ii)	Rainfall data; 
(iii)	Capacity of streams and rivers on or in close proximity to site. 
(b)	Lake level data. General engineering information related to pumping spillways, debris basins, irrigation systems. 
(c)	Soil erosion and sediment control plan construction in a manner consistent with the letter and spirit of Act No. 347 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972 (MCL 282.101 et seq., MSA 13.1820(1) et seq.), as amended, and any applicable local ordinances and requirements. 
(d)	General soils data: 
(i)	Soil type; 
(ii)	Soil erodability; 
(iii)	Stability of existing and proposed slopes. 
(e)	Contour map of the reclaimed site at two-foot intervals. 
(f)	Location of all stream flow points: 
(i)	Inflow points; 
(ii)	Outflow points; 
(iii)	Catchment areas. 
(4)	A detailed plan for the extraction of the natural resources deposits. Such plans shall include a timetable for various stages of the operation and shall be accompanied by a restoration plan indicating how the natural resources area will be reused in a manner compatible with the township master plan for future and use. The restoration plan shall include: 
(a)	Proposed use of restored natural resources area. 
(b)	Proposed topography drawn as contours at an interval of two feet and indicating water bodies or other major physical features. 
(c)	Delineation of areas intended to be partitioned or subdivided, including the proposed layout. 
(d)	All excavation shall be made either to a water-producing depth of at least ten feet below the low water mark for at least 80 percent of the water area, or shall be graded or backfilled with noxious-free, noninflammable, and noncombustible materials to secure [insure]: 
(i)	That the excavated area shall not collect and permit to remain therein stagnant water; or 
(ii)	That the surface of such area which is not permanently submerged is graded or backfilled as necessary so as to reduce the peaks and depression thereof, and so as to produce a gently rolling surface that will minimize erosion due to rainfall and which will be in substantial conformity to the adjoining land area. 
(e)	The banks of all sand and gravel excavations shall be sloped to the water line in a water-producing excavation, and to the pit floor in a dry operation, at a slope which shall not be less than five feet horizontal to one foot vertical and said banks shall be restored with vegetation in a manner set forth hereunder. 
(f)	Vegetation shall be restored by the use of sufficient soil and overburden and by appropriate seeding of grasses or planting of shrubs or trees in all parts of said reclaimed mining area where such area is not to be submerged under water or within 25 feet of the shoreline as hereinabove provided. 
(g)	In the event filling of the mined area is necessary during rehabilitation, said fill material shall be nonorganic only. 
(h)	Upon cessation of mining operations by abandonment or otherwise, the operator, within a reasonable period of time not exceeding 12 months thereafter, shall remove all plant structures, buildings, stockpiles and equipment, unless such building or structures can be lawfully used in the district in which the same are located. 
b.	Review of permit application.
(1)	The building official shall be responsible for receiving and processing all applications for permits. His office shall accept for filing only applications completely documented as herein required. 
(2)	The building official shall be responsible for coordinating the several separate inspections as required herein. 
(3)	The township board shall be authorized to approve the manner and order of restoration of proposed new excavation. So as to assure faithful restoration of the area, the petitioner shall deposit with the clerk cash, a certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit, whichever the petitioner selects, or a surety bond acceptable to the township board; the amount of such deposit shall be established by the township board based upon an estimate by the township engineer and shall be sufficient to finance restoration of the disturbed area. 
This deposit shall be submitted by the petitioner prior to the issuance of any permit, and shall be held in escrow by the township until restoration is completed and has been approved by the township board. 
So as to prevent undue hardship, the township board may, at its discretion, approve bonds for areas less than the total acreage applied for. However, at no time shall any excavation be undertaken unless and until sufficient bond has been deposited to ensure restoration of the area to be disturbed. 
In the event of deviation from an approved extraction and/or restoration plan, the building official shall notify the permit holder of a violation. Failure to correct said violation within 30 days shall automatically void any permits issued and/or prevent the issuance of new permits until such time as the deviation has been corrected in keeping with requirements set forth by the township board. Appeals from a decision of the building official shall, in regard to an alleged violation, be directed to the township board. 
c.	Specific operating requirements.
(1)	Setback. Excavation, washing and stockpiling of extracted material shall not be conducted closer than 75 feet to the outer boundary of the approved extraction area. Fifty feet of the setback area shall not be used for any use in conjunction with a natural resources operation except public notice signs identifying occupation. Access roads may occupy 25 feet of the outer boundary setback. Greenbelt plantings and landscaping shall be provided in the setback area as required by the township board. Said setback may be varied by the board of appeals when the outer boundary of the approved extraction area abuts a body of water. In granting said variance, the board of appeals shall establish a specific setback so as to secure public safety. 
(2)	Building line for operation structures. To reduce the effects of airborne dust, dirt and noise, all equipment for sorting, crushing, loading, weighing and other operations structures shall not be built closer than 300 feet from any public street right-of-way or from any adjoining residentially zoned district. 
(3)	Frontage and access.
(a)	Each tract of land for sand or gravel extraction shall have a minimum frontage on a major or secondary thoroughfare (a thoroughfare of at least 86 feet of right-of-way, existing or proposed) of at least 500 feet, except that the township board may approve a lesser frontage minimum if written consent of owner in fee of adjoining property is first secured. 
(b)	All means of access to and from the property shall be by way of class A roads as designated by the Washtenaw County road commission. Such road shall be designated as a major or secondary thoroughfare on the township future land use plan. 
(4)	Fencing. Any excavation which operation results in, or produces for a period of one month, collections of water, or slopes as described below shall be subject to the following safety requirements: 
(a)	Where slopes steeper than 30 degrees exist for a period of one month or more, access to such slopes shall be barred by a cyclone fence or similarly effective barrier at least six feet high, at least 50 feet outside the edge of the excavation, with suitable gates controlling access to the excavation area. 
(b)	Where collections of water are one foot or more in depth for any period of at least one month, and occupying an area of 200 square feet or more, access to such collections shall be similarly fenced, as required in subparagraph (a) above, for slopes. 
(c)	In those instances where the sand or gravel extraction area is situated in marginal land areas consisting of swampland or is bounded by natural bodies of water, the fence shall be required only on those sides accessible to public rights-of-way or as the township board may determine as requiring fencing so as to secure safety. The township board may require the posting of signs "Keep Out - Danger" as needed. 
(5)	Access roads. All private access roads shall be treated so as to create dustfree surface for a distance of 300 feet from any public access road. 
(6)	Slopes. Finished slopes of the banks of the excavation shall in no event exceed a minimum of five feet to one foot (five feet horizontal to one foot vertical) and where ponded water results from the operations, this slope must be maintained and extended into the water to a depth of five feet. Said slopes shall be met as the work in any one section of the excavation proceeds, and the time for completion of said slopes shall not extend beyond one year's time from the date of beginning; provided, that the township board may extend the above one-year period to such longer period as satisfactory under the circumstances. 
Sufficient topsoil shall be stockpiled on the site so that the entire area, when excavation operations are completed, may be recovered with a minimum of six inches of topsoil, and that such replacement of topsoil shall be made immediately following the termination of excavating operations. So as to prevent erosion of slopes, all replaced topsoil shall immediately be planted with grass or other plant material acceptable to the township board. 
(7)	Explosives. The use of explosives shall be done in accordance with the Regulations for Storage and Handling of Explosives, as published by the Michigan State Police, Fire Marshal Division, East Lansing, Michigan. 
(8)	Site plan review. All uses proposed for sand and gravel extraction areas shall be further subject to the requirements of section 2115, site plan review of this ordinance, as applicable. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1855. Farms with sales and entertainment facilities:
Farms with sales and entertainment facilities utilized in promotion of on-site farm product sales may be permitted in residential R-1 districts subject to the following conditions: 
a.	Any sales and entertainment facilities shall have direct access to a major or secondary thoroughfare by means of drives or roads which directly service the facility from the major or secondary thoroughfare. Minor streets shall not be utilized for access to such facilities. 
b.	A site plan, drawn to scale, showing all intended site uses, shall be submitted for review and approval. Such plan shall show the intended use and location of all buildings and structures, growing areas, parking facilities, roads and drives to be utilized by the public, pedestrian circulation, location of service areas for various facilities and transition plantings and/or screening devices. 
c.	Crop growing areas of a depth of not less than 200 feet shall be provided on those sides of the property not abutting the major or secondary street servicing the farm. 
d.	Greenbelt tree plantings or other effective visual screening shall be provided where off-site abutting residential properties are occupied with dwelling structures within 200 feet of any area on the site occupied with sales or entertainment facilities. 
e.	All parking shall be provided off the street or road right-of-way. 
f.	Noise levels shall not exceed 65 decibels at the property line of the farm where adjacent property has a dwelling unit within 200 feet of the property line nor shall it exceed a maximum of 75 decibels at any other property line. 
g.	Hours of operation of any outdoor entertainment facilities shall be limited to reasonable hours. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1856. Racetracks (including midget auto and karting tracks) and dirt tracks:
Because racetracks and dirt tracks develop a concentration of vehicular traffic in terms of ingress and egress from their parking area and cause noise levels which may project beyond the property so used, they may be permitted in I-2 districts when located adjacent to a major thoroughfare 120 feet wide or greater and shall be located on a parcel of land which is abutting land zoned for industrial purposes on all sides of the parcel in question, and shall be subject further to the following conditions and such other controls as the planning commission deems necessary to promote health, safety and general welfare in the township: 
a.	A site size of not less than 20 acres shall be provided. 
b.	All parking shall be provided as off-street parking within the boundaries of the development. 
c.	All access to the parking areas shall be provided from roads which have a right-of-way of not less than 120 feet in width. 
d.	All sides of the development not abutting a major thoroughfare 120-foot right-of-way or greater shall be provided with a 20-foot greenbelt planting and fence, wall or earth berm so as to obscure from view all activities within the development. The planting shall be in accord with section 2108. 
e.	A track shall not be located closer than 500 feet to any residence on property other than the site on which the tract is located. 
f.	Dust shall be controlled so as not to be noticeable beyond the property line of the property on which the track is located. 
g.	Noise levels shall comply with section 2120, paragraph 5 of this ordinance. 
h.	The track area shall be fenced. 
i.	Grading on the site which involves one or more acres shall require a building permit and shall comply with State of Michigan Act 347 of 1972, the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act of 1972, and with applicable Charter township ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1857. Outdoor spat ball, simulated war games and similar activities:
Outdoor spat ball, simulated war games and similar activities may be permitted in I-2 industrial districts subject to the following conditions: 
a.	A minimum site size of not less than ten acres shall be provided. 
b.	The proposed use shall be of such location, size and character that it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the surrounding area. 
c.	A site plan, drawn to scale, showing all intended site uses, shall be submitted for review and approval in accord with section 2115. The site plan shall show the layout of the proposed use designating activity areas, location of all buildings and structured parking facilities, roads and drives to be utilized by the public, pedestrian circulation, location of service areas and transition plantings and/or screening devices. 
d.	The facility shall abut a major thoroughfare and shall provide all vehicle access to the facility from such abutting thoroughfare. 
e.	The property line of any such facility shall not be located within 200 feet of any residential dwelling or within 200 feet of any residential district. 
f.	A setback of 50 feet for all activity areas on the site shall be provided. Activities on the site shall in no way extend beyond the property line of the site. 
g.	Noise levels shall not exceed 65 decibels at any property line of the site. 
h.	Hours of operation shall be limited from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
i.	Devices for the transmission of sound, voices or music shall be so directed as to prevent such sound from being audible beyond the property lines of the site. 
j.	The township board may impose such reasonable conditions as it deems necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare from excessive noise, traffic, obnoxious odors and any detrimental effects from the operation of the facility. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1858. Garbage, refuse and rubbish transfer stations:
Garbage, rubbish and refuse transfer stations may be permitted in I-2 and I-3 industrial districts. The township board may grant a use permit under such conditions as it deems necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare, including but not limited to the following: 
a.	The proposed use must be of such location, size and character that it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the surrounding neighborhood. 
b.	The location and size of the proposed use or uses, the nature and intensity of the principal use and all accessory uses, the site layout and its relation to streets giving access to it, shall be such that traffic to and from the use and uses, and the assembly of persons in connection therewith, will not be hazardous or inconvenient to the neighborhood nor unduly conflict with the normal traffic of the neighborhood. In applying this standard, the township board shall consider amongst other things: convenient routes for traffic; the relationship of the proposed use to main traffic thoroughfares and to streets and road intersections; vehicular turning movements in relation to routes of traffic flow; location and access of off-street parking and the general character and intensity of the existing and potential development of the neighborhood. All driveways and parking areas on the site should be hard-surfaced to specifications of engineering department. 
c.	The location and height of buildings or structures and the location, nature, and height of doors, walls and fences must be such that the proposed use will not have a detrimental effect upon the neighboring property or the neighboring area in general, nor impair the value of neighboring property, nor interfere with or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land or buildings or unreasonably affect their value. Such building shall be completely enclosed. 
d.	The standards of density and required open spaces for the proposed use shall be at least equal to those required in the I-2 zoning district or at least equal to those prescribed in the special requirements relating to the proposed use, whichever is the greater. 
e.	The location, size, intensity, site layout and periods of operation of any such proposed use must be designated to eliminate any possible nuisance likely to emanate therefrom which might be noxious to the occupants of any other nearby permitted uses, whether by reason of dust, noise, fumes, vibration smoke or lights. 
f.	The proposed use must provide for proper yard space, parking facilities loading space, percentage of lot coverage, protective walls, size of buildings, lot area and width and other requirements of this ordinance. 
g.	The proposed use must be in accord with the spirit and purpose of this ordinance and not be inconsistent with or contrary to the objectives sought to be accomplished by this ordinance and principles of sound planning. 
h.	The following conditions shall be prohibited: 
1.	Incineration or open burning in the building or on the site shall be prohibited. 
2.	Overnight storage of any refuse material in the building shall be prohibited. 
3.	Dumping or storage of any material on the site outside the building at any time shall be prohibited. 
i.	The township board may impose such reasonable conditions as it deems necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare from excessive noises, excessive traffic patterns, obnoxious and unhealthy odors, and any detrimental effects from the general operation of such transfer station. 
j.	The township board may impose additional conditions and safeguards as it deems necessary to minimize the adverse effects of such an installation on the character of the surrounding area. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1859. Lighted outdoor commercial sports centers:
Because lighted outdoor commercial sports centers, including baseball and other intense activities, possess the unique characteristic of often being used late into the night while attracting large numbers of spectators and attendant vehicular traffic in conjunction with ingress and egress to parking areas, these uses may be permitted only in I-2 industrial districts subject to the following conditions: 
a.	Outdoor commercial sports centers shall be permitted only upon parcels of land zoned I-2 which are surrounded by similarly zoned property on all sides, except a side abutting a major thoroughfare of 120 feet of right-of-way or greater. 
b.	Because it is of primary concern to the township to preserve large areas of industrial property for industrial uses, the township when considering approval of such a use shall take into account the compatibility of the lighted outdoor commercial sports center with existing and future industrial development. 
c.	In determining the number of parking spaces required to accommodate the lighted outdoor commercial sports center, the township board may take into account the hours of operation and types of activities conducted upon the site. The minimum parking requirements for baseball facilities shall be no fewer than 75 spaces for each of the first four baseball diamonds plus 50 spaces for each additional baseball diamond. 
d.	The proposed internal site design of the facility shall meet all standards of the township and other affected governmental agencies, including but not limited to those standards pertaining to proper drainage, lighting, hard surfacing, and other engineering standards. 
e.	Points of ingress and egress shall be available to the complex only from abutting major thoroughfares of 120 feet of right-of-way or greater. The site shall comply with all standards of the township and other affected governmental agencies relative to driveways, acceleration and deceleration lanes, and related items. 
f.	The use and parking area shall be screened from adjacent major thoroughfares with berms and other approved landscaping. 
g.	All lighting used to illuminate the area shall be installed so as to be confined within and directed upon the site. 
h.	Devices for the transmission of broadcasting of voices or music shall be so directed as to prevent said sound from being audible beyond the lot lines of the site. 
i.	Storage buildings, restroom facilities, facilities for the sale and consumption of food, beverages and refreshments and other similar accessory uses shall comply with all standards of the township and other affected governmental agencies. Such accessory facilities shall operate only during the hours of operation of the principal use of the property. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1860. Wastewater treatment plants:
Wastewater treatment plants may be permitted in the I-3 industrial district and the I-C industrial commercial district. The township board may grant a use permit under such conditions as it deems necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare, including but not limited to the following: 
a.	There shall be a demonstrated need in the community for such facility. 
b.	The proposed plant shall be designed and located within an area where the impacts shall be limited in terms of visual impacts, odors and surrounding land use character. 
c.	The location, size, operation and design shall utilize measures to eliminate any possible nuisance likely to emanate therefrom, which might be noxious to the occupants of any other nearby use, whether by reason of odors, fumes or lights. Such measures shall include implementation of odor control measures. 
d.	Any such use shall conform to current standards established by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
e.	The township board may impose such reasonable conditions as it deems necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare from obnoxious and unhealthy odors, visual impacts and any detrimental effects to the character of the surrounding area. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1861. State-licensed residential child and adult care facilities:
State-licensed child and adult care facilities, as defined in article II, definitions, shall meet the following regulations: 
a.	These facilities, except for adult/child family day care homes, shall be registered with the Ypsilanti Township Community Development Department and shall continually have on file with the township documentation of a valid license as required by the state. 
b.	Since the state law preempts in this area, these facilities shall be brought into compliance with all state building and fire codes pursuant to State Licensing Rules R400.1831—R400.1835. Documentation of such compliance with state requirements shall be provided. 
c.	The site shall comply with the sign provisions of section 2109. 
d.	Off-street parking shall be provided for the number of employees on site at any one time. 
e.	If located in a single-family residential district, the building shall have an appearance which is nonintrusive and consistent in color, materials, roof-line and architecture, as determined by the planning commission. 
f.	Documentation of sufficient indoor classroom, crib or play area meeting state requirements shall be provided. Documentation of approved areas, as licensed by the state, shall be provided. 
g.	There shall be sufficient outdoor play area to meet state regulations. All required outdoor play areas shall be fenced with a four-foot tall fence, provided that no fence shall be located in a front yard. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1862. Towing services:
Towing services without an impound or storage yard, taxi terminals and dispatch facilities, limousine services and bus depots, subject to the following: 
a.	All repair work on vehicles and equipment associated with the use shall be conducted completely within an enclosed building. 
b.	Outdoor storage of vehicles and equipment associated with the use is permitted, provided that the site includes a building of at least 500 feet of gross floor area for office use in conjunction with the use. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 1863. Storage facilities for building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber, storage of contractor's equipment and supplies:
Storage facilities for building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber, storage of contractor's equipment and supplies, provided such is enclosed within a building or within an obscuring wall or fence on those sides abutting all residential or business districts, and on any yard abutting a public thoroughfare. In any I-1 district, the extent of such fence or wall may be determined by the planning commission on the basis of usage. Such fence or wall shall not be less than five feet in height, and may, depending on land usage, be required to be eight feet in height. A chain link-type fence, with heavy evergreen shrubbery inside of said fence, shall be considered to be an obscuring fence. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 20, 2-20-18)
 
ARTICLE XIX. PD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 1900. Intent:
The planned development (PD) district is intended to permit, with township approval, private or public development or redevelopment of areas throughout the township which shall be substantially in accord with the goals and objectives of the master plan of future land use for the Township of Ypsilanti. The use patterns of the areas involved shall provide a desirable environment and shall be harmonious with the general surrounding uses permitting flexibility in overall development while ensuring the highest of safeguards and standards for public health, safety, convenience and general welfare. Such PD district may embrace a mixture of one or more distinct uses or zoning categories, in the vertical or horizontal plane. A PD district shall encourage the use of land in accordance with its character and adaptability; conserve natural and social/cultural resources and provide sustainable design and energy efficiency; encourage innovation in land use and community planning; and bring about a greater compatibility of design and use. It is the intent of this article to offer an alternative to traditional development through the use of planned unit development legislation, as authorized by Section 16c of the Township Zoning Act (Act No. 184 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1943, as amended) for the purpose of: 
(1)	Encouraging the use of land in accordance with its character and adaptability; 
(2)	Allowing innovation and greater flexibility in design; 
(3)	Assuring the permanent preservation of natural, social, cultural and historic resources; 
(4)	Providing open space and recreational facilities within a reasonable distance of all residents of the development; 
(5)	Provide complete non-motorized circulation to, from and within the development; 
(6)	Provide convenient vehicular access throughout the development and minimize adverse traffic impacts; 
(7)	Facilitating the construction and maintenance of streets, utilities, and public services in a more economical and efficient manner; 
(8)	Provide better housing, employment, and shopping opportunities particularly suited to residents of the township; 
(9)	Ensure various land uses and building bulk will relate to each other and to adjoining existing and planned uses in such a way that they will be compatible, with no material adverse impact of one use on another; 
(10)	Ensuring compatibility of design and use between neighboring properties; 
(11)	Encourage the use and improvement of existing sites; 
(12)	Allow for infill development and redevelopment within older neighborhoods in the northern portion of the township that is compatible with established neighborhoods and consistent with traditional neighborhood design standards; and 
(13)	Emphasize the provision of (social infrastructure (to foster the sense of community. 
(Ord. No. 2003-328, 1-20-04)
State law reference(s)—Planned unit development, MCL 125.286c. 
 
Sec. 1901. Eligibility criteria:
To be eligible for PD consideration, the applicant must present a proposal for residential development that meets each of the following: 
(1)	Recognizable benefits. A PD shall result in a recognizable and substantial benefit, both to the residents of the property and to the overall quality of life in the township. The benefits can be provided through site design elements in excess of the requirements of this ordinance, such as high quality architectural design, extensive landscaping, provide transition areas from adjacent land uses, unique site design features, unified access, provision of social space, preservation of woodlands and open space, particularly along major thoroughfares, and buffering development from lakes, rivers, streams and wetlands. This benefit should accrue, in spite of any foreseeable detriments of the proposed development. 
(2)	Uses proposed. The uses proposed will have a beneficial effect, in terms of public health, safety, welfare or convenience or any combination thereof, on present and potential surrounding land uses. The uses proposed will encourage a more efficient use of public utilities and services and lessen the burden on circulation systems, surrounding properties, and the environment. This beneficial effect for the township (not the developer) shall be one which could not be achieved under any other single zoning classification. The zoning is warranted by the design and amenities incorporated in the development proposal. 
(3)	Qualification requirements. The proposed development shall provide at least one of the following open space benefits: 
(a)	Significant natural assets. The site contains significant natural assets such as woodlands, rolling topography with grades exceeding 15 percent, significant views, natural drainage ways, water bodies, floodplains, regulated or non-regulated wetlands, or natural corridors that connect quality wildlife habitats which would be in the best interest of the township to preserve and which might be negatively impacted by conventional residential development. 
(b)	Recreation facilities. If the site lacks natural features, it can qualify if the development will preserve existing or provide new recreation facilities and open spaces to which all residents of the development shall have reasonable access. Such facilities include areas such as a neighborhood park, plazas, golf course, passive recreational facilities, soccer fields, ball fields, bike paths or similar facilities which provide a feature of community-wide significance and enhance residential development. 
(c)	Mixed use. A site can qualify if the development will provide a complimentary and integrated mixture of uses, residential densities and housing types. A mixed use project shall be considered a project which proposes a combination of single-family detached and multiple-family housing or a mixture of compatible residential and commercial uses. Such mixture of uses shall be integrated into a cohesive, pedestrian scale neighborhood. 
(d)	Infill development/redevelopment. Land located within the older urbanized area of the township north of I-94 designated in the master plan for townhouse residential may qualify for development as a PD where the design standards of section 1915 are met. 
(4)	Guarantee of open space. Usable open space shall be provided, as required herein. The applicant shall guarantee to the satisfaction of the township that all open space portions of the development will be maintained in the manner approved. Documents shall be presented that bind all successors and future owners in fee title to commitments made as a part of the proposal. This provision shall not prohibit a transfer of ownership or control, provided notice of such transfer is provided to the township and the land uses and restrictions continue as approved in the PD plan. 
(5)	Cohesive neighborhood. The proposed development shall be designed to create cohesive community neighborhoods through a network of spaces such as parks, plazas and common open space areas for passive or active recreation and resident interaction. All open space areas shall be equally available to all residents of the PD. 
(6)	Unified control. The proposed development shall be under single ownership or control, such that there is a single person or entity having proprietary responsibility for the full completion of the project. The applicant shall provide sufficient documentation of ownership or control in the form of agreements, contracts, covenants, and/or deed restrictions that indicate that the development will be completed in its entirety as proposed. 
(7)	Density impact. The proposed type and density of use shall not result in an unreasonable increase in the need for or impact to public services, facilities, roads, and utilities in relation to the use or uses otherwise permitted by this ordinance, and shall not place an unreasonable impact to the subject and/or surrounding land and/or property owners and occupants and/or the natural environment. The township may require that the applicant prepare an impact statement documenting the significance of any environmental, traffic or socio-economic impact resulting from the proposed PD. An unreasonable impact shall be considered an unmitigateable, significant adverse effect on the quality of the surrounding community and the natural environment in comparison to the impacts associated with conventional development. The township may require that the applicant prepare a quantitative comparison of the impacts of conventional development and the PD plan to assist in making this determination (such as an overlay of conceptual development plans, on a natural features map, illustrating other site development options to demonstrate the impacts have been minimized to the extent practical). If the cumulative impact creates or contributes to a significant problem relative to infrastructure demand or environmental degradation, mitigation shall be provided to alleviate the impacts associated with the PD. 
(8)	Public utilities. All uses within the PD project shall be served by public water and sewer. 
(9)	Parking. Off-street parking sufficient to meet the minimum required by section 2104 shall be provided and may, if deemed appropriate by the township, require for planned developments more or less parking than that required by this ordinance. 
(10)	Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided so as to ensure that proposed uses will be adequately buffered from one another and from surrounding public and private property. The township may, if deemed appropriate, require for PDs more or less landscaping than that required by this ordinance. 
(11)	Circulation. Vehicular and non-motorized (pedestrian) circulation, allowing safe, convenient, uncongested and well-defined/understandable circulation within and to the district; shall be provided. 
(12)	Master plan. The proposed development shall be consistent with and further the implementation of the master plan of future land use for the township. 
(Ord. No. 2003-328, 1-20-04)
 
Sec. 1902. Permitted uses:
(1)	Single-family residential. Detached single-family residential shall be permitted in any PD. 
(2)	Multiple-family residential. Multiple-family residential shall be permitted in any PD as follows: 
(a)	Where existing (pre PD) zoning is multiple-family residential, multiple-family dwelling units shall be permitted meeting the density and design standards of this ordinance. 
(b)	Where existing (pre PD) zoning is single-family residential, up to 40 percent of the dwelling units may be attached single-family housing, provided the remaining dwelling units (at least 60 percent) shall be detached single-family residential and provided further that at least an additional ten percent of the site will be preserved as open space, above the minimum requirement. 
(c)	Where existing (pre PD) zoning is multiple-family residential, senior housing may be permitted meeting the density and design standards of section 2002, Senior Housing Option. 
(3)	Nonresidential. Nonresidential uses shall be permitted in a PD as follows: 
(a)	Where existing (pre PD) district is zoned for nonresidential uses, all commercial business, services, professional offices and industrial uses listed as a permitted use in the existing (pre PD) zoning district shall be permitted. 
(b)	Where the existing (pre PD) zoning is residential, the township board may permit a commercial land use component in a PD with a gross area of 70 acres or more, provided the township board determines the use will be compatible with the surrounding area and all of the following are met: 
1.	The commercial component shall be located on a lot of sufficient size to contain all commercial structures, parking, and landscape buffering. The total area occupied by the commercial land uses may not exceed five percent of the gross area of the PD or three acres, whichever is less. 
2.	All commercial uses shall be compatible with the residential area. The allowable commercial uses within such an area shall be limited to those permitted in the B-1 local business district. 
3.	The township finds that the architectural design of the structures is compatible with the balance of the PD and surrounding development. 
4.	All commercial structures are integrated and connected to a non-motorized (pedestrian and bicycle) access system servicing the PD. 
5.	The township makes the finding that the overall site layout and the vehicular circulation pattern will not have a detrimental effect on residential streets. 
6.	The commercial land use is consistent with the land use designated in the master plan. 
7.	The township board may require that one or more phases of residential be completed prior to approving the PD stage II final site plan for the commercial component. 
(Ord. No. 2003-328, 1-20-04)
 
Sec. 1903. Dwelling density:
(1)	Single-family residential. Where the existing (pre PD) zoning is single-family residential, the number of dwelling units allowable within a PD shall be determined through preparation of a "parallel plan." 
(a)	The applicant shall prepare, and present to the township for review, a parallel plan for the project that is consistent with state, county and township requirements and design criteria for a tentative preliminary plat. The parallel plan shall meet all standards for lot size, lot width and setbacks as normally required under article XX, Schedule of Regulations, neighborhood open space requirements, public roadway improvements and contain an area which conceptually would provide sufficient area for storm water detention. Lots in the parallel plan shall provide sufficient building envelope size without impacting wetlands regulated by the state department of environmental quality. 
(b)	The township shall review the design and determine the number of lots that could be feasibly constructed and be economically viable following the parallel plan. This number, as determined by the township, shall be the maximum number of dwelling units allowable for the PD. The regulatory flexibility of a PD may be allowed to cluster the dwellings on smaller lots or mix housing types, provided the overall density shall not exceed that determined in the parallel plan, unless a density bonus is provided under subsection (5) below. 
(2)	Multiple-family residential. Where the existing (pre PD) zoning is multiple-family residential, the density shall be the maximum allowed by the existing (pre PD) zoning district, unless a density bonus is provided under subsection (5) below. 
(3)	Nonresidential. Where the existing (pre PD) zoning is office or business (i.e. OS-1, B-1, B-2, B-3), residential may be permitted at the density permitted in RM-2. Such density shall be permitted in those portions of the PD proposed for residential use. Land areas of a PD proposed exclusively for nonresidential use shall not be counted towards the maximum allowable density. Residential dwelling units may be permitted on the same site as nonresidential uses, provided designated residential parking shall be provided in addition to parking requirements for commercial uses and the site and buildings shall be designed to allow a complementary mixture of uses on the site with minimal conflict, based upon the criteria of section 1901. 
(4)	Multiple existing (pre PD) zoning districts. Where a PD is proposed for a land area that includes multiple existing (pre PD) zoning districts, density shall be determined separately for each respective zoning district then combined for a maximum permitted dwelling unit density for the overall project. Following the determination of density, residential dwelling unit types may be integrated within the overall design for the project and need not be segregated by the existing (pre PD) zoning districts. The location and distribution of dwellings within the PD shall be determined through design that meets the intent of this ordinance, preservation of natural features and compatibility with surrounding land uses. 
(5)	Density bonus. At the option of the applicant and with approval by the township board, a variable density bonus of up to 20 percent may be allowed, based upon the general eligibility criteria of section 1901, and in particular the density impact evaluation of section 1901(7). Where a density bonus is granted, one or more of the following shall be required by the township board: 
(a)	A high level of clustered development where a minimum of 40 percent of the PD is common open space. 
(b)	Inclusion of an integrated mixture of housing types. 
(c)	Providing recreation facilities, plazas, town squares or "commons" available to the public. The applicant has the option to provide the additional public spaces or recreational facilities (above and beyond the minimum open space requirements) at an off-site location approved by the township board. 
(d)	Providing streetscape and roadway improvements along abutting thoroughfares. 
(e)	Removal or renovation of blighted buildings or cleanup of site contamination as documented through a phase I and phase II environmental site assessment and a baseline environmental assessment. 
(f)	Other similar elements as determined by the township board, based upon a findings of the planning commission. 
A PD proposed as senior housing shall not qualify for additional density, beyond that specified in section 2002, Senior Housing Option. 
(6)	Townhouse residential. Where a PD is proposed for a land area that is designated in the master plan for townhouse residential, residential shall be permitted at a density of up to ten dwelling units per acre. The 20 percent density bonus may be granted where the township board finds that the project will provide for a pedestrian-friendly traditional neighborhood with high-quality architecture and open spaces used for active recreation, which is properly integrated within the surrounding neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 2003-328, 1-20-04)
 
Sec. 1904. Area and bulk regulations:
(1)	Basic regulations. All regulations applicable to setbacks, parking and loading, general provisions, and other requirements shall be met in relation to each respective land use in the development based upon zoning districts in which the use is listed as a permitted or special conditional use. The height, bulk, and area conditions set forth in article XX, Schedule of Regulations, shall be used as guidelines for the use areas set forth in the PD plan. Within a single-family residential PD, lot sizes may be reduced below the minimum requirement of the existing (pre PD) zoning district, provided that the open space within the PD equals or exceeds the total area of lot size reduction. 
(2)	Regulatory flexibility. To encourage flexibility and creativity consistent with the intent of the PD regulations, the township may permit specific departures from the requirements of the zoning ordinance for yards and lots as a part of the approval process. Any regulatory modification shall be approved through a finding by the township that the deviation shall result in a higher quality of development than would be possible using conventional zoning standards. 
A table shall be provided on the site plan which specifically details all deviations from the established zoning area, height and setback regulations, off-street parking regulations, general provisions, or subdivision regulations which would otherwise be applicable to the uses and development proposed in the absence of this PD article. This specification should include ordinance provisions from which deviation are sought, and the reasons and mechanisms to be utilized for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare in lieu of the regulations from which deviations are sought. Only those deviations consistent with the intent of this ordinance shall be considered. 
(Ord. No. 2003-328, 1-20-04)
 
Sec. 1905. Open space requirements:
(1)	Common open space. Common open space, other common properties and facilities, individual properties, and all other elements of a PD district are so planned that they will achieve a unified open space, community green or plaza and recreation area system, with open space and all other elements in appropriate locations, suitably related to each other, the site and surrounding lands. All land within a development that is not devoted to a residential unit, an accessory use, vehicle access, vehicle parking, a roadway, an approved land improvement or a commercial use, shall be set aside as common land for community use, recreation or conservation. Grading in the open space shall be minimal, with the intent to preserve existing significant topographic features, where such resources exist. 
(2)	Amount of open space. A PD shall maintain a minimum of 20 percent of the gross area of the site as dedicated open space held in common ownership. Projects proposed under section 1903(5)(a) shall require a minimum of 40 percent open space. Except as noted in section 1905(4), any undeveloped land area within the boundaries of the site meeting the open space standards herein may be included as required open space. 
(3)	Recreational open space area. At least one-half of the minimum required open space shall be usable, active recreational open space that is accessible to all residents of the PD and not include any part of a golf course. Such recreational open spaces shall be exclusive of any wetland, floodplain, stormwater detention/retention or landscape buffers. Recreational facilities such as playgrounds, athletic fields or picnic pavilions shall be provided. 
(4)	Areas not considered open space. The following land areas are not included as dedicated open space for the purposes of this article: 
(a)	Area proposed as single-family residential lots or site condominiums. 
(b)	Area proposed to be occupied by multiple-family dwellings, including the minimum required setbacks around buildings. 
(c)	Any portion of the project used for commercial or office purposes. 
(d)	The area of any street right-of-way or equivalent private road easement. 
(e)	Any submerged land area of a lake, river, stream or stormwater detention, or retention pond. 
(5)	Location of open space. Common open space shall be planned in locations visible and accessible to all in the PD (i.e. centrally located and not isolated corners of the development). The common open space may either be centrally located along the road frontage of the development, located to preserve significant natural features, or located to connect open spaces throughout the development. The open space along the exterior public roads shall generally have a depth of at least 100 feet, either landscaped or preserved in a natural wooded condition. This requirement shall not apply to townhouse residential PD developed under section 1915, which shall instead provide open space through parks, common greens, plazas or buffers. 
(6)	Open space corridors. Connections with adjacent open space, public land or existing or planned pedestrian/bike paths may be required by the township. 
(7)	Protection of open space.
(a)	The dedicated open space shall be set aside by the developer through an irrevocable conveyance that is found acceptable to the township, such as: recorded deed restrictions, covenants that run perpetually with the land, or conservation easements. 
(b)	Such conveyance shall assure that the open space will be protected from all forms of development, except as shown on an approved site plan, and shall never be changed to another use. Such conveyance shall: 
1.	Indicate the proposed allowable use(s) of the dedicated open space. The township may require the inclusion of open space restrictions that prohibit the following: 
a.	Dumping or storing of any material or refuse; 
b.	Activity that may cause risk of soil erosion or threaten any living plan material; 
c.	Cutting or removal of live plant material except for removal of dying or diseased vegetation; 
d.	Use of motorized off road vehicles; 
e.	Cutting, filling or removal of vegetation from wetland areas; 
f.	Use of pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers within or adjacent to wetlands. 
2.	Require that the dedicated open space be maintained by parties who have an ownership interest in the open space. 
3.	Provide standards for scheduled maintenance of the open space. 
(c)	The dedicated open space shall forever remain open space, subject only to uses approved by the township on the approved site plan. Further subdivision of open space land or its use for other than recreation, conservation or agricultural purposes, except for easements for utilities and septic systems, shall be strictly prohibited. Open space may include golf course area, provided that it forever remains outdoor recreation or natural undeveloped land. 
(8)	Allowable structures. Any structure(s) or building(s) accessory to a recreation use may be erected within the dedicated open space, subject to the approved open space plan. These accessory structure(s) or building(s) shall not exceed, in the aggregate, one percent of the required open space area. 
(Ord. No. 2003-328, 1-20-04)
 
Sec. 1906. Natural features:
(1)	Preservation of natural features. The development shall be designed so as to preserve natural resources and natural features. Compliance with this requirement shall be determined by the township after review of a site analysis plan, prepared by the applicant, that inventories these features. The PD shall comply with the township woodlands ordinance. The limits of tree clearing and grading shall be clearly shown on the preliminary and final PD site plans. 
(2)	Habitat. If animal or plant habitats of significant value exist on the site, the township, as a condition of approval, may require that the PD plan preserve these areas in a natural state and adequately protect them as nature preserves or limited access areas. 
(3)	Open space setback. A minimum 50-foot wide undisturbed open space setback shall be maintained from the edge of any, lake, pond, river, stream or wetland; provided that the township may permit trails, boardwalks, observation platforms or other similar structures that enhance passive enjoyment of the site(s natural amenities within the setback. This requirement shall not apply to townhouse residential PD developed under section 1915. 
(Ord. No. 2003-328, 1-20-04)
 
Sec. 1907. Compatibility with adjacent uses:
(1)	Compatibility with adjacent uses. The proposed location of uses or structures that are of a significantly different scale or character than the abutting residential districts, such as access drives, parking areas, solid waste pick-up points, swimming pools, tennis courts and facilities of a similar nature, shall not be located near the boundary of the development or so as to negatively impact the residential use of adjacent lands. 
(2)	Transition areas. Where the PD abuts a single-family residential district, the township may require a transition area. Grading within the transition area shall be minimal unless needed to provide effective buffering or accommodate drainage. If the grade change adjacent to single-family residential is to be varied by more than three feet, the site plan shall include cross sections illustrating existing and proposed grades in relation to existing and proposed building heights. Perspective renderings from adjacent residential units are encouraged. The township shall review the proposed transition area to ensure compatibility. The township may require that the transition area consist of one or more of the following: 
(a)	A row of single-family lots or condominium sites similar to adjacent single-family development in terms of density, lot area, lot width, setbacks and building spacing. 
(b)	Woodlands, natural features or a landscaped greenbelt sufficient to provide an obscuring effect. 
(c)	Open or recreation space. 
(d)	Significant changes in topography which provide an effective buffer. 
(Ord. No. 2003-328, 1-20-04)
 
Sec. 1908. Landscaping:
The following landscaping requirements shall be met in addition to other landscaping requirements contained in the zoning ordinance, township subdivision regulations ordinance and other applicable township ordinances. 
(1)	Street trees. Both sides of all internal roads shall be landscaped with street trees. For road frontages of individual lots or condominium sites, a minimum of two canopy trees shall be provided per dwelling. For sections of road that do not abut lots or condominium sites, one canopy trees shall be provided on each side for every 40 feet or road. Existing trees to be preserved within five feet of the road right-of-way or easement may be credited towards meeting this requirement. 
(2)	Frontage greenbelt. The open space along the exterior public roads shall be landscaped with a minimum of one evergreen tree or canopy tree for each 20 feet of road frontage. Preservation of existing trees may be credited towards meeting the frontage landscaping requirement. 
(3)	Buffering. Where nonresidential uses adjoin residentially zoned property, noise reduction and visual screening mechanisms such as landscape berms and/or decorative walls, shall be employed. 
(Ord. No. 2003-328, 1-20-04)
 
Sec. 1909. Architectural and site design standards:
(1)	Residential architecture. Residential facades shall not be dominated by garages; at least 40 percent of residential units shall have side entry garages or recessed garages where the front of the garage is at least five feet behind the front line of the living portion of the principal dwelling. The intent of encouraging recessed or side entry garages is to enhance the aesthetic appearance of the development and minimize the aesthetic impact resulting from the close clustering of units allowed under these regulations. 
(2)	Nonresidential architecture. Nonresidential buildings shall provide distinct and prominent architectural features that create a positive visual landmark. Walls facing the street shall include windows and architectural features customarily found on the front facade of a building, such as awnings, cornice work, edge detailing or other decorative finish materials. Blank walls shall not face the street. Single story buildings shall have pitched roofs. Flat roofs shall be allowed on nonresidential two story buildings, provided the roof is enclosed by parapets and a decorative cornice. The exterior building wall design standards of section 2121 shall be met. 
(3)	Site elements. Signage, lighting, landscaping, building architecture and materials, and other features of the project, shall be designed to achieve an integrated and controlled development, consistent with the character of the community, surrounding development or developments, and natural features of the area. 
(Ord. No. 2003-328, 1-20-04)
 
Sec. 1910. Parking lots—Multiple-family or mixed use project with commercial:
(1)	Parking requirement. The number and dimensions of off-street parking shall be sufficient to meet the minimum required by the ordinances of the township. However, where warranted by overlapping or shared parking arrangements, the township may reduce the required number of parking spaces by up to 20 percent. 
(2)	Parking location. All parking and loading areas serving the commercial uses shall be to the rear or side of the structure and fully screened from view of any public roadway, except that the township may allow up to 25 percent of the minimum number of required parking spaces in the front yard. 
(3)	Parking lot screening.
(a)	All off street parking spaces or loading areas must be screened from view of any public road or pedestrian path, or private road/drive within the project by a street-wall or hedge along the frontage. Street-walls shall be between three feet in height and made of brick or stone. 
(b)	Where a nonresidential use or parking lot is adjacent to a residential use, a six-foot tall brick screening wall shall be required. The township may substitute this requirement for a three-foot tall landscape berm with a row of evergreen trees spaced no more than ten feet on-center. 
(4)	Parking lot greenbelt. Off-street parking lots serving three or more dwelling units shall provide a ten-foot wide open green space area around the perimeter of the parking lot. 
(5)	Parking lot trees. Landscaping shall be provided within parking lot landscape islands or surrounding the parking lot at a rate of one deciduous tree for every ten parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. 2003-328, 1-20-04)
 
Sec. 1911. Lighting:
(1)	Limitations on intensity. Exterior lighting shall be restrained and excessive brightness avoided to help ensure compatibility with adjacent land uses. All lighting shall be limited to 20 feet in height. The intensity of light fixtures shall be limited to 250 watts. Any lighting other than ornamental street lights shall be downward directed cut-off type fixtures. Floodlight type fixtures shall not be permitted except for building accent and sign lighting approved by the township. 
(2)	Ornamental lighting. The township may require a consistent type of pedestrian scale ornamental lighting along all streets, and sidewalks and within any off street parking lots. 
(3)	Lighting plan. A lighting plan including illustration of a foot candles grid and details of lighting fixtures shall be provided for nonresidential parking lots and loading areas. 
(Ord. No. 2003-328, 1-20-04)
 
Sec. 1912. Signs:
Residential entrance signs and commercial signs shall be approved as part of the final PD. 
(Ord. No. 2003-328, 1-20-04)
 
Sec. 1913. Circulation:
(1)	Internal roads. All streets within the PD shall meet the minimum construction and other requirements of township ordinances, unless modified by township board. 
(2)	Pedestrian circulation.
(a)	Sidewalks, a minimum of five feet wide shall be provided on both sides of all streets within the PD. 
(b)	Sidewalks shall be at least eight feet wide in commercial areas or in residential areas adjacent to parking spaces where the sidewalk is connected to the curb. 
(c)	Ten-foot wide bike paths shall be provided along major thoroughfares abutting the PD. 
(d)	Trails shall be provided within the open space. They may be constructed of asphalt, gravel or other similar material. 
(Ord. No. 2003-328, 1-20-04)
 
Sec. 1914. Infrastructure:
Drainage, and utility design shall meet or exceed the standards otherwise applicable in connection with each of the respective types of uses served. There shall be underground installation of utilities, including cable, electricity and telephone, as found necessary by the township board, upon the recommendation of the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 2003-328, 1-20-04)
 
Sec. 1915. Townhouse residential:
In addition to the above PD requirements, all PD's developed as townhouse residential must comply with the following design standards: 
(1)	Uses. The following uses shall be permitted where approved in the PD agreement. 
(a)	Single-family detached dwellings over one story in height. 
(b)	Single-family attached with a maximum of eight units attached in a single building. 
(c)	Publicly or privately owned and operated parks and recreation facilities. 
(d)	Home occupations. 
(e)	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
(2)	Dimensional standards. All principal buildings shall meet the following dimensional requirements: 
Minimum front yard setback: 15 feet. 
Minimum spacing between buildings: 15 feet. 
Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet. 
Minimum setback from side and rear perimeter of site: 20 feet. 
Minimum setback from adjacent single-family zoning district: 30 feet. 
Maximum percent of lot area covered by buildings: 45 percent. 
Maximum height of structures: Two stories and 25 feet.* 
Minimum ground floor area per unit: 1,000 square feet. 
* The township board may permit buildings up to three stories and 35 feet in height where the building is setback from existing adjacent single-family lots a distance equal to the height of the building and landscape screening is provided along the lot line adjoining an existing single-family residential use. 
(3)	Building layout and architecture. The following architectural standards shall be met for all structures. 
(a)	Style. Buildings shall have a traditional style of architecture characteristic of the mid-western United States. Design guidelines and typical building elevation drawings shall be presented with the PD stage I preliminary site plan and be reference in the PD agreement. Detailed architectural plans for each building will be included with the final PD stage II plans. 
(b)	Street facade. Buildings shall be oriented towards the street. The facade of buildings facing the public street shall include doors, porches, windows and other architectural detailing consistent with the front facade of a traditional dwelling. The front facade of all buildings shall be constructed of brick. 
(c)	Porches. All main entrances to the units shall have a porch or stoop at least 30 square feet in area facing the street. 
(d)	Roofs. All buildings shall have pitched roofs. The roofline may also include varying lines customary with gable or hip style roofing and dormer window features are encouraged. Permitted roofing materials include asphalt shingles, cedar shake and slate. 
(e)	Garages. All units shall provide garages accessed from the rear or side of the building. This may be accommodated by an attached rear-entry garage, a garage that is access via a rear service drive or a detached garage located in the rear yard. Garages facing towards the front lot line may be permitted where the front of the garage is located at least 20 feet behind the front wall of the dwelling. 
(4)	Circulation.
(a)	Road standards. Roads may be public or private where approved by the township board. The township board may permit specific modifications to road standards where the modification will improve the traditional neighborhood character of the development, provided parking and emergency vehicle access are accommodated. 
(b)	Street connections. Street connections shall be encouraged where it will unify neighborhoods and provide more convenient access to businesses and community facilities such as schools and parks. Cul-de-sacs and other dead-end streets shall be discouraged. Where it is not possible or desirable to provide a through street, the planning commission may allow a looped drive with a common green in the center. The circular drive around the green shall be at least 20 feet wide, measured face to face of curb, and the central green shall be no less than 20 feet at its narrowest dimension and be landscaped. 
(c)	Rear service drives. Rear service drives or alleys may be provided to serve as access to rear yard garages within a minimum pavement width of at least 20 feet. In addition to a rear drive, all residential structures shall have frontage along a public street or private road, except the township board may allow dwellings to front onto a common green or pedestrian right-of-way, where the fire department determines that adequate emergency vehicle access is provided. 
(d)	Pedestrian circulation. Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of streets through the development. All developments shall provide pedestrian linkages between public sidewalks and the building entrances. Sidewalk and pathway connections may be required to adjacent uses and activity areas. 
(5)	Parking. All units shall be provided with individual garages. Guest parking spaces shall not be located in the front yard of the site and any off-street parking spaces must be screened from view of any public road or pedestrian path, by a streetwall or hedge along the frontage. Streetwalls shall be three feet in height and constructed of brick or stone. 
(6)	Lighting. A consistent type of pedestrian scale ornamental lighting shall be provided along all streets and sidewalks and within any off street parking lots. Such lighting shall be provided at a frequency and height to provided desired light levels. 
(7)	Open space. Open space meeting the requirements of section 1905 shall be provided. Open space areas shall offer a source of passive and/or active recreation, in accordance with the intended character of the neighborhood. Passive recreational areas may include features such as formal seating areas and open lawn area. Active recreational areas may include specific recreation elements such as playgrounds, tennis courts and swimming pools or less formal features such as open play fields and walking paths. 
(Ord. No. 2003-328, 1-20-04)
 
Sec. 1916. PD site plan submittal requirements:
Application shall be made to the community development department for consideration under this PD district. The person applying shall be required to make a submittal of the following material for review by the planning commission and recommendation to the township board: 
(1)	PD stage I preliminary site plan requirements. The PD stage I preliminary site plan shall set forth the proposed uses to be developed in the PD and the following specific information on a site plan. The information on proposed improvements required by paragraph (g) below can be conceptual in nature, particularly for larger, mixed-use PD's that will be developed in phases. For a PD that contains a single type of use (e.g., a single-family subdivision) where the project will be developed in a single phase, the applicant has the option to include a complete site plan or preliminary subdivision plat for preliminary site plan or tentative preliminary plat approval, as applicable. 
(a)	A property area survey of the exact area being requested (scale: one inch = 100 feet). 
(b)	A proof of ownership of land being requested for rezoning or evidence of a contractual ability to acquire such land, such as an option or purchase agreement. 
(c)	A completed application form, supplied by the township community and economic development department, and an application/review fee. A separate escrow deposit may be required for administrative charges to review the PD submittal. 
(d)	Cover sheet providing: 
1.	The applicant's name; 
2.	Name of the development; 
3.	The preparer's name and professional seal of architect, engineer, surveyor or landscape architect indicating license in the State of Michigan; 
4.	Date of preparation and any revisions; 
5.	North arrow; 
6.	Property lines and dimensions; 
7.	Complete and current legal description and size of property in acres; 
8.	Small location sketch of the subject site and area within one-half, and scale; 
9.	Zoning and current land use of applicant's property and all abutting properties and of properties across any public or private street from the PD site; 
10.	Lot lines and all structures on the property and within 100 feet of the PD property lines; 
11.	Location of any access points on both sides of the street within 100 feet of the PD site along streets where access to the PD is proposed. 
(e)	An aerial photograph of the site. 
(f)	A site analysis plan sheet indicating locations of significant natural, historical, and architectural features, including: 
1.	Existing buildings; 
2.	Drainage patterns; 
3.	Surface water bodies; 
4.	Floodplain areas; 
5.	Wetlands with supporting documentation; 
6.	Existing topography at five-foot contour intervals; 
7.	Tree survey indicating the location and diameter (in inches, measured four feet above grade) of "landmark" trees. Landmark trees will be designated as "areas not to be disturbed" and secured through installation of a snow fence or other fencing. The limits of tree clearing shall be clearly indicated. 
(g)	A plan sheet indicating: 
1.	Existing and proposed topography at five-foot contour intervals and a general description of grades within 100 feet of the site, including the limits of grading and tree removal; 
2.	Dimensions of existing and proposed right-of-way lines, names of abutting public streets, proposed access driveways and parking areas, and existing and proposed pedestrian and/or bicycle paths; 
3.	Existing buildings, utility services, and any public or private easements, noting those which will remain and which are to be removed; 
4.	Layout and typical dimensions of proposed lots, footprints of proposed buildings; uses with the acreage allotted to each use. For developments with residential components: the number, type and density of proposed housing units; 
5.	Arrangement and area calculations for open space, including upland and wetland open space areas; 
6.	General location and type of landscaping proposed (evergreen, deciduous, berm, etc.) noting existing trees and landscaping to be retained; 
(h)	A plan sheet illustrating open space areas and tabulating the amount of open space provided broken down by areas for active recreation, passive recreation, upland natural preservation areas, wetlands, utility easements and landscape buffers. 
(i)	If a multi phase PD is proposed, identification of the areas included in each phase. For residential uses identify the number, type, and density of proposed housing units within each phase. 
(j)	A traffic impact study meeting the requirements of section 2115(6) of the zoning ordinance. 
(k)	Any additional graphics or written materials requested by the township to assist the township in determining the appropriateness of the PD such as, but not limited to, aerial photography; market studies; impact on public primary and secondary schools and utilities; traffic impacts using trip generation rates recognized by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) for an average day and peak hour of the affected roadways; impact on significant natural, historical, and architectural features and drainage; impact on the general area and adjacent property; description of how property could be developed under the regulations of the existing (pre PD) district; preliminary architectural sketches; and estimated construction cost. 
(l)	A draft written PD development agreement specifying all the terms and understanding of the PD development. 
(2)	Final PD stage II site plan requirements. The final PD stage II site plan shall include a complete site plan meeting the requirements of section 1515, or a final preliminary plat meeting the requirements of the township subdivision regulations ordinance, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2003-328, 1-20-04)
 
Sec. 1917. Acceptance and approval of PD stage I preliminary site plan and rezoning:
In reviewing and approving the PD stage I preliminary site plan and rezoning, the following procedures and conditions shall be followed: 
(1)	Pre-conceptual conference. The applicant shall attend a pre-conceptual conference with the township officials, the township community and economic development department, planning, and engineering consultants and regulatory, public service, and utility agencies. The applicant shall submit an application, review fee and pre-conceptual plan at least 20 business days prior to the pre-conceptual conference and forward copies of the submittal to all reviewing agencies listed by the township. The purpose of this meeting is to allow the applicant to introduce the site plan concept and receive comments or direction from the on the site plan or the need for additional material needed to evaluate the impacts of the use. No formal action shall be taken. 
(2)	Technical (staff) reviews. Formal application shall be made to the township community and economic development department. The township community and economic development department shall review the application. The township planning consultant, department of public works, fire chief, police chief, township engineer, building department manager, road committee and natural resources committee, if applicable, shall also review the application. The reviews shall be submitted to the township community and economic development department. The township community and economic development department may schedule a conference with applicable consultants and departments which reviewed the submittal information. The technical reviews may be revised and resubmitted following the conference or submittal of a revised application. An application shall not be forwarded to the planning commission until all required technical information is provided. 
(3)	Public hearing for PD stage I rezoning. Following the technical review process, the planning commission shall schedule and conduct a public hearing to review the request in accordance with the following procedures. The applicant is also encouraged to meet with neighborhood associations and land owners prior to the planning commission public hearing on the proposed project. 
(a)	The township community and economic development department shall provide notice of public hearing on the request for PD rezoning in accordance with section 2703. Such notification shall be in accordance with Section 4 of the Township Zoning Act (Public Act 184 of 1943, as amended). 
(b)	The planning commission shall conduct the required public hearing. The purpose of the public hearing is for the planning commission and the applicant to receive public comment on the PD. The planning commission shall not take action at the same meeting when the public hearing is conducted unless there is a specific finding that all review standards are met and no conditions are necessary for the recommendation to the township board. 
(c)	Following the public hearing the applicant shall submit revised plans and a document which point-by-point addresses each issue, as directed by the planning commission. 
(4)	Planning commission recommendation. The planning commission shall review the PD site plan in consideration of public hearing comments, technical reviews from township staff and consultant's correspondence from applicable review agencies, and compliance with the standards of this article and other applicable standards of this ordinance. The planning commission shall make a recommendation to the township board to approve, approve with conditions or deny the request. The planning commission recommendation shall be based on the following: 
(a)	Whether the proposal meets the eligibility criteria for qualification of the PD and promotes the land use goals and objectives of the township. 
(b)	Whether all applicable provisions of this section and this ordinance shall be met. If any provision of this section shall be in conflict with the provisions of any other section of this ordinance, the provisions of this section shall apply to the lands embraced within a PD. 
(c)	Whether there is, or will be at the time of development, adequate facilities to accommodate the sanitary sewage, storm water, solid waste, water supply needs and traffic generated by the proposed project. 
(5)	Township board approval of PD stage I preliminary site plan and rezoning. Following receipt of the planning commission's recommendation, the PD stage I preliminary site plan and rezoning shall be considered by the township board. The township board shall take one of the following actions on the request. 
(a)	Table. If the application is determined to be insufficient, does not fully respond to planning commission issues or more information is required, then the request may be tabled. The township board shall direct the applicant to prepare additional information, revise the PD stage I preliminary site plan or direct the township staff to conduct additional analysis. 
(b)	Reconsideration. If the township board believes there is new information which might modify the recommendation of the planning commission, the board may return the application with the new information to the planning commission for reconsideration. The planning commission shall provide a recommendation within 30 days. 
(c)	Approval. Upon determination that a PD stage I preliminary site plan is in compliance with the standards and requirements of this ordinance and other applicable ordinances and laws, the township board shall approve the preliminary PD stage I preliminary site plan and rezoning by resolution. The PD rezoning shall be effective upon approval of the second reading of the resolution. The township board may impose reasonable conditions with the approval of a PD. Conditions of any approval are attached to the land and will remain through subsequent owners. The applicant shall submit a revised PD stage I preliminary site plan that demonstrates compliance with the conditions for administrative approval by the township community and economic development department. 
(d)	Denial. Upon determination that a PD stage I preliminary site plan does not comply with standards and regulations set forth in this ordinance, or requires extensive revision in order to comply with said standards and regulations, the township board shall deny the application. Resubmittal of an application which was denied shall be considered a new application. 
(6)	Stage I preliminary PD agreement. The applicant shall submit an agreement stating the conditions upon which the PD is based, for review by the township attorney. The agreement, after review by the planning commission and approval by the township board, shall be entered into between the township and the applicant and be recorded in the office of the Washtenaw County Register of Deeds at the expense of the applicant. Approval shall be effective upon recording. The content of the agreement shall be based on the extent of the proposed development, but shall at a minimum provide the following: 
(a)	A survey of the acreage comprising the proposed development. 
(b)	The manner of ownership of the developed land. 
(c)	The amount, manner of the ownership and proposed method of dedication or mechanism to protect any areas designated as common areas or open space. 
(d)	Land use description including list of proposed uses, residential density, dwelling types, lot dimensions, setbacks and other dimensional standards. 
(e)	Description of improvements to common areas, recreational facilities and non-motorized pathways. 
(f)	General description of any improvements to roads or utilities. 
(g)	Provisions to ensure adequate protection of natural features. 
(h)	The preliminary PD plan shall be incorporated by reference and attached as an exhibit. 
(Ord. No. 2003-328, 1-20-04)
 
Sec. 1918. Effect of PD stage I preliminary site plan and rezoning approval:
(1)	Approval by the township board of the PD stage I preliminary site plan and rezoning shall have the effect of rezoning the property. The site plan, preliminary development agreement, building elevations and other development proposals including the proposed uses, shall become an integral part of the zoning amendment to the PD district and, for purposes of recordation, shall be referred to as "Planned Development No." All approved plans shall be filed with the township clerk and the community development department. 
(2)	Approval of the PD stage I preliminary site plan shall not constitute final site plan approval. It shall be deemed as approval of the land use plan submitted and shall serve as a guide in the preparation of the PD stage II final site plan. Rezoning procedures under this article of the ordinance will rely on the plan submitted for both stage I and stage II and the supporting documentation and the plan, therefore, is basic to the rezoning. 
(3)	Once an area has been rezoned to a PD district, no development shall take place therein nor use made of any part thereof except in accordance with the PD stage I preliminary site plan as originally approved, or in accordance with an approved amendment thereto. 
(4)	The proposed PD district shall be of such area as to represent a sound carrying out of the master plan of land use, it not being the intention of this district that an unrelated parcel-by-parcel rezoning be effectuated. 
(5)	The zoning ordinance amendment, which effectuates the rezoning to the PD district, shall refer to and incorporate by reference the PD stage I site plan and such zoning amendment shall be carried out in accordance with rezoning procedures of this ordinance. 
(6)	PD stage II final site plans and subdivision plats, as applicable, shall be submitted shall be submitted for review and approval in accordance with section 2115, Site Plan Review, or the township subdivision regulations ordinance, as applicable, for an area embraced in the PD. 
(7)	Approval of the PD stage I preliminary site plan by the township board shall be effective for a period of two years. If PD stage II final site plan or subdivision plat for at least the first phase of the project is not submitted and approved within two years of the PD stage I approval, the right to develop under the approved PD stage I preliminary site plan shall terminate and a new application must then be filed and processed. The two-year period for PD stage I preliminary approval may be extended for one year, if applied for by the petitioner prior to expiration and granted by the township board, based upon a recommendation by the planning commission. Following expiration of the PD stage I approval, the township may initiate proceedings to rezoning the property back to the pre-PD zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2003-328, 1-20-04)
 
Sec. 1919. PD stage II final site plan submittal and approval:
A presentation of the PD stage II final site plan shall be made to the planning commission for review and recommendation to the township board of the following: 
(1)	PD stage II final site plans shall be submitted for each phase of the development. This plan shall be worked out in detail showing specific uses, building location, off-street parking, street alignments, open spaces and other physical plan details being proposed. Supporting documentation in the form of building plans, and schedule of construction shall be submitted. The PD stage II final site plan shall conform to all site plan requirements and all site plan review requirements of this ordinance. In reviewing site plans and subdivision plans, the following standards shall apply: 
(a)	Site plans or subdivision plans shall be in substantial conformance with the approved PD stage I preliminary site plan. The final plan shall reflect and adhere to those use patterns as approved in the preliminary plan. The township board may approve a PD stage II final site plan that proposes minor deviations from the PD stage I layout only where the township board finds such deviations conform to the requirements of this ordinance and will result in an equal or higher quality development that the PD stage I site plan. Where major deviations are proposed from the PD stage I plan, the township board may require resubmission of a new PD stage I site plan for a planning commission public hearing and recommendation. 
(b)	Each site plan or subdivision plat shall either individually or in combination with previously approved contiguous project areas, meet the standards of this section and the approved preliminary PD stage I site plan regarding layout, density, open space and land use. 
(c)	Each plan submission shall include a map illustrating the site or phase in relation to previously approved plans and the overall PD stage I preliminary site plan. 
(d)	A final PD agreement shall be submitted for review by the township attorney and approved by the township board. 
(2)	Stage II final PD agreement. As part of the application for PD stage II final site plan approval, the applicant shall submit an agreement stating the conditions upon which approval is based, for review by the township attorney. The agreement, after review and approval by the township board, shall be entered into between the township and the applicant and be recorded in the office of the Washtenaw County Register of Deeds at the expense of the applicant. Approval shall be effective upon recording. Said agreement shall provide: 
(a)	All items contained in the stage I preliminary PD agreement. 
(b)	Provision assuring that those open space areas shown on the plan for use by the public or residents of the development will be or have been irrevocably committed for that purpose. The township may require conveyances or other documents to be placed in escrow to accomplish this. 
(c)	Satisfactory provisions have been made to provide for the future financing of any improvements shown on the plan for site improvements, open space areas and common areas which are to be included within the development and that maintenance of such improvements is assured by a means satisfactory to the township board. 
(d)	The cost of installing and maintaining all streets and the necessary utilities has been assured by a means satisfactory to the township board. 
(e)	The PD stage II final site plan shall be incorporated by reference and attached as an exhibit. 
(Ord. No. 2003-328, 1-20-04)
 
Sec. 1920. Effect of PD stage II final site plan approval:
(1)	Approval of the PD stage II final site plan shall be effective for a period of one year. If construction has not commenced within this period, the approval shall expire and the right to develop under the approved PD stage II final site plan shall terminate and a new application for PD stage II final site plan must then be filed. The one-year period for PD stage II final site plan approval may be extended for one year, if applied for by the petitioner prior to the expiration and granted by the township board, based upon a recommendation by the planning commission. Once a building permit has been obtained, the PD stage II final site plan shall remain valid for as long as the building permit is current and construction is being diligently carried on towards completion. 
(2)	All dedications of public rights-of-way or planned public open spaces shall be made prior to any construction taking place on the site and shall be recorded by the developer. 
(3)	In residential use areas, any prorated open space shall be committed by dedication to an association of residents, either as rights-in-fee, easement, or in a master deed and retained as open space for park, recreation and related uses. All lands dedicated in fee or easement shall meet the requirements set forth by the township board. Provisions satisfactory to the township board shall be made to provide for the financing of any improvements shown on the plan for open spaces and common use areas which are to be provided by the applicant, and including maintenance of such improvements by a means satisfactory to the township board. This may include a development agreement. Such documents shall be recorded with the county register of deeds. 
(4)	In those instances where a subdivision plat is being utilized as a planned development or a part of such development, the procedures and expiration dates of the Plat Act (Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.), as amended, shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2003-328, 1-20-04)
 
Sec. 1921. Required conditions:
Before approving the plan in either the PD stage I preliminary site plan or PD stage II final site plan submittal, the planning commission and the township board shall determine that: 
(1)	The cost of installing all streets, sidewalks, bike paths, streetlights, park areas and necessary utilities and maintenance thereof has been assured by a means satisfactory to the township board. The township board shall have the option of requiring suitable guarantee in a form suitable to the township for the provision of any or all site improvements. 
(2)	The final plan of each project area of the approved plan is in conformity with the overall approved plan. Any changes or amendments requested shall terminate approval of the preliminary plan until such changes or amendments have been reviewed and approved as in the instance of the first submittal, it being the intent of this section that no other administrative or board of appeals action shall constitute official approval of such changes or amendments to the preliminary plan. Denial by the township board of any requested changes or amendments shall not void the originally approved plan. 
(3)	Proceeding with a planned development district shall only be permitted if it is mutually agreeable to the township board and the developer. 
(Ord. No. 2003-328, 1-20-04)
 
Sec. 1922. Administrative revisions to approved PD stage II plans:
Approval of the PD stage II final site plan confers upon the township community and economic development department the authority to approve certain minor deviations during the construction process when an applicant or land owner who was granted final site plan approval notifies the township community and economic development department of the proposed amendment to such approved site plan in writing, accompanied by a site plan illustrating the proposed change. The request shall be received prior to initiation of any construction in conflict with the approved plan. 
(1)	Procedure. Within 14 days of receipt of a request to amend the final site plan, the township community and economic development department shall determine whether the change is major, warranting review by the planning commission, or minor, allowing administrative approval, as noted below. 
(2)	Minor changes. Minor changes to a previously approved planned development site plan may be approved without necessity of planning commission or township board action thereon if the coordinator of community development certifies in writing that the proposed revision constitutes a minor alteration and does not alter the basic design nor any specific conditions of the plan as agreed upon by planning commission and township board. The community development coordinator shall record all such changes on the original PD site plan and shall advise planning commission and township board of all said minor revisions within 15 days of said administrative approval. Minor alterations or revisions under this section shall be limited to: 
(a)	For residential buildings, the square footage of structures may be reduced by three percent; or increased by three percent, provided the overall density of units does not increase, the minimum square footage and parking requirements are met and the building(s) do not extend into any required open space or required setbacks. 
(b)	Gross floor area of nonresidential buildings may be decreased; or increased by up to three percent or 2,000 square feet, whichever is smaller, provided parking requirements are met and the building does not extend into any required setback or open space. 
(c)	Any decrease in building size or changes in bedroom counts per dwelling unit in no more than ten percent of the total number of units. 
(d)	Floor plans may be changed if consistent with the character of the use. 
(e)	Relocation of a building by up to five feet, if consistent with required setbacks, open space and other standards. 
(f)	Shifting of building heights and elevations, providing such shifting does not exceed ten percent of the previously approved dimension and providing such shifting does not significantly alter the conceptual integrity of the plan. 
(g)	Construction of additional, or alteration of, approved sidewalks, provided that the full intent of pedestrian movement through and around the site is not inhibited thereby. 
(h)	Shifting of, additions to, changes in species of landscape materials, provided that such change does not reduce minimum landscape requirements. 
(i)	Plantings on the approved landscape plan may be replaced by similar types of landscaping on a one-to-one or greater basis. Any regulated trees lost during construction shall be replaced on a caliper-per-caliper basis on the site. 
(j)	Designated woodlands or areas not to be disturbed may be increased. 
(k)	Relocation of refuse collection stations. 
(l)	Improvements or slight relocation of site access or circulation, such as inclusion of deceleration lanes, boulevards, curbing or pedestrian/bicycle paths, with documentation from Washtenaw County, where appropriate. 
(m)	Internal rearrangement of parking lots and curb cut locations, not including the relocation of parking lots, provided such fictional rearrangement does not reduce the total number of parking spaces required, and further provided that the such rearrangement does not inhibit good traffic flow or circulation. 
(n)	Installation of recreational or maintenance facilities that do not require erection of a structure intended for human use or occupancy. 
(o)	Changes of building materials to another of higher quality, or a slight change in the color of the exterior material, as determined by the township community and economic development department. 
(p)	Grade change of up to one foot, reviewed by the township engineer. 
(q)	Modification of entry design, sign placement or reduction in size of signage, which is consistent with the intent of this section and the approved plan. 
(r)	Changes to the location of accessory buildings and structures only when the new location will be consistent with the building envelope identified on the approved plan. 
(s)	Changes required or requested by the township, county or state for safety reasons. 
(3)	Major changes. Where the township community and economic development department determines a requested amendment to the approved site plan is major, resubmittal to the planning commission and township board shall be required. Should the planning commission or township board determine that the modifications are inconsistent with the approved final PD site plan, a revised final PD site plan shall be submitted according to the procedures outlined in this article. In all cases, a change in use to a more intensive use than approved in the final PD plan shall be considered major and require resubmission of a final PD plan. 
(Ord. No. 2003-328, 1-20-04)
 
Sec. 1923. Existing planned developments:
(1)	Approved planned developments. Projects which received final PD stage II approval under the prior PD standards shall be considered conforming provided such projects conform to the site plan and conditions upon which they were approved, and the projects have either been completed or work is diligently being carried on within the time limits stipulated under this ordinance. Any expansion shall conform to the regulations of the particular zoning district; no expansion in area beyond the area approved as a PD shall be considered. Any modifications to the previously approved final PD site plans shall be reviewed under the current PD regulations. 
(2)	Commencement and completion of construction. Construction shall be commenced within one year following final approval of a PD, or within one year of any other necessary governmental approval for commencement of the project, whichever is later, provided all other necessary approvals have been actively pursued. Each phase of the project shall be commenced within one year of the schedule approved by the township. If construction is not commenced within such time, any approval of a site plan on the project shall expire and be null and void, provided, an extension for a specified period may be granted by the planning commission upon good cause shown if such request is made to the planning commission prior to the expiration of the initial period. 
(3)	PD stage I planned developments. Projects that have received a recommendation by the planning commission to the township board for PD stage I approval prior to the effective date of this amendment, but did not receive final PD stage II approval, shall be reviewed under the current PD regulations of this ordinance for final approval, subject to the following: 
(a)	Where a density was established by the township on a PD stage I site plan, subsequent final site plans submitted shall retain the following: 
1.	The density established at that time shall be the maximum allowable density for that site. 
2.	The final site plan shall include the same mixture of housing types, provided that the township board may approve a reduction in the percent of non-single-family residential dwellings. 
3.	The final site plan shall contain as much or more open space as the preliminary PD plan. 
(b)	Within two years following receipt of the preliminary PD stage I approval, the applicant shall submit to the township planning commission a final PD stage II plan. If a final PD stage II plan has not been submitted within the two years, then the original PD stage I approval shall be null-and-void and any subsequent submittal shall be required to comply with the current PD requirements of this ordinance. Time extension, beyond the two-year period, may be granted by the township board. The request for extension must be received in writing and shall not be for more than one year. 
(c)	Final site plans must still exhibit the community benefits and natural features protection that qualified the project for development as a PD. The planning commission shall make a finding that the final site plan is consistent with the intent and conditions of the preliminary PD approval. 
(Ord. No. 2003-328, 1-20-04)
 
Sec. 1924. Limitations on variances from ZBA:
The decision to grant PD approval or any regulatory modifications are not subject to variance approval of the zoning board of appeals. No part of a PD may be appealed to the zoning board of appeals. This provision shall not preclude an individual lot owner from seeking a variance following final approval of the PD stage II, provided such variance does not involve alterations to open space areas as shown on the approved PD site plan. 
(Ord. No. 2003-328, 1-20-04)
 
Sec. 1925. Fees:
Fees for legal, engineering and planning review of the site plans shall be as established by the township board. 
(Ord. No. 2003-328, 1-20-04)

 
ARTICLE XX. SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
 
Sec. 2000. Schedule limiting height, bulk, density and area by zoning district, residential districts:
Zoning District (aa) 	Minimum Zoning Lot Size Per Unit (b, v, y) 	Maximum Height of Structures 	Minimum Yard Setback (per lot in feet) (d, i, j, k, s, t, u, x) 	Minimum 
Ground 
Floor Area 
Per Unit 
(sq. ft.) 	Maximum 
% of Lot 
Area 
Covered 
(by all 
buildings) 
	Area in 
Sq. Ft. 
(a, w) 	Width in 
Feet 
(c) 	In Stories 	In Feet 
(g) 	Front 	Side 	Rear 
(n) 		
						Least 	Total of 
Two 			
R-1 one-family residential 	32,500 	100 	2 	25 	25 	12(e) 	25 	35 	1 story 
1,200 
2 story 
900	30 
R-2 one-family residential 	21,780 	90 	2 	25 	25 	10(e) 	20 	35 	1 story 
900
2 story 
720 	30 
R-3 one-family residential 	14,000 	80 	2 	25 	25 	5(e) 	16 	35 	1 story 
720 
2 story 
600 	30 
R-4 one-family residential 	8,400 	60 	2 	25 	25 	5(e) 	16 	35 	1 story 
720 
2 story 
600 	30 
R-5 one-family residential 	5,400 	50 	2 	25 	20 	5(e) 	16 	35 	1 story 
720 
2 story, 
600 	35 
RM-1 multiple-family 	(f) 	— 	2 	25 	30(l) 	30(l) 	60(l) 	30(l) 	Eff. 350 
1 br. 500 
2 br. 700 
3 br. 900
4 br. 
1,100 	15 
RM-2 multiple-family 	(f) 	— 	3 	35 	30(l) 	30(l) 	60(l) 	30(l) 		25 
RM-3 multiple-family 	(f) 	— 	4 	45 	40(l) 	40(l) 	80(l) 	50(l) 	Eff. 350 
1 br. 500 
2 br. 700 
3 br. 900
4 br. 
1,100 	15 
RM-4 multiple-family 	(f) 	— 	No maximum (h) 	50(l) 	50(l) 	100(l) 	50(l) 		15 
RM-5 townhouse residential 	(f) 	— 	3 	35 	10(z) 	10 	10 	Minimum total area/unit: 1,000 	None 
MHP mobile home park 	5,500 	(r) 	(r) 	25(r) 	(r) 	(r) 	(r) 	(r) 	600(r) 	(r) 
PD planned development 	See article XIX for standards 

(Ord. No. 94-133, 8-16-94; Ord. No. 96-154, 10-15-96; Ord. No. 97-164, 2-28-97; Ord. No. 97-165, 4-25-97; Ord. No. 97-172, 10-7-97; Ord. No. 99-202, 3-16-99; Ord. No. 99-224, § V, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 2000-241, 2-14-00; Ord. No. 2001-288, 12-18-01; Ord. No. 2003-329, 1-20-04; Ord. No. 2009-395, 7-21-09; Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 21, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 2001. Schedule limiting height, bulk, density and area by zoning district, commercial, office and industrial districts:
Zoning District 	Minimum Zoning Lot Size Per Unit 	Maximum Height of Structures 	Minimum Yard Setback (per lot in feet) (d, i, j, k, o, s, x) 	Minimum 
Ground 
Floor Area 
Per Unit 
(sq. ft.) 	Maximum 
% of Lot 
Area 
Covered 
(by all 
buildings) 
	Area in 
Sq. Ft. 
(a) 	Width in 
Feet 
(c) 	In Stories 	In Feet 
(g) 	Front 	Side (n) 	Rear 		
						Least 	Total of 
Two 			
OS-1 office space 	None 	None 	2 	25 	20 	(m) 	(m) 	20 	None 	None 
B-1 local business 	None 	None 	2 	25 	20 	(m) 	(m) 	20 	None 	None 
B-2 community business 	None 	None 	3(q) 	30(q) 	70 	(m) 	(m, n) 	(n) 	None 	None 
B-3 general business 	None 	None 	2 	25 	20 	(m) 	(m) 	20 	None 	None 
IRO industrial, research, office 	None 	None 	3(q) 	30(q) 	50 	20 	40 	(p) 	None 	None 
I-1 light industrial 	None 	None 	(q) 	40(q) 	40 	20 	40 	40(p) 	None 	None 
I-2 general industrial 	None 	None 	(q) 	50(q) 	50 	40 	80 	50(p) 	None 	None 
I-3 industrial 	None 	None 	(q) 	40(q) 	50 	40 	80 	50(p) 	None 	None 
I-C industrial commercial 	None 	None 	(q) 	50(q) 	50 	40 	80 	50(p) 	None 	None 
P-1 vehicular parking 	See article XII for standards 
PD planned development 	See article XIX for standards 

Notes to schedule of regulations: 
(a)	All lots that are not served by either public sanitary sewer or public water, as defined by the Michigan Department of Public Health, (i.e. lots with both on-site well and septic) shall have a minimum lot area of one acre. This provision may be modified for a planned development approved under article XIX, provided all lots meet the requirements of the Washtenaw County Health Department and the required "parallel plan" to determine density is prepared with one acre lots. 
(b)	Modifications to dimensional requirements and maximum density may be permitted by the township under article XX, planned development. 
(c)	The maximum ratio of lot depth to lot width shall not exceed a depth of four times the width. 
(d)	For all uses permitted other than single-family residential, i.e., places of worship, schools, etc., the setback shall equal the height of the main building or the setback required in section 402 or 2000, whichever is greater. 
(e)	When a side yard is across a common separating street from a front yard on the opposing lot, the side yard abutting a street shall not be less than the minimum front yard of the district in which located. On all other corner lots, the street side yard shall be the larger required side yard (see sketch). The lot width for corner lots shall be at least ten feet wider than the minimum required for other lots to ensure lot area is adequate to accommodate homes which are similar in size to those which could be constructed on adjacent lots. 
(f)	For all developments in the RM multiple-family districts, the total number of dwelling units shall not be more than the following: 
RM-1 = One dwelling unit for each 8,100 square feet of lot area. 
RM-2 = One dwelling unit for each 7,200 square feet of lot area. 
RM-3 = One dwelling unit for each 5,400 square feet of lot area. 
RM-4 = One dwelling unit for each 3,000 square feet of lot area. 
RM-5 = One dwelling unit for each 4,300 square feet of lot area 
See section 2002 for standards applicable to senior housing. 
(g)	The following kinds of structural appurtenances may exceed the height limitations for authorized use: 
(1)	Schools, places of worship and other similar institutional buildings may be erected to a height not exceeding 48 feet provided the front, side and rear yards shall not be less than the height of the building wall abutting such yard; 
(2)	The highest point of chimneys, spires, cupolas, domes, towers, flag poles, radio and television antennae may be erected to a height not exceeding 60 feet; the average height of such elements which are an architectural feature shall be 48 feet. Radio, television and personal short-wave radio antennae may be permitted up to a height of 100 feet provided the tower is setback from all property lines and buildings a distance equal to half the height of the structure tower. 
(3)	Penthouse or rooftop structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, heating and air conditioning equipment, and other similar apparatus may be erected above the height limits if the planning commission finds that the elevation plans illustrate the following conditions are met: 
a.	All rooftop equipment and apparatus shall be housed in a penthouse, parapet wall or screening structure constructed of the same type of building material and same color used in the principal structure. 
b.	Penthouses and structures shall be set back from the outermost vertical walls or parapet of the principal structure a distance equal to at least two times the height of such penthouse or structure. The height of such penthouse or structure shall in no instance exceed 15 feet. 
c.	Such penthouse or structure shall not have a total floor area greater than 15 percent of the total roof area of the building. 
(h)	The maximum height of structures in the RM-4 multiple-family high-rise district shall be subject to the review and approval of the Willow Run Airport Zoning Agency. 
(i)	All required yard areas shall be lawn, ground cover or living landscape plant materials except for approved access drives, sidewalks, bikepaths, setback projections, ponds, parks, essential service facilities and permitted accessory buildings. 
(j)	Setbacks shown are for principal buildings. Section 2103, accessory buildings and accessory uses, specifies setbacks for accessory buildings and structures. 
(k)	Permitted projections into required yards: fire escapes, fire towers, chimneys, platforms, balconies, boiler flues, and other projections shall be considered part of the building, subject to the setback requirements for the district in which the building is located. Architectural features and vertical projections, may extend or project into a required yard as shown in the following table: 
Projection 	All Yards 	Rear Yard 	Side Yard 
Air conditioning equipment shelters 	- - 	x 	x 
Air conditioning units, window mounted 	x 	- - 	- - 
Access drives 	x 	- - 	- - 
Arbors and trellises 	x 	- - 	- - 
Architectural entrance features (1) 	x 	- - 	- - 
Awnings and canopies 	x 	- - 	- - 
Bay windows (1) 	x 	- - 	- - 
Decks, open or enclosed (2) 	- - 	x 	x 
Eaves, overhanging (1) 	x 	- - 	- - 
Fences 	x 	- - 	- - 
Flagpoles 	x 	- - 	- - 
Gardens 	x 	- - 	- - 
Gutters (1) 	x 	- - 	- - 
Hot tubs 	- - 	x 	x 
Landscaping 	x 	- - 	- - 
Laundry drying equipment 	- - 	x 	x 
Light standard, ornamental 	x 	- - 	- - 
Paved terraces and open porches (2) 	x 	- - 	- - 
Privacy walls 	- - 	x 	- - 
Sidewalks, bikepaths and walkways 	x 	- - 	- - 
Signs 	x 	- - 	- - 
Stairways, open unroofed 	x 	- - 	- - 
Steps and stoops 	x 	- - 	- - 
Swimming pools 	- - 	x 	x 
Reception towers/antennas 	x 	- - 	- - 
Walls 	x 	- - 	- - 
Waste receptacles 	- - 	x 	x 

x = Permitted in any area of yard 
Notes related to table: 
(1)	Architectural features: Bay windows, window sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves, overhanging eaves and other architectural features may project into a required side yard not more than two inches for each one foot of width of such side yard, and may extend into any front or rear yard not more than 24 inches. 
(2)	Terraces, decks and porches: Open porches may project into a required front yard up to 15 feet, with the exception of the R-5 one-family residential district where the open porch projection may not exceed ten feet. Open porches, decks and paved terraces may project up to 30 percent into a required minimum side or rear yard and may exceed the maximum permitted lot coverage by up to three percent. 
(l)	Setbacks in the RM districts shall meet the following requirements. 
(1)	In all RM districts, front, side or rear yards shall be required from the perimeter of the parcel and need not refer to spacing between buildings for a the same parcel. 
(2)	In RM-4 districts, the minimum setbacks from the lot lines shall be equal to the height of the building except: 
a.	Where a lot line abuts a street, one-half the width of the right-of-way as shown on the major thoroughfare plan may be considered as yard setback. 
b.	Where a lot line abuts a permanent public open space or parkway, one-half of the narrowest width of the open space or parkway immediately contiguous to the common property line may be considered as yard setback. In no instance, however, shall any yard setback be less than 50 feet. 
(3)	In all RM districts, there shall be a minimum of 20 feet of unobstructed setback between drives, maneuvering lanes and open parking spaces and any residential building or wall. 
(4)	In all RM districts, the minimum distance between any two buildings shall be regulated according to the length and height of such building, and in no instance shall this distance be less than 30 feet. (See illustration following this section.) The formula for regulating the required minimum distances between two buildings is as follows: 
S =  
Where: 
S = 	The required minimum horizontal distance between any wall of building A and any wall of building B or the vertical prolongation of either. 
La = 	The total length of building A. The total length of building A is the length of the portion or portions of a wall or walls of building A from which, when viewed directly from above, lines drawn perpendicular to building A will intersect any wall of building B. 
Lb = 	The total length of building B. The total length of building B is the length of that portion or portions of a wall of building B from which, when viewed directly above, lines drawn perpendicular to building B will intersect building A. 
Ha = 	The height of building A. The height of building A at any given level is the height above natural grade level of any portion or portions of a wall or walls along the length of a building A. 
Hb = 	The height of building B. The height of building B at any given level is the height above the natural grade level of any portion or portions of a wall or walls along the length of building B. 

(m)	No side yards are required along the interior side lot lines of the district, except as otherwise specified in the building code, provided that if walls of structures facing such interior side lot lines contain windows, or other openings, side yards of not less than ten feet shall be provided. Where a lot borders on a residential district or a street, there shall be provided a setback of not less than ten feet on the side bordering the residential district or street. 
(n)	No building shall be closer than 75 feet to the outer perimeter (property line) of such district, or to any major thoroughfare. 
(o)	No building shall be closer than 50 feet to the outer perimeter (property line) of such district when said property abuts any residential district. This requirement does not apply to sites zoned B-5 East Michigan Avenue business district or B-6 Ecorse/Ford business district. 
(p)	All storage shall be in the rear yard and shall be completely screened with an obscuring wall or fence, not less than six feet high, or with a chainlink-type fence and a greenbelt planting so as to obscure all view from any adjacent residential, office or business district or from a public street. 
(q)	The height of structures may exceed the maximum required herein for planned developments of 20 acres or more in area, provided that all yards shall be increased at least one foot in depth for each additional foot of building height above the maximum herein permitted. 
(r)	See article XVIII for modifications allowed and additional requirements. Mobile home parks shall be regulated in accord with Act No. 96 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1987 (MCL 125.1101 et seq.), as amended. 
(s)	Setback requirements, where such setbacks are to be provided from abutting streets, shall be provided whether such right-of-way is public, private or an access easement. 
(t)	In subdivisions platted prior to the date of adoption of this zoning ordinance and in which a building setback line is established on the lots abutting a lot or lots to be developed, such building line may be utilized as the setback line for new building construction. 
(u)	Minimum yards for site condominiums shall be provided in accordance with this zoning ordinance and shall be computed as follows: 
(1)	Minimum front yard setbacks shall be equal to the distance between the front yard area line and the condominium dwelling. 
(2)	Minimum rear yard setbacks shall be equal to the distance between the rear yard area line and the condominium dwelling. For two back-to-back units, the separation shall equal two rear yard setbacks. 
(3)	Minimum side yard setbacks shall be equal to the distance between the side yard area line and the condominium dwelling. For two side-to-side units, the separation shall equal two side yard setbacks. 
(v)	Dwellings existing and dwellings to be constructed on lots of record in and subdivisions having received tentative preliminary plat approval and on sites in site condominium subdivisions having received preliminary approval prior to the date of adoption of this amendment shall be permitted provided such lots and structures comply with lot area, width and setback requirements of the zoning ordinance at the time of approval. 
(w)	Any submerged area of a lake, river, pond or stream, or regulated wetlands shall not count towards meeting the minimum lot area for single-family lots. Computation of dwelling unit density requirements in RM zones shall not include submerged areas of a lake, river, pond or stream, and regulated wetlands. 
(x)	Open space setback: An undisturbed open space setback of not less than 50 feet shall be maintained from the edge of any lake, pond, river or stream, including, but not limited to the Huron River, Paint Creek and their tributaries. An undisturbed open space setback of not less than 25 feet shall be maintained from the edge of any drain or wetland. Such setbacks shall be measured from the top of the bank or other defined edge and shall not be subject to topography. 
The township may permit trails, boardwalks, observation platforms or similar structures that enhance passive enjoyment of a site's natural amenities within the setback as part of an approved site plan. 
(y)	Any residential subdivision, condominium or multiple-family development comprising 20 or more lots or dwelling units, either as a single development or as a group of adjacent developments offered by a single proprietor, shall provide an active recreational area which shall contain an area equal in size to 1,500 square feet for each lot or dwelling unit in the subdivision or condominium project or multiple-family development. Said recreational area shall be well drained, graded, seeded or sodded, safe from hazard, accessible to all dwellings, and the location shall be approved by the planning commission. Reservation of the recreational area shall be achieved through deed restrictions or dedication to a subdivision homeowner's association. 
(z)	The planning commission may approve a reduction of the minimum required front yard setback for buildings in this district, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)	The development parcel or zoning lot has frontage on only one public street and is not a corner lot. 
(2)	The architectural character of all facades that are visible from the street shall be upgraded to include primarily glass, brick, cut stone, cast stone, smooth stucco or wood. Concrete block, EIFS and other synthetic materials shall be eliminated from these facades, except for minor architectural accents as may be approved by the planning commission. 
(3)	A reduction in the required front yard setback would result in an unsafe traffic or pedestrian safety condition. 
(aa)	Where a parcel that is within 500 feet of the I-94 right-of-way is proposed to be developed for residential purposes by means of a multiple-family development, condominium, subdivision plat or planned development, such site plan or plat shall delineate that area of the site with sound levels of 61 dBA or greater. No dwelling units shall be located within this 61 dBA or greater area unless one of the following measures is taken: 
(1)	Sound walls or earth berming are installed to attenuate the noise level to less than 61 dBA at the location of all dwellings and all yard areas within 35 feet of all single-family dwellings. 
(2)	Sound attenuation measures incorporated into the design and construction of the dwellings, such as masonry construction and insulation resulting in interior noise levels less than 52 dBA. 
(bb)	Open space setback: An undisturbed open space setback of not less than 50 feet shall be maintained from the edge of any lake, pond, river or stream, including, but not limited to the Huron River, Paint Creek and their tributaries. An undisturbed open space setback of not less than 25 feet shall be maintained from the edge of any drain or wetland. Such setbacks shall be measured from the top of the bank or other defined edge and shall not be subject to topography. 
The township may permit trails, boardwalks, observation platforms or similar structures that enhance passive enjoyment of a site's natural amenities within the setback as part of an approved site plan. 
(cc)	Any residential subdivision, condominium or multiple-family development comprising 20 or more lots or dwelling units, either as a single development or as a group of adjacent developments offered by a single proprietor, shall provide an active recreational area which shall contain an area equal in size to 1,500 square feet for each lot or dwelling unit in the subdivision or condominium project or multiple-family development. Said recreational area shall be well drained, graded, seeded or sodded, safe from hazard, accessible to all dwellings, and the location shall be approved by the planning commission. Reservation of the recreational area shall be achieved through deed restrictions or dedication to a subdivision homeowner's association. 
(dd)	The planning commission may approve a reduction of the minimum required front yard setback for buildings in this district, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)	The development parcel or zoning lot has frontage on only one public street and is not a corner lot, 
(2)	The architectural character of all facades that are visible from the street shall be upgraded to include primarily glass, brick, cut stone, cast stone, smooth stucco or wood. Concrete block, EIFS and other synthetic materials shall be eliminated from these facades, except for minor architectural accents as may be approved by the planning commission. 
(3)	A reduction in the required front yard setback would result in an unsafe traffic or pedestrian safety condition. 
(ee)	Where a parcel that is within 500 feet of the I-94 right-of-way is proposed to be developed for residential purposes by means of a multiple-family development, condominium, subdivision plat or planned development, such site plan or plat shall delineate that area of the site with sound levels of 61 dBA or greater. No dwelling units shall be located within this 61 dBA or greater area unless one of the following measures is taken: 
(1)	Sound walls or earth berming are installed to attenuate the noise level to less than 61 dBA at the location of all dwellings and all yard areas within 35 feet of all single-family dwellings. 
(2)	Sound attenuation measures incorporated into the design and construction of the dwellings, such as masonry construction and insulation resulting in interior noise levels less than 52 dBA. 
Where a planned development is proposed under article XIX, PD planned development regulations, the open space requirements of article XIX may be provided as an open space buffer in the area of the site that has sound levels of 61 dBA or greater, where this will cluster the dwellings within the area of the site that has sound levels of less than 61 dBA. 
(Ord. No. 99-202, 3-16-99; Ord. No. 2000-257, 12-5-00; Ord. No. 2001-275, 8-21-01; Ord. No. 2001-288, 12-18-01; Ord. No. 203-329, 1-20-04; Ord. No. 2009-395, 7-21-09; Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 21, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 2002. Senior housing option (planned development):
(a)	Independent living senior housing, developed under the provisions of this section, may be allowed in any RM zoning district with planned development approval from the township under article 19. The senior housing development shall meet all applicable standards of the PD regulations and the RM zoning district in which it is situated, except as provided in this section. 
(b)	The township may base its approval on the long-term availability of senior services to be provided by the developer, operator, government or private elderly support agencies, such as medical assistance, meals assistance, proximity to shopping, personal services and medical care, transportation (including access to mass transit), recreation and other elderly needs. 
(c)	The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be as follows. Projects may not qualify for an additional density bonus under the PD provisions. 
RM-1 = One dwelling unit for each 5,000 square feet of lot area. 
RM-2 = One dwelling unit for each 4,000 square feet of lot area. 
RM-3 = One dwelling unit for each 3,500 square feet of lot area. 
RM-4 = One dwelling unit for each 3,000 square feet of lot area. 
(d)	Minimum unit size shall be 350 square feet of usable floor area, not including kitchen, bathroom and storage areas. The interior of each unit shall be designed to provide ease of mobility by seniors who may have mobility limitations. The following standards shall be met for all units: 
(1)	All doors shall provide a minimum 36-inch clear opening when the door is standing 90 degrees open. 
(2)	All common hallways or passageways shall be at least five feet in width. All hallways or passageways within individual units shall be at least three feet, six inches in width. 
(3)	There shall be no raised thresholds in the units. Floors shall continue through door openings at the same level. 
(4)	The township may require that all bathroom and kitchen features be designed in accordance with the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), Specifications for Making Buildings and Facilities Accessible to and Usable by Physically Handicapped People, Section 4.34, Dwelling Units, of ANSI A117.1 (1980), or structurally designed and laid out to be easily modified to accommodate these standards. 
(5)	Multi-story facilities shall have at least one hospital type elevator within each building. 
(e)	All pedestrian circulation walkways and sidewalks shall be hard-surfaced with either asphalt, concrete, brick paving or boardwalk and be accessible to the handicapped according to the standards set forth in the Americans With Disabilities Act. Handicapped access ramp structures may encroach into any required setback space. 
(f)	At least 15 percent of the total site area shall be reserved as open space. This open space shall be utilized for recreation facilities such as picnic areas, walking trails or other open space uses which provide elderly residences the opportunity to enjoy the natural features of the site. The open space shall be configured to be integrated with the individual units and maximize the proximity of each housing unit to natural open space. 
(g)	Deed restrictions shall limit occupancy of units to senior citizens by requiring that each unit be occupied by at least one person over 55 years of age. Documents shall be presented that bind all successors and future owners in fee title to commitments made as a part of the initial special land use approval. This provision shall not prohibit a transfer of ownership or control, provided notice of such transfer is provided to the township and the land uses continue as approved. Allowances may be made in the deed restrictions for a limited variance provision, not to exceed ten percent of the units to allow for the continued occupancy by an under 55-year-old spouse where the over 55-year-old spouse becomes deceased. 
An annual report of all leases and occupants shall be provided to the township community and economic development department to ensure continued compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 99-202, 3-16-99; Ord. No. 2008-380, 10-7-08)
 
ARTICLE XXI. GENERAL PROVISIONS
 
 
Sec. 2100. Conflicting regulations:
Whenever any provision of this ordinance imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, then the provisions of this ordinance shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other law or ordinance impose more stringent requirements than are imposed or required by this ordinance, then the provisions of such ordinance shall govern. 
 
Sec. 2101. Scope:
No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected, constructed or altered and maintained, and no new use or change shall be made or maintained of any building, structure or land, or part thereof, except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
 
Sec. 2102. Reserved.
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2001-273, adopted Aug. 21, 2001, repealed § 2102 which pertained to nonconforming lots, nonconforming uses of land, nonconforming structures, and nonconforming uses of structures and premises, and derived from Ord. No. 74, adopted May 17, 1994, and Ord. No. 98-187, adopted Apr. 7, 1998. 
 
Sec. 2103. Accessory buildings and accessory uses:
Accessory buildings and uses, except as otherwise permitted in this ordinance shall be subject to the following regulations: 
1.	Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a main building, it shall be subject to, and must conform to, all regulations of this ordinance, applicable to main buildings. 
2.	A building or structure accessory to a residential building shall not be erected in any yard except a rear yard unless otherwise provided for herein. 
3.	An accessory building shall not occupy not more than 25 percent of a required rear yard, plus 40 percent of any nonrequired rear yard provided that in no instance shall the accessory building exceed the ground floor area of the main building. 
4.	No detached accessory building shall be located closer than ten feet to any main building nor shall it be located closer than five feet to any side or rear lot line. A structure built of noncombustible product may be located closer than ten feet to the main building at the discretion of the building official. 
In those instances where the rear lot line is coterminous with an alley right-of-way, the accessory building shall not be closer than one foot to such rear lot line. In no instance shall an accessory building be located within a dedicated easement right-of-way. 
5.	Detached accessory building in all one-family residential, multiple-family residential, office, B-1 and P-1 districts shall not exceed one story or 14 feet in height unless otherwise provided for herein. 
6.	When an accessory building is located on a corner lot, the side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot to its rear, said building shall not project beyond the front yard setback required on the lot in rear of such corner lot. In no instance shall an accessory building be located nearer than ten feet to a street right-of-way line. 
7.	One recreational vehicle owned by residents of the township and stored on their individual lots shall be stored only within the confines of the rear yard and shall further respect the requirements of this section applicable to accessory buildings, insofar as distances from principal structures, lot lines and easements are concerned. All recreational equipment parked or stored shall not be connected to sanitary facilities and shall not be occupied. In those instances where the rear yard is not accessible by means of a driveway or alley or has insufficient side yard clearance for the passage of a recreational vehicle, the building inspector may allow the parking or storage of such recreational vehicle in the side or front yard. In those instances where a recreational vehicle is to be parked or stored in a front yard, only the driveway portion of such yard shall be utilized and in no instance shall such recreational vehicle be parked or stored closer than ten feet to the front property line. 
8.	Accessory buildings on farms shall be excluded from the requirements of this section, provided such buildings are clearly an accessory use to farming activity being conducted on the site, provided further that all other requirements of this ordinance are complied with. 
9.	On lots of one and one-half acres or more in area located in areas zoned for residential use and having a frontage of not less than 150 feet, pole barns may be constructed as an accessory use provided the following conditions are met: 
a.	Setbacks from side or rear lot lines shall not be less than ten feet. 
b.	The height of such building shall not be more than 20 feet. 
c.	The accessory building shall only be erected in a rear yard and may exceed the ground floor area of the main building but shall not exceed other lot area coverage requirements of this ordinance. 
d.	All building and construction codes of the township shall be complied with. 
e.	Any such lot shall not be located in a platted subdivision. 
10.	A resident of a dwelling unit may have not more than one motorized vehicle for sale on the site of such dwelling unit at any time and in no instance shall vacant residential lots or parcels be utilized for the sale of vehicles. A resident may repair vehicles of the resident on the property of the resident's dwelling unit; however, in no instance shall a resident repair the vehicle of other than a resident of the dwelling unit on said property. In no instance shall vehicles for sale be displayed in a front yard other than on the driveway portion of such yard. The sale of vehicles from a residential property shall not exceed two vehicles in any one year. 
11.	Freestanding solar panels shall be considered an accessory building and shall be subject to the requirements for such, together with all other applicable building codes and ordinances. 
12.	On-site use wind energy system may be located within a rear yard when the following conditions are adhered to: 
a.	Height: The highest point of any portion of a tower and/or generator shall not exceed 65 feet in height above the average grade of the parcel. 
b.	Property setback: The distance between a tower and the owner's property line shall be at least one and one-half times the height of the tower including the top of the blade in its vertical position. No part of the wind energy system structure, including guy wires may be located within ten feet of a property line. 
c.	Sound pressure level: On-site wind energy systems shall not exceed 55 dB(A) at the property line closest to the wind energy system. This sound pressure level may be exceeded during short-term events such as utility outages and/or severe wind storms. If the ambient sound pressure level exceeds 55dB(A), the stand shall be ambient dB(A) plus five dB(A). 
d.	Construction codes, towers and interconnection standards: On-site use wind energy systems including towers shall comply with all applicable state construction and electrical codes and local building permit requirements. On-site use wind energy systems including towers shall comply with Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) requirements, the Michigan Airport Zoning Act (Public Act 23, 1950, MCL 259.431 et seq.) the Michigan Tall Structures Act (Public Act 259 of 1959, MCL 259.481 et seq.), and local jurisdiction airport overlay zone regulations. An interconnected on-site use wind energy system shall comply with Michigan Public Service Commission and Federal Energy Regulatory Commission standards. Off-grid systems are exempt from this requirement. 
e.	Safety: An on-site use wind energy system shall have an automatic braking, governing or feathering system to prevent uncontrolled rotation or over speeding. All wind towers shall have lightning protection. If a tower is supported by guy wires, the wires shall be clearly visible to a height of at least six feet above the guy wire anchors. The minimum vertical blade tip clearance from grade shall be 20 feet for a wind energy system employing a horizontal axis rotor. 
13.	In all office, service and business districts, rooftop equipment and apparatus shall be screened from ground level by being housed in a penthouse or structure constructed of the same type of building materials used in the principal structure, or by building design. 
14.	Private pools shall be permitted as an accessory use within the rear yard only, provided they meet the following requirements: 
a.	There shall be a minimum distance of not less than ten feet between the adjoining property line, or alley right-of-way, and the outside of the pool wall. Side yard setbacks shall apply to side yards if greater than ten feet. 
b.	There shall be a distance of not less than four feet between the outside pool wall and any building located on the same lot. 
c.	No swimming pool shall be located less than 35 feet from any front lot line. 
d.	No swimming pool shall be located closer than one foot from any recorded easement. 
e.	For the protection of the general public, all yards containing swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence not less than four feet in height. The gates shall be of a self-closing and latching type, with the latch on the inside of the gate not readily available for children to open. Gates shall be capable of being securely locked when the pool is not in use for extended periods. Provided, however, that if the entire premises of the residence is enclosed, then this provision may be waived by the building inspector upon inspection and approval. 
f.	All electrical installations or wiring in connection with swimming pools shall conform to the provision of the National Electrical Code. If service drop conductors of (or) other utility wires cross under or over a proposed pool area, the applicant shall make satisfactory arrangements with the utility involved for the relocation thereof before a permit shall be issued for the construction of a swimming pool. No portion of a swimming pool or associated structure shall be permitted to encroach upon any easement or right-of-way which has been granted for public utility use. 
(Ord. No. 96-144, 3-5-96; Ord. No. 98-180, 2-17-98; Ord. No. 99-224, § VI, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 2001-266, § 2, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 2002-306, 12-17-02; Ord. No. 2010-402, § 2, 3-16-10; Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 22, 2-20-18)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2001-266, § 2, adopted May 15, 2001, repealed subsections 2103.11 and 2103.12, relating to satellite dish antennas and wireless transmission antenna and towers. The following subsections have been renumbered accordingly. 
 
Sec. 2104. Parking requirements:
1.	General. There shall be provided in all districts, at the time of erection or enlargement of any main building or structure, automobile off-street parking space, with adequate access to all spaces. The number of off-street parking spaces in conjunction with all land or building uses shall be provided, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as hereinafter prescribed. 
a.	Off-street parking existing at the effective date of this ordinance, in connection with the operation of an existing building or use, shall not be reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a similar new building or new use. 
b.	Any area once designated as required off-street parking shall not be changed to any other use unless and until equal facilities are provided elsewhere. 

2.	Minimum number of spaces required. The minimum number of off-street parking spaces by type of use shall be determined in accordance with the following schedule: 
Use 	Number of minimum parking spaces per unit of measure 
a.	Residential
	(1) 	Residential, one-family and two-family 	Two for each dwelling unit. 
	(2) 	Residential, multiple-family 	Two for each dwelling unit. 
	(3) 	Residential, multiple-family high-rise (over four stories) 	One and three-quarters for each one dwelling, or one and one-half for each one dwelling unit provided that one-quarter space per unit is indicated as potential, future parking, to be initially developed as landscaped open space. The site plan shall show how the parking lot could be expanded to include the one-quarter space per dwelling unit if ever found necessary. 
	(4) 	Housing for the elderly 	One for each two units and one for each employee. Should units revert to general occupancy, then two spaces per unit shall be provided. 
	(5) 	Mobile home park 	Two for each mobile home site and one for each employee of the mobile home park. 
	(6) 	Bed and breakfast dwellings 	Two for the owner and or operator and one for each leasable room. 
b.	Institutional
	(1) 	Places of worship 	One for each three seats or six feet of pews in the main unit of worship 
	(2) 	Hospitals 	Two for each one bed. 
	(3) 	Convalescent homes and nursing homes 	One for each two employees plus one for each four persons in residence. 
	(4) 	Elementary and junior high schools 	One for each one teacher, employee, or administrator in addition to the requirements for auditorium or stadium. 
	(5) 	Senior high schools 	One for each one teacher, employee, or administrator, and one for each ten students, in addition to the requirements of the auditorium or stadium, whichever seats more. 
	(6) 	Private clubs, or lodge halls 	One for each three persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county or state fire, building or health codes. 
	(7) 	Fraternity or sorority 	One for each five permitted active members, or one for each two beds, whichever is greater. 
	(8) 	Library, museum or post office 	One for each 150 square feet of usable floor area. 
	(9) 	Child and adult care facilities 
	(a) 	Family day care homes for up to six adults 	Two for each unit plus one for each caregiver. 
	(b) 	Group day care home for up to 12 adults 	Two for each dwelling unit plus one for each caregiver. 
	(c) 	Group day care home for children 	Two for each dwelling unit plus one for each caregiver. 
	(d) 	Dependent day care center for children 	One for each caregiver. 
	(e) 	Dependent day care center for adults 	Two, plus one for each 20 adults in the facility. 
c.	Offices
	(1) 	Banks 	One for each 200 square feet of usable floor space, plus three for each ATM. Drive-up windows shall be provided four stacking spaces for the first window, plus three spaces for each additional window. 
	(2) 	Business offices or professional offices except medical offices 	One for each 250 square feet of usable floor space. 
	(3) 	Professional offices of doctors, dentists or similar professions 	One for each 200 square feet of usable floor area. 
d.	Retail Uses 
	(1) 	Retail stores except as otherwise specified herein 	One for each 250 square feet of usable floor space. 
	(2) 	Shopping centers with multiple tenants 	One for each 250 square feet of usable retail floor area for the first 50,000 square feet. One for each 275 square feet for the next 50,000 to 450,000 square feet of usable retail floor area. One for each 300 square feet for that area in excess of 450,000 square feet of usable retail floor area. Non-retail uses such as restaurants, bars and theaters shall be calculated separately based upon their respective requirements. 
	(3) 	Furniture and appliance, household equipment, repair shops, showroom of a plumber, decorator, electrician, or similar trade, shoe repair, and other similar uses 	One for each 800 square feet of usable floor area. (For that floor area used in processing, one additional space shall be provided for each two persons employed therein.) 
	(4) 	Gasoline service stations (full service) 	Two for each lubrication stall, rack or pit; and one for each service vehicle used by the service station, in addition to space provided at each fuel pump dispenser. Gasoline service stations providing carwash facilities, sale of food, beverages and other products shall provide additional off-street parking spaces based on the requirements for such uses. 
	(5) 	Gasoline filling stations (self-service) 	One for each employee plus one for each 100 square feet of floor area used for cashier, office or retail sale of food, beverages and other products in addition to space provided at each fuel pump dispenser. In no instance shall such facility provide fewer than three spaces for cashier's and office use. Gasoline service stations providing carwash facilities shall provide additional off-street parking spaces based upon the requirements for such uses. 
	(6) 	Home improvement centers 	One per 300 square feet of useable floor area. 
	(7) 	Motor vehicle sales and service establishments 	One for each 400 square feet of usable floor area of sales room and one for each one auto service stall in the service room. 
	(8) 	Outdoor commercial display and sales 	One for each 500 square feet of land area being used for display, plus one for each employee 
e.	Restaurants/food and beverage
	(1) 	Bars, lounges, taverns, nightclubs (majority of sales consist of alcoholic beverages) 	One per each 70 square feet of useable floor area or one per two seats, whichever is greater 
	(2) 	Drive-in Restaurant 	One for each employee and one for each 25 square feet of usable floor area. 
	(3) 	Drive-through Restaurant 	One for each employee, one for each 75 square feet of dining area and five stack-up spaces for each drive-through window or station. 
	(4) 	Carry-out Restaurant (with no eating on premises) 	Six per service or counter station, plus one for each employee. 
	(5) 	Open front Restaurants such as, but not limited to: dairy bars and fruit, and vegetable stands 	Ten plus one per employee. 
	(6) 	Standard sit-down restaurants without liquor license 	One for each 100 square feet of usable floor area or one for each three persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county or state fire, building or health codes, whichever is the greater. 
	(7) 	Standard sit-down restaurants with liquor license 	One for each 75 square feet of usable floor area or one for each two persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county or state fire, building or health codes, whichever is the greater. 
			
d.	Service Uses 
	(1) 	Automobile repair 	Two for each service stall plus one for each employee. 
	(2) 	Automobile quick oil change 	Two stacking spaces for each service stall, rack or pit plus one for each employee. 
	(3) 	Auto wash 	One for each one employee. In addition, stacking spaces equal in number to five times the maximum capacity of the auto wash. Maximum capacity of the auto wash shall mean the greatest number of automobiles possible undergoing some phase of washing at the same time, which shall be determined by dividing the length in feet of each wash line by 24. 
	(4) 	Auto wash (self service or coin operated) 	Two stacking spaces for each washing stall in addition to the stall itself plus one for each drying space. 
	(5) 	Beauty parlor or barbershop 	Two for each beauty or barber chair plus one for each employee. 
	(6) 	Dry Cleaners 	One (1) per five hundred (500) square feet of useable floor area 
	(7) 	Laundromats and coin-operated dry cleaners 	One for each two washing and/or dry-cleaning machines. 
	(8) 	Mortuary establishments 	One for each 50 square feet of usable floor area. 
	(9) 	Motel, hotel or other commercial lodging establishments 	One for each one occupancy unit plus one for each employee plus spaces as required for accessory uses such as a bar, restaurant, meeting rooms, etc. 
	(10) 	Adult entertainment facility 
	(a) 	Adult book/video store 	One for each 75 square feet of usable floor space. 
	(b) 	Adult motion picture theater 	One for each two seats plus one for each theater employee. 
	(c) 	Adult mini-motion picture theater 	One for each one seat or viewing station plus one for each employee. 
	(d) 	Cabaret 	One for each 75 square feet of usable floor space. 
	(11) 	Massage establishment 	One for each massage table or station, plus one for each 20 square feet of waiting room, plus one for each employee. 
	(12) 	Self-storage mini-warehouse 	One for each 20 storage units plus two for manager's residence 
	(13) 	Video Rental Establishments 	One per 150 square feet of useable floor area. 
g.	Recreation Uses
	(1) 	Athletic clubs, exercise establishments, health studios, sauna baths, martial art schools and other similar uses 	One for each three persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county or state fire, building or health codes plus one per employee. In those instances where memberships are provided for, not less than one per each five memberships shall be provided plus one per employee or one for each two clothing lockers plus one per employee whichever is the larger. 
	(2) 	Amusement arcade 	One for each one game table and one for each amusement device. 
	(3) 	Bowling alleys 	Five for each one bowling lane plus spaces required for accessory uses such as a bar or restaurant. 
	(4) 	Commercial outdoor recreation facilities (such as archery ranges, batting cages, etc.) 	Two for each batting cage, archery range or similar activity. 
	(5) 	Dancehalls, pool or billiard parlors, roller or skating rinks, exhibition halls, and assembly halls without fixed seats 	One for each three persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county or state fire, building or health codes or one for each 200 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater. 
	(6) 	Golf courses, open to the general public, except miniature or "par-three" courses 	Six for each one golf hole and one for each one employee, plus spaces required for each accessory use such as a restaurant or bar. 
	(7) 	Golf driving range 	Two for each driving tee plus three spaces for employees. 
	(8) 	Ice skating or roller rink 	One for each seat or six feet of benches, or one for each 150 square feet of skating area, whichever is the greater. 
	(9) 	Miniature or "par-three" golf courses 	Two for each one hole plus one for each one employee. 
	(10) 	Private golf clubs, swimming pool clubs, tennis clubs or other similar uses 	One for each two member families or individuals plus spaces required for each accessory use such as a restaurant or bar. 
	(11) 	Stadium, sports arena or similar place of outdoor assembly 	One for each four seats or eight feet of benches. 
	(12) 	Tennis club, paddle-ball club, racquetball club and othersimilar uses 	Six per court, plus such additional spaces as may be required herein for affiliated uses such as restaurants, plus one per employee. 
	(13) 	Theaters and auditoriums 	One for each three seats plus one for each two employees. 
h.	Industrial
	(1) 	Industrial or research establishments and related accessory offices 	Five plus one for every one and a half employees in the largest working shift or one for each 500 square feet of usable floor area in those instances where shift size is not known. Space on the site shall also be provided for all construction workers during periods of plant construction. 
	(2) 	Telephone exchange buildings 	One for every one employee on the largest working shift. 
	(3) 	Warehouses and wholesale establishments and related accessory offices 	Five plus one for every one employee in the largest working shift, or five plus one for every 1,700 square feet of usable floor space, whichever is the greater. 

3.	Number of Spaces.
a.	For those uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be in accord with a use which the planning commission considers is similar in type. 
b.	For the purpose of computing the number of parking spaces required, the definition of "useable floor area" in article II, "Definitions," sec. 201 shall govern. 
c.	When units or measurements determining the number of required parking spaces result in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half shall be disregarded and fractions over one-half shall require one parking space. 
d.	Two or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required off-street parking in which case the required number of parking spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the several individual uses computed separately, except as provided below. 
e.	The planning commission may reduce the parking requirements based upon a finding that there will be a lower demand for parking due to one or more of the following: 
(1)	Shared parking by multiple uses where there will be a high proportion of multipurpose visits or uses have peak parking demands during differing times of the day or days of the week. Pedestrian connections shall be maintained between the uses. Where uses are on separate lots, the lots shall be adjacent, pedestrian, and vehicular connections shall be maintained between the lots and shared parking agreements shall be filed with the county register of deeds and the township. 
(2)	Expectation of walk-in trade due to sidewalk connections to adjacent residential neighborhoods or employment centers. The site design shall incorporate pedestrian connections to the site and on-site pedestrian circulation providing safe and convenient access to the building entrance. 
(3)	Availability of other forms of travel such as transit. The planning commission may require the site design incorporate transit stops, pedestrian connections to nearby transit stops or bicycle parking facilities. 
f.	Where the conditions of subsection e. above are not met, but an applicant demonstrates that the parking requirements for a proposed use would be excessive, the planning commission may defer some of the parking, provided the site plan designates portions of the site for future construction of the required parking spaces. Areas reserved for future parking shall be maintained in a landscaped appearance and not used for building area, storage, or other accessory use. The deferred parking shall be required to meet ordinance requirements if constructed and may not occupy required greenbelts. Construction of the deferred parking area to add parking spaces may be initiated by the owner or required by the community and economic development director, based on parking needs or observation, and shall require administrative approval of an amended site plan. 
g.	In order to minimize excessive areas of pavement which reduces aesthetic standards and contribute to high rates of storm water runoff, exceeding the minimum parking space requirements by more than 20 percent shall only be allowed with approval by the Planning Commission. In granting such additional space, the Planning Commission shall determine that such parking will be required, based on documented evidence, to accommodate the use on a typical day. 
4.	Accessible Parking. Accessible parking shall comply with the provisions of the American's With Disabilities Act (ADA). The number and layout of spaces required shall comply with ADA accessibility guidelines including the following: 
Accessible Parking Spaces* 
(Required Minimum) 	AccessibleSpaces 
1 	to 	25 	1 
26 	to 	50 	2 
51 	to 	75 	3 
76 	to 	100 	4 
101 	to 	150 	5 
151 	to 	200 	6 
201	to 	300 	7 
301	to 	400 	8 
401	to 	500 	9 
501	to 	1,000 	2** 
1,001 	and 	over 	20*** 
*Accessible spaces are required to be eight feet zero inches wide, with an adjacent access aisle five feet zero inches wide. One in every eight accessible spaces shall have an access aisle eight feet eight inches wide (rather than five feet) and shall be signed "van accessible." 
**Percent of total 
***Plus one space for each 100 over 1,000 

5.	Parking location.
a.	Off-street parking spaces may be located within a non-required side or rear yard and within the rear yard setback unless otherwise provided in this ordinance. Off-street parking shall not be permitted within a front yard or a side yard setback, except in the office, business and industrial districts (OS-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, IRO, I-1, I-2, I-3, I-C). In the office, business and industrial districts, off-street parking may be permitted in the required front yard provided a minimum unobstructed and landscaped setback of 20 feet is provided. The setback is measured from the nearest point of the off-street parking area, exclusive of access driveways, and the nearest right-of-way line as indicated on the thoroughfare plan of the master plan of future land use. 
b.	Off-street parking shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from all lot lines in all zoning districts. 
c.	Off-street parking for other than residential use shall be either on the same lot or within 300 feet of the building it is intended to serve, measured from the nearest point of the building to the nearest point of the off-street parking lot. Ownership shall be shown of all lots or parcels intended for use as parking by the applicant. 
d.	Required residential off-street parking spaces shall consist of a parking strip, parking bay, driveway, garage, or combination thereof, and shall be located on the premises they are intended to serve, and subject to the provisions of section 2103, accessory buildings and accessory uses, of this article. Front yard parking on other than a driveway or in an established apron between a curb and property line shall be prohibited. 
6.	Off-street parking space layout, and construction. Whenever the off-street parking requirements in this section require the building of an off-street parking facility, or where P-1 vehicular parking districts are provided, such off-street parking lots shall be laid out, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards and regulations: 
a.	No parking lot shall be constructed unless and until a permit therefore is issued by the building official. Applications for a permit shall be submitted to the township in such form as may be determined by the building official and shall be accompanied with two sets of plans for the development and construction of the parking lot showing the provisions of this section will be fully complied with. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 2115 of this article, in those instances where an existing building use has provided adequate parking under this ordinance and a change of use is proposed wherein parking requirements for such proposed new use are equal to or lesser than those available on the site, site plan review by the planning commission shall not be required. Such parking lot shall receive the review of the building official. 

b.	All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of maneuvering lanes. Backing directly onto a street shall be prohibited. Parking lots shall meet the following dimensional requirements: 
Parking 
pattern 	Maneuvering lane width 	Parking space width 	Parking space length 	Total width of one tier of parking spaces plus maneuvering lane 	Total width of two tiers of spaces plus maneuvering lane 
0° (parallel parking) 	12 ft. 	8 ft. 6 in. 	24 ft. 	20 ft. 	28 ft. 
30° to 53° 	14 ft. 	9 ft. 	18 ft. 	30 ft. 	50 ft. 
54° to 74° 	17 ft. 	9 ft. 	18 ft. 	34 ft. 6 in. 	56 ft. 
75° to 90° 	24 ft. 	9 ft. 	18 ft. 	42 ft. 	60 ft. 


c.	All maneuvering lane widths shall permit one-way traffic movement, except that the 90 pattern may permit two-way movement. 
d.	Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot by means of clearly limited and defined drives shall be provided for all vehicles. Ingress and egress to a parking lot lying in an area zoned for other than single-family residential use shall not be across land zoned for single-family residential use. 
e.	Each entrance and exit to and from any off-street parking lot located in an area zoned for other than single-family residential use shall be at least 25 feet distant from adjacent property located in any single-family residential district. 
f.	The entire parking area, including parking spaces and maneuvering lanes, required under this section shall be provided with asphalt or concrete surfacing in accordance with specifications approved by the township engineer. The parking area shall be surfaced prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or, in case of seasonal difficulties, a guarantee acceptable to the township. In those instances where a parking area is nonconforming with respect to paving, the expansion of the use of land or structure shall require the paving of such parking area in conformity with this section. The planning commission may approve alternative paving materials, such as permeable/grass pavers, for overflow, seasonal or low usage parking, based upon the review and recommendation of the township engineer. 
g.	Off-street parking areas shall be drained so as to dispose of all surface water accumulated in the parking area in such a way as to preclude drainage of water onto adjacent property or toward buildings. 
h.	Off-street parking shall be provided with concrete curbs, where necessary to protect landscaped areas, sidewalks, buildings, or adjacent property from vehicles that might otherwise extend beyond the edge of the parking lot. Sidewalks abutting parking spaces shall be seven feet wide. Plantings shall be set back sufficient distance from curbs to allow for bumper overhang. 
i.	To facilitate movement and to help maintain an orderly parking arrangement, all parking spaces shall be clearly striped with paint. Except for parallel parking spaces, each stall shall be delineated with four-inch wide double yellow lines 24 inches apart. The width of the parking stall may be computed from the centers of the double striping. 
7.	Landscaping and screening.
a.	The parking area shall be so designed as to provide a landscape plan in accord with section 2108 of this article. 
b.	When a front yard setback is required, all land between said wall and the front property line or street right-of-way line shall be kept free from refuse and debris and shall be landscaped with deciduous shrubs, evergreen material and ornamental trees. The ground area shall be planted and kept in lawn. All such landscaping and planting shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. 
c.	Where an off-street parking area is located within a yard that adjoins a residential zoning district, the off-street parking area shall be provided with a continuous obscuring wall on all sides facing the residential district. 
(1)	The wall shall be constructed of brick and be not less than four feet six inches in height measured from the surface of the parking area. The planning commission may approve alternative masonry materials that are compatible with the architecture of the building or wood privacy fencing where provisions are made to protect the fence from vehicle damage. 
(2)	In all cases where a wall extends to an alley which is a means of ingress and egress to an off-street parking area, it shall be permissible to end the wall not more than ten feet from such alley line in order to permit a wider means of access to the parking area. 
(3)	The planning commission may modify the screening wall requirements where, in unusual circumstances, no good purpose would be served by compliance with the requirements of this section or where the planning commission determines that landscape screening would be more appropriate. 
d.	Where an off-street parking area is located within a front yard, a landscape berm or continuous hedge row shall be provided within the greenbelt between parking area and the road right of way. 
8.	Lighting. All lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be so installed as to be confined within and directed onto the parking area only and meet the requirements of section 2110. 
9.	Maintenance and storage.
a.	All parking areas shall be maintained in a safe condition by the property owner free of snow and ice. The parking lot design shall provide a location for snow storage that does not encroach into required parking spaces. 
b.	The storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale, trucks, refuse the repair of vehicles is prohibited. The use of semi-trailers for storage purposes on the premises for five or more consecutive days is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2004-343, 9-21-04; Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 22, 2-20-18; Ord. No. 2020-491 , § 4, 7-21-20)
 
Sec. 2105. Reserved.
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2004-343, adopted Sept. 21, 2004, repealed § 2105 in its entirety. Former § 21-5 pertained to off-street parking space layout, standards, construction and maintenance and derived from Ord. No. 74, adopted May 17, 1994 and effective on May 18, 1994. 
 
Sec. 2106. Off-street loading and unloading:
On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof, involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles or materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot, adequate space for standing, loading, and unloading in order to avoid undue interference with public use of dedicated rights-of-way. Such space shall be provided as follows: 
1.	All spaces shall be provided in the rear yard in the ratio of at least ten square feet per front foot of building and shall be computed separately from the off-street parking requirements. Where an alley exists or is provided at the rear of the buildings, the rear building setback and loading requirements may be computed from the center of said alley. In OS districts off-street loading may take place in undesignated places in parking lots provided such loading is of a short term nature. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 22, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 2107. Trash and recycling receptacles:
A space for the location of a separate trash and recycling receptacle, paved and with minimum dimensions of 16 feet wide and 12 feet deep, shall be provided for each zoning lot in the nonresidential districts (OS-1, B-1 through B-6, FS, IRO, I-1 through I-3, I-C, RM-1 through RM-5 and nonresidential uses proposed within a PD district) regardless of whether or not the use of a trash and recycling receptacle is intended, trash and recycling receptacles are permitted provided that: 
1.	The trash and recycling receptacles are located in a rear yard or interior side yard and are clearly accessible to servicing vehicles. 
2.	Trash and recycling receptacles shall be screened from view on all sided. Such screening shall consist of walls constructed of a brick or finished concrete materials or earth mound either of which are less than six feet in height or at least one foot above the height of the enclosed trash and recycling receptacles whichever is greater. Gates providing access shall also provide screening and may consist of an approved treated wood material. When possible, trash and recycling receptacles screening should be constructed of the same material type as the main building facade. 
3.	In those districts mentioned above, trash and recycling receptacles and their screening enclosures shall be located as far as practical from any adjoining residential district or use and shall in no instance be located within 20 feet of any single-family residential property line or district. 
4.	The location of trash and recycling receptacles shall be indicated on site plans and the location and screening shall be subject to the approval of the community and economic development director, or of the planning commission when the planning commission reviews the site plan. 
( Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 22, 2-20-18)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 22, adopted Feb. 20, 2018, repealed § 2107 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former § 2107 pertained to uses not otherwise included within a specific use district, and derived from Ord. No. 95-137, adopted Oct. 17, 1995; Ord. No. 2000-245, § II, adopted March 21, 2000; Ord. No. 2001-266, § 3, adopted May 15, 2001. 
 
Sec. 2108. Landscape requirements.
A landscape plan shall be submitted for any proposed use or building which requires the submittal of a site plan or when otherwise required by this ordinance. In cases where a site plan is submitted for alterations or additions to an existing building, all of the standards set forth herein shall be met. Landscape plans shall be approved by the planning commission prior to the issuance of a building permit and shall be prepared in accordance with the following: 
1.	Planting plan specifications.
a.	Minimum scale of one inch = 50 feet. 
b.	Existing and proposed contours with contour interval not to exceed two feet. 
c.	The planting plan shall indicate, to scale, the location, spacing and starting size for all proposed landscape material within the required greenbelt or landscaped area. 
d.	Typical straight cross section including slope, height and width of berms and type of ground cover or height and type of construction for all proposed walls, including footings. 
e.	Significant construction details to resolve specific site conditions, e.g. tree wells to preserve existing trees, culverts to maintain natural drainage patterns. 
f.	Planting and staking details in either text or drawing form to insure proper installation and establishment of proposed plant materials. 
g.	Planting plans shall be prepared by a registered landscape architect. 
2.	Landscaping design standards.
a.	General landscaping. Except for those areas occupied by buildings, loading areas, parking areas, patios and walkways, all areas of a site shall remain in lawn area. Unless specified otherwise in this appendix, within such areas the following minimum plant material shall be provided: 
i.	A mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees shall be planted at the rate of one tree for each 1,000 square feet or fraction thereof of lawn area, plus 
ii.	One shrub for every 500 square feet or fraction thereof of lawn area. 
b.	Street yard landscaping. Whenever, in this ordinance, a landscaped setback is required between a public or private street and a parking or building setback, all such yards shall be landscaped in accordance with the following: 
i.	A minimum of one large deciduous tree shall be planted for each 40 lineal feet of frontage, or portion thereof, plus 
ii.	A minimum of one ornamental tree shall be planted for each 100 lineal feet of frontage or portion thereof, plus 
iii.	A minimum of one shrub shall be planted for each ten lineal feet of frontage, or portion thereof. 
iv.	In the B-5 and B-6 district, sites are exempt from the ornamental tree planting requirement. In addition, one shrub shall be planted for each 20 feet of frontage, or portion thereof. 
c.	Landscape buffer. A landscape buffer may be provided as a screening device at the discretion of the petitioner or as required by the planning commission. Where allowed or required, landscape buffers shall conform to the following standards: 
i.	A landscape buffer may be interrupted only to provide for roads or driveways for vehicular access. 
ii.	For the purpose of determining required plant material, landscape area length shall be measured along the exterior periphery of the landscape buffer area. Within the landscape buffer, plant material shall be provided as follows: 
a)	A minimum of one evergreen tree per 25 lineal feet or fraction thereof, plus 
b)	A minimum of one deciduous tree per 50 lineal feet or fraction thereof, plus 
c)	A minimum of one shrub per ten lineal feet or fraction thereof. 
iii.	Landscape buffers shall have a minimum width of not less than 20 feet. 
iv.	Landscape buffers shall be located on the property line, unless otherwise provided for in this ordinance or by the planning commission. 
v.	In the B-4, B-5 and B-6 districts, a landscape buffer may be required by the planning commission along any property line that abuts a residential district or existing residential use. This buffer shall consist of a solid fence or decorative wall up to six feet in height to be erected parallel to any common lot line, with a ten-foot wide planting strip along the base of the wall or fence that consists of one evergreen tree and one canopy tree per 30 lineal feet along the property line. 
d.	Landscaped berms.
i.	Berms shall be at least three feet above the grade elevation, and shall be constructed with slopes no steeper than one foot vertical for each three feet horizontal with at least a two foot flat area on the top. For the purposes of this provision, grade elevation shall be the ground elevation at the property line adjacent to the proposed berm. The height of the berm shall be measured from the surface of the parking area or land on the nonresidential side of the berm. 
ii.	The berm area shall be planted with grass or other suitable ground cover to ensure that it withstands wind and weather and retains its height and shape. 
iii.	Within a landscape berm, plant material shall be provided as follows: 
a)	A minimum of one evergreen tree per 50 lineal feet or fraction thereof, plus 
b)	A minimum of one deciduous tree per 100 lineal feet or fraction thereof, plus 
c)	A minimum of one shrub per 20 lineal feet or fraction thereof. 
 
BERM ILLUSTRATIONS

e.	Detention/retention pond landscaping.
f.	Greenbelt buffer for residential developments. When a subdivision, site condominium, cluster housing or multiple family development borders a major thoroughfare, a landscaped greenbelt shall be provided directly adjacent, and parallel to, the future right-of-way of said thoroughfare for the entire length of the subdivision. The applicant has the option of either constructing a landscaped earth berm or a decorative wall with landscaping as described below. The planting of materials shall be done in a manner so as to provide adequate screening of the homes from the major thoroughfare within five years of construction. 
 
 
g.	Parking lot landscaping.
h.	Storefront pedestrian landscaping. Between any building and any parking lot or circulation aisles, the following standards shall apply: 
i.	Trash receptacle screening. See section 2107. 
3.	Materials standards and specifications. Except as otherwise specified in the general requirements for each zoning district, all plant and nonplant material shall be installed in accordance with the following standards: 
4.	Waivers. The planning commission may waive or modify any of the standards of this section in the following situations: 
(Amd. of 5-2-95; Ord. No. 98-183, 2-17-98; Ord. No. 2001-288, 12-18-01; Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 22, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 2109. Signs:
1.	Purpose, intent and definitions.
a.	These regulations establish rules and standards for the construction, location, maintenance and removal of all signs except those exempted from regulation by this ordinance. Directional, emergency, or traffic-related signs owned by the township, county, state or federal government agencies are not regulated by this section. The execution of these regulations recognizes that the purpose of this chapter is to protect the interest of public health, safety and welfare and to ensure the maintenance of an attractive physical environment while satisfying the needs of sign users for adequate identification and communication. In order that such purposes can be achieved, the following objectives shall be applied for this ordinance and any future additions, deletions and amendments: 
(1)	General. Ensure that signs are located, designed, constructed, installed and maintained in a way that protects life, health, morals, property and the public welfare. 
(2)	Public safety. Protect public safety by prohibiting signs that: 
i.	Are structurally unsafe or poorly maintained; 
ii.	Cause unsafe traffic conditions because they unreasonably distract motorists, have similarities to official traffic signs or hinder vision; and 
iii.	Impede safe movement of pedestrians or safe ingress and egress from buildings or sites. 
(3)	Protect aesthetic quality of districts and neighborhoods. Prevent blight and protect aesthetic qualities by preventing visual clutter and protecting views. Prevent proliferation of signs in residential areas and eliminate abandoned signs and sign structures on unused properties. Avoid glare and light trespass through selection of proper fixture type(s) and location, lighting technology, and control of light levels. 
(4)	Free speech. Ensure that the constitutionally guaranteed right of free speech is protected and allow signs as a means of communication. 
(5)	Reduce conflict. Reduce conflict among signs and light and between public and private information systems. 
(6)	Business identification. Allow for adequate signage for business identification and other commercial speech, non-commercial speech, and dissemination of public information, including but not limited to, public safety information and notification as may be required by law. 
(7)	Foster economic development. Ensure that signs are located in a manner that does not cause visual clutter, blight, and distraction, but rather promotes identification and communication necessary for sustaining and expanding economic development in the city. 
b.	Sign definitions: The following definitions are related to signs: 
(1)	Sign: Any announcement, declaration, display, billboard, illustration and insignia when designed and placed so as to attract general public attention. Such shall be a single sign whenever the proximity, design, content or continuity reasonably suggest a single unit, regardless of any physical separation between parts. Signs shall include banners, bulbs, other lighting devices, streamers, pennants, balloons, propellers, flags or similar devices. 
For purposes of this ordinance, the following additional definitions shall apply: 
(a)	Abandoned sign: A sign that is accessory to or associated with a legal use that has been discontinued or terminated. 
(b)	Bench sign: A bench or chair or an attachment to a building which provides a bench, chair or seating device which has been painted, or in any other way has attached to it, a sign. 
(c)	Billboard: A nonaccessory sign, other than an off-premises directional sign, which does not pertain to the principal use of the premises on which it is located. 
(d)	Building-mounted sign: A display sign which is painted on, adjacent to or attached to a building wall, door, window or related architectural feature. Such signs would include, but are not limited to canopy, marquee, wall, window or temporary signs. 
(e)	Canopy sign: A sign which is painted on or attached to an awning or canopy. 
(f)	Damaged sign: A sign or supporting structure which is torn, damaged, defaced, destroyed or has otherwise been found to be in a damaged condition by the building official. 
(g)	Decorative display: A decorative, temporary display designed for the entertainment or cultural enrichment of the public and having no direct or indirect sales or advertising content. 
(h)	Entrance sign: Multiple-family residential, condominium, mobile home park and single family residential subdivisions with more than 20 dwelling units or lots may erect signs bearing the name of the development. Such signs shall contain no advertising or information other than the name of the development, status of occupancy, management organization and contact information. 
(i)	Erect: To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, affix or paint. 
(j)	Front face area: The area of the front wall, including doors and windows, of the principal building facing a public street and where the address or primary public entrance is located. Buildings on corner lots may have up to two front faces if each face satisfies the above criteria. If the building is devoted to two or more uses or businesses, the front face area for each use or business shall be determined by the building official based upon the proportionate share of the building occupied by each use or business. 
(k)	Ground sign: A display sign supported by one or more columns, uprights or braces in or on the ground surface. Such signs shall have a maximum of seven feet and minimum of three feet clearance above ground level. 
(l)	Illegal sign: A sign for which no valid permit was issued by the township at the time such sign was erected, or a sign which is not in compliance with the current zoning ordinance and does not meet the definition of a legal nonconforming sign. 
(m)	Legal nonconforming sign: A sign for which the township issued a permit at the time such sign was erected, but which is not in compliance with the current zoning ordinance. Such signs must be located outside of any existing right-of-way, away from any public or private easement and wholly upon the parcel to which it is associated. Such signs must have all necessary structural and decorative parts, including, but not limited to supports, sign box or enclosure and electrical equipment. The sign face or sign copy area must be intact and illuminated signs must be capable of immediate illumination. 
(n)	Marquee sign: A display sign attached to or hung from a marquee, canopy or other covered structure projecting from and supported by the building and extending beyond the building wall, building line or street lot line. Every marquee sign shall be thoroughly secured to the building by iron or metal anchors, bolts, supports, rods or braces. 
(o)	Nameplate: A wall sign denoting the name of the occupant in a residential dwelling unit or denoting only the name and profession of the occupants in a commercial, public or other institutional building. 
(p)	Noncombustible material: Any material which will not ignite at or below a temperature of 1,200 degrees Fahrenheit and will not continue to burn or glow at that temperature. 
(q)	Off-premises directional sign: A sign which provides direction to a location within the township. 
(r)	Portable sign: A sign and sign structure which is not attached to a building and is capable of being moved within the zoning lot on which it is located or from one zoning lot to another. 
(s)	Roof sign: A display sign which is erected, constructed and maintained on or above the roof of the building. 
(t)	Sign area: The gross surface area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of a sign, and in no case passing through or between any adjacent elements of same. Such perimeter shall not include any structural or framing elements, lying outside the limits of such sign, and not forming an integral part of the display. For computing the area of any sign, the area shall be deemed to be the total of the combined area of the smallest rectangular figure which can encompass all letters and descriptive matter on the sign. 
(u)	Sign, accessory: A sign which pertains to the principal use of the premises. 
(v)	Sign copy: Portion of a sign which describes the business or service establishment, including, but not limited to, the name, type of, and nature of said establishment. 
(w)	Sign, nonaccessory: A sign which does not pertain to the principal use of the premises. 
(x)	Temporary sign: A display sign, banner, or other advertising device constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, plastic or other light temporary material, with or without a structural frame, or any other sign intended for a limited period of display, but not including decorative displays for holidays or public demonstration. 
i.	Construction: Signs advertising the lots and/or buildings erected in any subdivision or multiple-family development. Display signs for the construction or remodeling of nonresidential buildings, such as, but not limited to, churches and schools. Such signs shall be removed upon completion of construction or upon cessation of work for a period of six months. 
ii.	Garage sale: Garage sale signs may be used to advertise a garage sale and shall be promptly removed upon completion of the garage sale. 
iii.	Real estate: Signs advertising the rental, sale or lease of the property upon which they are located. 
iv.	Sale of produce: Such signs may be erected for the period of the local harvest season for the produce being sold. Written permission of the property owner on whose property such sign is located shall be submitted to the office of community standards. 
v.	Special events: Banners and pennants may be erected for special events, including but not limited to "open houses" for new homes or businesses. No banner shall be strung across any public right-of-way except as authorized by the township board and county road commission for special community events only. Banners found to be in a torn, damaged or unsafe condition shall be removed by the owner immediately. 
vi.	Political campaign signs: Signs announcing the candidacy of persons running for public office or issues to be voted upon at an election and other information pertinent to elections are permitted provided permission to locate such signs on private property has been obtained from the owner or occupant of the property on which such signs are located. 
(y)	Unsafe sign: A sign that is not properly secured, is in danger of falling or has otherwise been found to be unsafe by the building official. 
(z)	Wall sign: A display sign which is painted on, adjacent to or attached to a building wall, door, window or related architectural feature and projecting not more than 18 inches from the wall. 
(aa)	Window sign: A sign affixed to a window or so as to be observable from the opposite side of the window to which such sign is located or affixed. 
2.	General requirements for all signs:
a.	Construction: All signs shall be securely constructed and in conformance with applicable building and electrical codes and standards. Wood products shall be of wolmanized or equal treatment. A lightning grounding device shall be provided where required. All letters, figures, characters or representation in cutout or irregular form, shall be safely and securely built or attached to the sign structure. All signs of a greater area than 24 square feet shall have a surface or facing of noncombustible material. All signs shall be attached by means of metal anchors, bolts or expansion screws. In no case shall any sign be secured with wire, strips of wood or nails. 
b.	Accessory to principal use: All signs which direct attention to a business, entertainment, service or commodity must be accessory to the business, entertainment, service or commodity offered, conducted or sold on the premises on which the sign is located, except real estate signs, off-premises directional signs and non-accessory signs specifically allowed in specified districts. 
c.	Wind pressure and dead load requirements: Ground, projecting, wall and marquee signs shall be designed and constructed to withstand wind pressure and shall be constructed to receive dead loads as required in the township building code or other ordinances of the township. 
d.	Illumination: Internally and externally lighted, reflectorized, glowing and other forms of illumination shall be permitted on all signs. All illumination shall be concentrated on the area of the sign to prevent glare upon the street or adjacent property. No sign shall be illuminated by other than electrical means or devices. All illuminated signs must be in compliance with section 2110 and shall not be of a flashing or intermittent flashing type. 
e.	Signs not to constitute a traffic hazard: No sign shall be erected in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision or constitute a traffic hazard. No sign shall interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. No sign shall make use of the words "stop," "look," "danger" or other word, phrase or symbol in a manner that is confusing or misleading. At street intersections, no signs other than municipal traffic control signs shall be located within eight feet of the ground surface in the triangle formed by the property lines paralleling the streets and extending for a distance of 25 feet each way from the intersection of the right-of-way lines at the corner lot. 
f.	Face of sign shall be smooth: No nails, tacks or wires shall be permitted to protrude from the front of any sign. This shall not exclude, however, the use of block letters, electrical reflectors, or other devices which may extend over the top and in front of the advertising structure. 
g.	Obscene matter prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to display upon any sign or other advertising structure any obscene matter. 
h.	Public right-of-way: No sign shall be erected or placed within the public right-of-way. The owner of any sign which has been removed by the township from the right-of-way due it is in violation of this provision, shall pay to the township the sum of $25.00 before recovering the sign. If any sign is not claimed within 14 days, said sign shall be disposed of. 
i.	Sign setbacks: All permitted ground and-temporary signs shall be set back not less than 15 feet from all property lines and existing street right-of-way lines unless otherwise specified herein. 
j.	Glass in signs: Glass sheets used in any sign for which a permit is required, and in which wire mesh is not imbedded, shall not be less than three-sixteenth-inch thick and shall not exceed 100 square inches in area for any one piece. Provided, however, that pieces of glass not less than one-eighth-inch thick, covered with metal except for area cut in form letter, numerals, or figures may be used, but the area of such piece of glass shall not exceed 340 square inches. Glass in sheets shall not exceed 720 square inches in area. 
3.	Permitted accessory signs by use or type of sign:
a.	Residential uses:
Sign Type/Purpose 	Ground Entrance 	Wall Name Plate 
Sign permit required 	Yes 	No 
Maximum number of signs 	Footnote 1 	1 
Maximum sign face area (sq. ft.) 	24 	2 
Maximum number of sign faces per sign 	1 	1 
Maximum sign height 	6 	— 
Setback from property line/right-of-way (feet) 	10 	— 
Setback from structures (feet) 	50 	— 
May be illuminated (sec. 2110) 	No 	No 
Maximum length of time for display (days) 	— 	— 

Footnotes: 
(1) One sign per entrance from a collector road or thoroughfare. 
(2) One ground-mounted sign per side of lot with frontage on a public street and one building-mounted sign per side of building with a public entrance. 

b.	Non-residential building-mounted signs:
Sign Type 	Wall 	Canopy 	Marquee 	Window 
Sign permit required 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 	No 
Maximum sign face area (sq. ft.) 	Footnote(s) 1, 5 	Footnote 1 	Footnote 1 	Footnote 4 
Maximum number of sign faces per sign 	1 	— 	3 	2 
Maximum sign height 	Footnote 2 	Footnote 2 	Footnote 3 	— 
Minimum height above ground (feet) 	— 	7 	9 	— 
Setback from property line/right-of-way (feet) 	— 	5 	5 	— 
May be illuminated? (sec. 2110) 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes 	No 

Footnotes: 
(1) The sign face area of all building-mounted signs shall not exceed ten percent of the area of the front face of the building space occupied by the use associated with the sign, up to a maximum of 240 square feet. For multiple-tenant non-residential buildings, written permission from the building owner to install a sign shall be supplied to the office of community standards, and a minimum of four square feet of available sign face area shall be reserved for each tenant or use, up to the maximum permitted by section 2109.3.b. 
(2) Wall and canopy signs shall not extend higher than the height of the face of the building upon which they are located. 
(3) Marquee signs may extend up to 15 percent above the height of the face of the building upon which they are located. 
(4) Temporary or permanent window signs shall be permitted to be installed on the inside of a building in a manner visible from the public way provided that such signs or graphics do not exceed two signs per window and further do not cover more than 20 percent of the window surface area. Window signs shall be limited to the company name and or logo occupying the given space. Signage shall not include the advertisement of products, services or other non-company affiliated graphics. Hours of operation and street numbers are exempt from this requirement. 
(5) One illuminated time and temperature sign, not exceeding 24 square feet in area, may be included as part of a sign, subject to the requirements of section 2110. 
c.	Non-residential ground signs:
Maximum height (feet) 	Minimum 
setback 
required 
(feet) 	Maximum sign face area (sq. ft.) 
footnotes (2), (3) 	Maximum 
number of signs 
6.0 	6.0 	24.0 	Footnote (1) 
6.5 	6.5 	25.5 	
7.0 	7.0 	27.0 	
7.5 	7.5 	28.5 	
8.0 	8.0 	30.0 	
8.5 	8.5 	31.5 	
9.0 	9.0 	33.0 	
9.5 	9.5 	34.5 	
10.0 	10.0 	36.0 	

Footnotes: 
(1) Not more than one ground sign may be erected accessory to any development parcel or zoning lot, except where otherwise provided for herein. A maximum of two ground signs may be permitted if the development parcel or zoning lot has a minimum of 500 feet of frontage on a collector road or thoroughfare, or a minimum of 700 feet of total frontage on two collector roads or thoroughfares, provided that all ground signs related to the use or uses of the development parcel or zoning lot are in compliance with this ordinance. 
(2) The sign face area of one ground sign associated with a non-residential use may be increased to 150 percent of the maximum permitted by section 2109.3.c. if the sign abuts a collector road or thoroughfare with a road right-of-way width of 100 feet or more (or one-half right-of-way width of 50 feet or more). 
(3) The sign face area of one ground sign associated with a development parcel or zoning lot that has been improved with a multiple-tenant non-residential building containing five or more separate tenants or uses may be increased to 150 percent of the maximum permitted by section 2109.3.c., provided that written permission from the property owner shall be supplied to the office of community standards for each tenant or use to install sign copy on this sign, and provided that all ground signs related to the use or uses of the development parcel or zoning lot are in compliance with this ordinance. 
d.	Temporary signs:
Sign Type/Purpose 	Temporary Construction 	Temporary Garage Sale 	Temporary Special Event 	Temporary Real Estate 	Temporary 
Sale of 
Produce 	Temporary 
Builder 
Directional 	Temporary Political 
Sign permit required 	Yes 	No 	No 	No 	No 	No 	No 
Maximum number of 
signs 	Footnote 1 	Footnote 2 	Footnote 2 	1 	1 	Footnote 5 	—- 
Maximum sign face area (sq. ft.) 	24 	4 	Footnote 4 	4 	16 	3 	16 
Maximum number of sign faces per sign 	2 	2 	2 	2 	2 	2 	2 
Maximum sign height 	6 	— 	— 	6 	6 	3 	—- 
Setback from property line/right-of-way (feet) 	10 	5 	5 	5 	5 	5 	—- 
Setback from structures (feet) 	50 	— 	— 	— 	— 	25 	—- 
May be 
illuminated? 
(sec. 2110) 	No 	No 	No 	No 	No 	No 	No 
Maximum length of time for display (days) 	Footnote 3, 6 	14 days/year Footnote 3, 6 	30 days/year Footnote 3, 6 	Footnote 3, 6 	120 days/year Footnote 3, 6 	Footnote 3, 6 	—- 

Footnotes: 
(1) One sign per entrance from a collector road or thoroughfare. 
(2) One sign per side of lot with frontage on a public street and one sign per side of building with a public entrance. 
(3) A removal agreement or security bond to guarantee removal of the sign may be required. The sign must be removed within three days after completion of the activity for which it was erected. 
(4) Up to ten percent of the area of the front face of the building space occupied by the use associated with the sign. 
(5) Temporary signs, if located on a building, shall not extend higher than the height of the front face of the building. 
(6) Temporary signs shall be located so as to provide adequate traffic circulation and emergency vehicle access, and shall not reduce the number of off-street parking spaces by more than ten percent. 

4.	Nonaccessory signs:
a.	Not adjacent to Interstate 94 (I-94).
(1)	Area and height limitations: No billboard may be erected or maintained of a greater surface area than 300 square feet per sign face or of a greater overall height above ground than 35 feet or the bottom surface of which extends to within less than three feet above the ground surface. 
(2)	Location: Billboards may be erected only in I-2, I-3, I-C districts. No billboard may be erected within 500 feet of any residential use or district, hospital, public park, recreation ground, public reservation, bridge, school, library or church, nor within 50 feet of street right-of-way lines at any street intersection and shall have a minimum setback of 25 feet from all property lines or shall meet the setback requirements of the district, whichever is greater. Billboards shall be located no closer to one another than 1,000 feet. 
(3)	Material required: All billboards shall have a surface or facing of noncombustible material. No wood products or other combustible materials shall be permitted to support such signs. 
(4)	Limitations: No billboard shall be approved at any time when there are 20 or more billboard sign faces in the township except for that a new billboard structure may be granted approval only in exchange for the removal of four nonconforming billboard faces. 
b.	Adjacent to Interstate 94 (I-94).
(1)	Area and height limitations: No billboard may be erected or maintained of a greater surface area than 672 square feet per sign face or of greater overall height above ground than 50 feet or the bottom surface of which extends to within less than three feet above the ground surface. 
(2)	Location: Billboards may be erected only in I-1, I-2, I-3 or I-C zoning districts. No billboard may be erected within 500 feet of any residential use or district, hospital, public park, recreation ground, public reservation, bridge, school, library or church and shall have a minimum setback of 25 feet from all property lines or shall meet the setback requirements of the district for which it is located, whichever is greater. Billboards shall be located no closer to one another than 1,000 feet on the same side of the given thoroughfare. 
(3)	Material required: All billboards shall have a surface of facing of noncombustible material. No wood products or other combustible materials shall be permitted to support such signs. 
(4)	Limitations: No billboard shall be approved at any time when there are 20 or more billboard sign faces in the township except for that a new billboard structure may be granted approval only in exchange for the removal of four nonconforming billboard faces. 
5.	Electronic changeable message signs and billboards:
a.	Such signs shall contain static messages only and shall not have movement or flashing on any part of the sign structure, design or pictorial segments of the sign, nor shall such sign have varying light intensity during display of any single message. 
b.	Each display on an electronic changeable sign shall remain fixed for a minimum of ten seconds. 
c.	When a message on an electronic changeable sign is changed, said change shall be accomplished immediately. No fading of the copy shall be permitted. 
d.	No auditory message or mechanical sounds may be emitted from the sign. 
e.	Electronic changeable message signs may not operate at brightness levels of more than 0.30 foot candles above ambient light level as measured at the following distances: 
Sign Square Feet 	Distance (feet) 
<300 	150 
301—378 	200 
379—672 	250 
>672 	350 

f.	The owner of said electronic changeable message sign shall arrange for an annual certification of the foot-candles showing compliance by a certified independent contractor and supply said certification to the Ypsilanti Township Office of Community Standards. 
g.	Each sign shall have a light sensing device that will adjust to the brightness of the display as the natural ambient light conditions change. 
h.	All electronic changeable message signs shall conform to all Michigan Department of Transportation rules and regulations. 
6.	Prohibited signs: The following signs are prohibited within the township: 
a.	It shall be unlawful for any person to display upon any sign or other advertising structure any obscene material. 
b.	Portable signs, swinging signs or any signs which incorporate flashing or moving lights or animation. 
c.	String lights used in connection with business premises for commercial purposes other than holiday decorations. 
d.	Any sign unlawfully installed, erected or maintained. 
e.	Signs on trees, utility poles or benches, whether located on public or private property. 
f.	Signs mounted on the roof of a building or extending above the height of the front face of the building upon which it is mounted, except where otherwise permitted herein. 
g.	Posting prohibited: No person shall post any placard, poster or other advertising matter on any post, tree or other object within any street area or upon any public property, except legal notices which shall be posted on boards established at three places designated by the township. No person, except an officer of the township, shall post any notice on such boards or remove or mutilate any notice posted thereon. 
7.	Permits and fees: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, repair, alter or relocate a sign, repair a nonconforming sign damaged by winds, vandalism, fire or an act of God unless the appropriate permits have first been obtained from the building official and the required permit fees have been paid to the township according to the schedule established by resolution of the township board. 
a.	Signs for which a permit is not required:
(1)	Repairs to an existing sign: Repair of a sign damaged by winds, vandalism, fire or an act of God provided that the sign is in conformance with the current zoning ordinance standards, that the sign is restored to its original design and that all work is in compliance with necessary structural and electrical codes. 
(2)	Service on an existing sign: Painting, servicing or cleaning of existing signs shall not require a sign permit unless a structural change or any change to the sign box or enclosure is made. 
(3)	Nameplates, not exceeding two square feet in area. 
(4)	Memorial signs or tablets, building names and dates of construction when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or aluminum. 
(5)	Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, danger and such temporary emergency or non-advertising signs as may be approved by the township. 
(6)	Gasoline price signs not exceeding six square feet on pump islands. 
(7)	Political campaign signs in conformance with section 2109.3. 
(8)	Directional signs: Signs regulating on-site traffic and parking of not more than four square feet in area. One such sign for each public entrance from a collector or arterial street up to a maximum of two such signs per zoning lot or development parcel. 
(9)	Posting of no more than one "Private Property" or similar notice per side of a residential zoning lot with frontage on a public street, provided that the lot is greater than one acre in size. Such signs shall be no more than 1.5 square feet in area and located a minimum of five feet from any lot line or right-of-way line. 
(10)	Flags bearing the official design of a nation, state, municipality, educational institution or organization as approved by the building official. 
(11)	Barber poles when a minimum of seven feet above the pedestrian right-of-way. 
(12)	Non-illuminated window signs on the inside of windows in non-residential districts that do not obstruct vision by more than 20 percent. 
(13)	Menu boards at drive-through restaurants with a maximum size of 60 square feet. 
b.	Permits required:
(1)	Sign permit: see section 2109.3.a—d. 
(2)	Building permit: Required for all permanent building-mounted and ground signs, except such signs that are painted on an existing wall. 
(3)	Electrical permit: Required for all illuminated signs or signs in which electrical wiring will be used in connection with the structure. 
c.	Sign permit application: Applications for permits shall be made upon forms provided by the building official and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)	Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)	Sketch plan: Three copies of a sketch plan in compliance with section 2115 that includes the lot survey, easements and setback dimensions, location of all buildings, other structures and all proposed and existing signs on the development parcel or zoning lot where such signs are to be erected. Elevation drawings of all buildings on the site shall be provided showing the location of all existing and proposed building-mounted signs. 
(3)	Construction drawings: Three blueprints or drawings of the plans, specifications, methods of construction and installation, materials list and method and type of illumination for each sign. All construction drawings or attachment details shall be signed and sealed by a licensed design professional. 
(4)	A photometric grid that is in conformance with section 2110 must be overlaid on the sketch plan showing the location of each proposed sign and the overall light intensity (in foot-candles) from all existing and proposed sources of illumination throughout the area affected by the proposed sign. 
(5)	Copy of stress sheets and calculations showing the structure is designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction in the amount required by this and all other laws and ordinances of the township. Provided, further, that where the building official deems it advisable, he may require the approval of the structural design by a registered architect or engineer. 
(6)	Name of person, firm, corporation or association erecting the sign or sign structures. 
(7)	Written and notarized consent of the owner where the sign is to be erected on vacant land. 
(8)	Insurance policy or bond as required by section 2109.8. 
(9)	Removal agreement: The township may require a signed removal agreement satisfactory to the township attorney for the removal of certain signs as applicable. A bond or other acceptable surety to guarantee such removal may also be required. 
(10)	Other information that the building official may require to show full compliance with this and all other township ordinances. 
d.	Sign permit issued if application in order: It shall be the duty of the building official, upon the filing of a complete application for a sign permit, to examine the plans and specifications and other data. If the proposed structure is in compliance with all requirements of the zoning ordinance and applicable building and electrical codes, the appropriate permits shall be issued within 30 days. 
e.	Sign permit revocability: All work associated with a sign permit shall be completed within six months after date of issuance. Such rights and privileges accrued under the provision of this ordinance are mere licenses and may be immediately revoked upon the violation of any of the conditions contained herein. 
8.	Insurance: Every person, before engaging or continuing in the business of erecting, servicing, repairing or dismantling signs in Ypsilanti Township, shall first furnish the township a public liability insurance policy in an amount of no less than $1,000,000.00 in a form that is satisfactory to the township attorney. This policy must indemnify the Charter Township of Ypsilanti and its prior, present and future officials, representatives and employees from all damage suits or actions of every nature brought or claimed against the erector for or on account of injuries or damages to persons or property received or sustained by any person or persons through any act of omission or negligence of said erector, his servants, agents or employees in the erection, repair, service or dismantling of any sign. Said policy shall contain a clause whereby it cannot be canceled or changed until after a written notice of intention to cancel has been filed with the township clerk and building official at least 30 days prior to the date of cancellation. 
9.	Legal nonconforming signs: Nonconforming signs are those signs lawfully erected prior to the adoption of this ordinance. All existing legal nonconforming signs shall be permitted to continue as such until removed or until changes other than painting or servicing are made, at which time they shall conform to the provisions of this ordinance. The zoning official may permit a reduction of the minimum required setback for ground signs from property lines and street rights-of-way to allow changes to an existing legal nonconforming ground sign, subject to the following: 
a.	The sign is located outside of any street right-of-way. 
b.	The sign is in compliance with section 2109.2 (general requirements for all signs). 
c.	The sign is in compliance with section 2109.3 maximum height and sign face area standards. 
10.	Class A nonconforming sign designation: Class A nonconforming signs shall be considered to be conforming signs for purposes of repair, service or the changing of sign copy in a manner that does not require structural changes or any change to the sign box or enclosure. The planning commission may grant a Class A nonconforming sign designation in those instances where a determination is made after public hearing that the continuance of a nonconforming sign meets both the criteria found in section 2102.3 and the following: 
a.	The granting of a continuance of the nonconforming sign will not create unfair advertising advantage over other properties in conformance with the sign provisions of this article. 
b.	A nonconforming use shall not be permitted to add additional signs to the building or premises. Existing signs accessory to nonconforming uses may be maintained. 
11.	Enforcement: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, or move any sign or structure in the township, or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of any of the provisions of this article. Any sign unlawfully erected or altered may be removed by the township at the expense of the sign owner. The township shall then place a lien on the property, adding necessary removal expenses to the tax bill for the property. 
12.	Removal of abandoned, damaged, illegal or unsafe signs:
a.	Abandoned signs:
(1)	Any sign located on property in the township that has been vacant for more than 120 days, and any sign that pertains to a use or activity that no longer exists on property in the township, shall be presumed to have been abandoned. 
(2)	At such time as the building official shall become aware of the sign that is presumed to have been abandoned under subsection (1) of this section, a notice of sign abandonment declaring that the sign is deemed abandoned, and directing the removal of the sign, shall be sent to the owner of the property. 
(3)	If the owner of the property to whom such a notice has been sent claims that the sign has not been abandoned, such owner shall, within 60 days from the date of the notice, file a written response to the building official stating facts which rebut the presumption of abandonment and demonstrate the intent not to abandon the sign. 
(4)	At the end of such 60-day period, if a written response stating facts to rebut the presumption of abandonment has not been submitted to the building official, the sign shall be deemed abandoned, and a notice to such effect shall be sent to the owner. 
(5)	If a written response stating facts to rebut the presumption of abandonment has been submitted to the building official, and if the response demonstrates in the discretion of the building official that the sign has not been abandoned, the sign shall be permitted to remain until further evidence of abandonment appears, or some other basis for removal arises. If the building official determines that the response fails to demonstrate that the sign has not been abandoned, the notice of sign abandonment, and the response from the owner, shall be placed upon the agenda of a meeting of the zoning board of appeals, and notice of the time, place and date of the meeting shall be sent to the owner. After a review of the notice and response, and after affording an opportunity to be heard by the owner and the director, together with any and all other information and argument deemed appropriate by the zoning board of appeals, the zoning board of appeals shall make a final determination with respect to whether the sign has been abandoned. 
(6)	Any sign deemed abandoned under subsection (4), or found by the zoning board of appeals to be abandoned under subsection (5) shall be removed within ten days of such determination, and a failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this section. 
The building official may remove such signs or sign copy at the expense of the sign owner after said owner has been ordered in writing to remove said sign by the building official and has not done so within 30 days. The township shall then place a lien on the property, adding necessary removal expenses to the tax bill for the property. 
b.	Damaged signs: Damaged signs shall be repaired, replaced or removed within ten days of the damage by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building or structure upon which said sign shall be found. Such signs may be removed by the building official at the expense of the sign owner after said owner has been ordered in writing to remove said sign by the building official and has not done so within ten days. The township shall then place a lien on the property, adding necessary removal expenses to the tax bill for the property. 
c.	Illegal signs: Illegal signs may be removed by the building official at the expense of the sign owner after said owner has been ordered in writing to remove said sign by the building official and has not done so within 30 days. The township shall then place a lien on the property, adding necessary removal expenses to the tax bill for the property. 
d.	Unsafe signs: Unsafe signs shall be immediately removed or made to conform to the provisions of this article by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building or structure upon which said sign shall be found. If such action is not taken within 24 hours, the unsafe signs may be removed by the building official at the expense of the sign owner. The township shall then place a lien on the property, adding necessary removal expenses to the tax bill for the property. 
13.	Sign maintenance: The building official may order the removal of any sign that is not maintained in accordance with the provisions of this article. Such signs may be removed by the building official at the expense of the sign owner after said owner has been ordered in writing to remove said sign by the building official and has not done so within 30 days. The township shall then place a lien on the property, adding necessary removal expenses to the tax bill for the property. 
a.	Maintenance: All signs for which a permit is required, together with all their supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be maintained in good working order; and when not galvanized or constructed of approved corrosion-resistant, noncombustible materials, shall be painted when necessary to prevent corrosion. The exteriors of all signs, supporting members, painted surfaces, advertising materials and lettering shall be kept painted and in good repair, so as to present a neat and orderly appearance. All bulbs or component parts of the sign, including the electrical switches, boxes and wiring used in the illumination of the sign must be well maintained and in good repair. 
b.	Housekeeping: It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner or lessee of every sign to maintain the immediate premises occupied by the sign in a clean, sanitary and healthful condition. 
( Ord. No. 2017-472 , §§ I, II, 3-21-17)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2017-472 , § I, adopted March 21, 2017, repealed § 2109 in its entirety, and section II of said ordinance enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former § 2109 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2015-446 , adopted Aug. 8, 2015; and Ord. No. 2016-457 , adopted April 19, 2016. 
 
Sec. 2110. Exterior lighting:
It is the intent of this ordinance to preserve, protect, and enhance the lawful nighttime use and enjoyment of any and all property through the use of appropriate lighting practices and systems. Such individual fixtures and lighting systems are designed, constructed, and installed to control glare and light trespass, minimize obtrusive light, conserve energy and resources while maintaining safety, security and productivity, and curtail the degradation of the nighttime visual environment. 
[1.]	Submittal requirements - The following information must be included for all preliminary nonresidential site plan submissions, final preliminary plats, and final residential site plans for approval by the planning commission and township board. Where formal site plan approval is not required as described in section 2115, some or all of the items may be required to be reviewed by the building official/zoning administrator prior to lighting installation: 
[a.]	Location, type and height of all freestanding, building-mounted and canopy light fixtures, and all existing and proposed sign lighting, shall be shown on the site plan and building elevations. 
[b.]	Photometric grid overlaid on the proposed site plan indicating the overall light for intensity throughout the site (in footcandles). 
[c.]	Specifications and details for the type of fixture being proposed including the total lumen output, type of lamp and method of shielding. 
[d.]	Use of fixture proposed. 
[e.]	Any other information deemed necessary by the building official/zoning administrator. 
[2.]	General provisions - The design and illumination standards of this ordinance shall apply to all exterior lighting sources and other light sources visible from the public way or adjacent parcels, except where specifically exempted herein. 
a.	Exterior lighting shall be fully shielded and directed downward, and shall utilize full cutoff housings, louvers, glare shields, optics, reflectors or other measures to prevent off-site glare and minimize light pollution. 
b.	Intensity: The intensity of light within a site shall not exceed 10.0 footcandles within any site and 1.0 footcandles at any zoning lot boundary or street right-of-way line. Where a zoning lot abuts a residential district or existing residential use, the intensity shall not exceed 0.5 footcandles at the zoning lot boundary. The planning commission or zoning official may permit a maximum intensity of 20.0 footcandles for lighting under a gas station pump island canopy or within the outdoor sales and display space of an automobile dealership, provided that such lighting is otherwise in compliance with this ordinance. 
c.	Measurement: Light intensity levels shall be measured on the horizontal plane at grade level within the site, and on the vertical plane of any zoning lot boundary or street right-of-way line at a height of five feet above grade level. 
d.	Lamp options: Metal halide lamps with a maximum wattage of 250 watts per fixture are recommended for use in the township to maintain a unified lighting standard and to minimize light pollution and 'sky glow.' The planning commission or zoning official may permit the use of other lamp-types and wattages up to 400 watts maximum for fully shielded fixtures, provided that such lighting is otherwise in compliance with this ordinance. 
e.	Decorative light fixtures: The planning commission or zoning official may approve decorative light fixtures as an alternative to shielded fixtures, provided that such fixtures would enhance the aesthetics of the site and would not cause off-site glare or light pollution. Such fixtures may utilize incandescent, tungsten-halogen, metal halide or high-pressure sodium lamps with a maximum wattage of 100 watts per fixture. 
f.	The use of laser light sources, searchlights or any similar high intensity light source for outdoor advertisement or entertainment is prohibited. 
g.	Lighting shall not be of a flashing, moving or intermittent type. 
h.	Unshielded luminous tube or fluorescent lighting that is visible from any property line or street right-of-way is prohibited, except where otherwise provided for herein. 
i.	All exterior lighting fixtures in non-residential districts shall be turned off between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and sunrise, except where used for security purposes or where the use of the property continues after 11:00 p.m. 
[3.]	Freestanding pole lighting - The following standards shall apply to all freestanding pole-mounted light fixtures: 
a.	Maximum overall height (as measured from grade level to the highest point of the fixture): 
(1)	Fifteen feet high, where such fixtures are located within 50 feet of a residential district or residential use. 
(2)	Twenty feet high, where such fixtures are located more than 50 feet from a residential district or residential use. 
(3)	Twenty-five feet high, where such fixtures are located more than 300 feet from a residential district or residential use. 
b.	Coordination with decorative streetlighting: The use of decorative pole lighting is strongly encouraged in areas where decorative streetlighting has been installed within the public right-of-way, or proposed as part of future streetscape improvements. The design, type and color of pole light fixtures should coordinate with the existing or proposed decorative streetlight fixtures. 
[4.]	Building-mounted lighting - Luminous tube or exposed lamp fluorescent lighting is prohibited as an architectural detail on all buildings, including, but not limited to areas along roof lines, cornices and eaves or around and within window and door openings. The planning commission may approve internally illuminated architectural bands or similar shielded lighting accents as part of a site plan, provided that such lighting accents would enhance the aesthetics of the site and would not cause off-site glare or light pollution. 
[5.]	Window lighting
[a.]	Any light fixtures visible through a window must be shielded to prevent glare at the property line. 
[b.]	Luminous tube and exposed bulb fluorescent lighting (visible from the property line) is prohibited unless it is part of a sign that meets the requirements of section 2109 of this ordinance. 
[6.]	Sign lighting
[a.]	Canopy signs: Canopy signs shall be illuminated from above using a maximum 100-watt, fully shielded metal halide, tungsten-halogen or incandescent light fixture. The zoning official may permit the canopy to be internally illuminated using one single-tube fluorescent fixture, provided that the fixture is recessed and the canopy material is opaque except for any permitted sign copy area. 
[b.]	Wall and marquee signs: Wall and marquee signs shall be illuminated from above using a maximum 100-watt, fully shielded metal halide, tungsten-halogen or incandescent light fixture that is directed downward. The zoning official may permit wall or marquee signs to be internally-illuminated, provided that more than 50 percent of the sign face area is covered by semi-opaque colors and materials that have a color value and saturation of 50 percent or higher. 
[c.]	Ground signs: Ground signs shall be illuminated from above or below using a maximum 100-watt, fully shielded metal halide, tungsten-halogen or incandescent light fixture that is directed downward. The zoning official may permit ground signs to be illuminated from below, provided that the light is tightly focused to prevent spillage of excess light beyond the edge of the sign face. The zoning official may permit ground signs to be internally-illuminated, provided that a minimum of 50 percent of the sign face area is covered by semi-opaque colors and materials that have a color value and saturation of 50 percent or higher. 
[d.]	Billboard signs: Billboard signs shall be illuminated from above using light fixtures that are tightly focused to prevent spillage of excess light beyond the edge of the sign face and directed downward to prevent off-site glare and minimize light pollution. 
[7.]	Exemptions - The following are exempt from the lighting requirements of this section, except that the building official/zoning administrator may take steps to eliminate the impact of the below exempted items when deemed necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public: 
[a.]	Sports fields. 
[b.]	Swimming pools. 
[c.]	Holiday decorations. 
[d.]	Window displays without glare. 
[e.]	Shielded pedestrian walkway lighting. 
[f.]	Soffit lighting. 
[g.]	Residential lighting with no-offsite glare. 
[h.]	Street lights. 
[8.]	Lamp or fixture substitution - Should any light fixture regulated under this ordinance or the type of light source therein, be changed after the permit has been issued, a change request must be submitted to the building official/zoning administrator for their approval, together with adequate information to assure compliance with this code, which must be received prior to substitution. 
(Ord. No. 99-226, 11-16-99; Ord. No. 2001-289, § 2, 11-20-01)
 
Sec. 2111. Residential entranceway:
In all residential districts, so-called entranceway structures including but not limited to: walls, columns, and gates marking entrances to single-family subdivisions or multiple housing projects may be permitted and may be located in a required yard, except as provided in section 2112, "Corner Clearance," provided that such entranceway structures shall comply to all codes of the Township of Ypsilanti, and shall be approved by the building department and a permit issued. 
 
Sec. 2112. Corner clearance:
No fence, wall, shrubbery, sign or other obstruction to vision above a height of two feet from the established street grades shall be permitted within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn between said right-of-way lines at a distance along each line of 25 feet from their point of intersection. 

 
 
Sec. 2113. Reserved.
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2000-260, adopted Dec. 19, 2000, repealed § 2113, walls, in its entirety. The former provisions derived from Amd. of 9-19-1995. 
 
Sec. 2114. Fences and walls.
1.	Definitions: The following definitions are related to fences and walls: 
a.	Fences and walls: Linear structures, partitions or continuous hedgerows maintained for the purpose of enclosing an area. 
(1)	Chain-link fence: A fence constructed of galvanized steel or similar materials as approved by the building official for the purpose of enclosing or securing an area. Chain-link fences shall not include wire fences or fences of similar construction. 
(2)	Industrial fence: A chain-link or ornamental fence constructed of materials approved by the building official for the purpose of enclosing or securing an industrial use. 
(3)	Living fence: A continuous hedgerow of living plant material planted and maintained for the purpose of enclosing an area. 
(4)	Ornamental fence: A fence consisting of wrought iron, galvanized steel, aluminum, vinyl, wood or similar materials fabricated into a design with specific pattern elements or ornamentation. All spaces in the fence shall be open and unobstructed and the fence shall not block vision to an extent greater than 40 percent. Ornamental fences shall not include chain-link or wire fences or fences of similar construction. 
(5)	Privacy fence: A fence constructed of wood, vinyl or similar materials that blocks vision to an extent greater than 40 percent for the purpose of obscuring or screening an area from public view. 
(6)	Rail fence: A fence constructed of wood, vinyl or similar materials and consisting of one to four horizontal rails connecting to vertical posts spaced a minimum of six feet apart. All spaces in such fences shall be open and unobstructed and such fences shall not block vision to an extent greater than 40 percent. 
(7)	Temporary fence: A fence constructed of canvas, plastic, chain-link, wood or similar material as approved by the building official for the purpose of enclosing or securing an area for a limited period of time. 
(a)	Construction: A fence erected for the purpose of securing a construction site against unauthorized access. The building official may require such fences as part of an approved permit. 
(b)	Special events: A fence erected for the purposes of public safety at a special event. Such fences shall not be erected across public rights-of-way except as authorized by the township board and the Washtenaw County Road Commission for special community events only. 
(8)	Decorative wall: A masonry wall consisting of brick, stone or similar materials as approved by the building official and constructed with a design that includes specific pattern elements or ornamentation. 
(9)	Obscuring wall: A masonry wall consisting of brick, stone or similar materials as approved by the building official and constructed for the purpose of enclosing, obscuring or screening an area from view. 
(10)	Damaged fence or wall: A fence or wall that is not properly secured, in danger of collapse or has otherwise been found by the building official to be in a damaged condition. 
(11)	Illegal fence or wall: A fence that was illegally erected or installed, or a fence that is not in compliance with the provisions of this article and does not meet the definition of a legal nonconforming fence. 
(12)	Legal nonconforming fence or wall: A fence or wall which was legally erected or installed but is no longer in compliance with the provisions of this article. Such fences or walls must be located outside of any existing right-of-way and wholly upon the parcel to which they are associated. 
2.	General requirements for fences and walls:
a.	Construction and maintenance: Fences and walls shall be securely constructed in conformance with this article and all applicable building codes and shall consist of durable, weather-resistant materials as approved by the building official. Masonry piers may be used as part of a fence installation with the approval of the building official. Fences and walls shall be maintained in good order, painted, rustproofed or otherwise protected against damage and decay so as to present an orderly appearance. 
b.	Hazards: Fences and walls shall not be erected in a manner that obstructs free and clear vision or would be a hazard to traffic or pedestrians. Fences and walls shall not be erected within public rights-of-way. 
c.	Orientation of finished side: Fences that have one finished or decorative side shall be oriented with the finished or decorative side facing outward towards adjacent parcels and away from the interior of the lot to which the fence is associated. Masonry walls shall be finished in a similar manner on all sides. 
d.	Site drainage and utilities: Fences and walls shall not be erected in a manner that obstructs the free flow of surface water within or across the lot to which it is associated or the adjacent lots. Fences and walls shall not be erected in a manner that causes damage to underground utilities. 
e.	Fences and walls, including, but not limited to posts, foundations, and overhanging elements, shall be located completely within the limits of the lot to which they are associated. 
3.	Height and location requirements:
Type of Fence or Wall 	Maximum Height (feet) (a) 	Minimum Yard Setback (feet) (a) 
	Front 	Side 	Rear 	Front(d) 	Side 	Rear 
Chain-link fence 	(c) 	4 	4 	(c) 	(b) 	(b) 
Living fence 	- 	- 	- 	0 	(b) 	(b) 
Ornamental fence 	3 ½ 	6 	6 	0 	(b) 	(b) 
Privacy fence 	(c) 	6 	6 	(c) 	(b) 	(b) 
Rail fence 	3 ½ 	5 	5 	0 	(b) 	(b) 
Industrial fence 	(c) 	8 	8 	20 	(b) 	(b) 
Decorative wall 	2 	4 	4 	0 	(b) 	(b) 
Obscuring wall 	(c) 	6 	6 	(c) 	5 	5 

(a)	All required setbacks for fences and walls shall be measured from the property line or existing street right-of-way line. Height of such fences or walls shall be measured from the grade level to the highest point of the fence or wall. 
(b)	Fences and walls located within required side and rear yards may be erected on the property line with the submission of written consent from all adjacent property owners or a certified survey verifying the location of lot boundaries. 
 
(c)	Fences, and walls above three and one-half feet in height and all chin link fences, privacy fences, and obscuring walls are not permitted within the required front yard of any zoning lot except where otherwise specified herein. On residential corner lots, a chain link fence up to four feet in height or privacy fence up to six feet in height is permitted within a front yard of a side street provided the residences on the adjacent lot and opposing lot also do not front on such side street. Such chain link fence or privacy fence shall not extend beyond the front building line into the front yard of the street that the front of the dwelling faces. On nonresidential lots, a privacy fence or an obscuring wall up to six feet in height shall be permitted within a front yard only where necessary for buffering from adjacent uses and approved on a site plan by the planning commission. 
 
(d)	On all lots, fences or walls over three and a half (3½) feet in height shall not be permitted within ten (10) feet of the intersection of a driveway with the road right-of-way. Such requirement shall apply to driveways on the same lot as the fence and driveways located on adjoining lots. On corner lots, fences and walls located within a front yard shall maintain the roadway corner clearance requirement of section 2112. 
4.	Prohibited fences and walls: The following fences and walls are prohibited within the township: 
a.	Barbed-wire, razor-wire or electrified fences, except where, for the purpose of ensuring public safety, the planning commission may approve such fences as part of an approved site plan. 
b.	Wire fences, except where such fences are located on parcels of not less than four acres in size with a minimum road frontage of 200 feet. 
c.	Any fence or wall unlawfully installed, erected or maintained. 
5.	Permits required: A fence permit shall be required for all work performed in association with the construction, alteration or relocation of a fence or wall, except where otherwise specified herein. A building permit shall also be required for any fence or wall over six feet in height. 
a.	Fences and walls for which a fence permit is not required: 
(1)	Repairs: Repairs to an existing fence or wall with no structural changes. 
(2)	Replacement: Replacement of an existing fence with a new fence that is the same type, and height and in the same location as the existing fence; provided the replacement fence is otherwise in full compliance with this ordinance and the building code. 
(3)	Gates: The installation of gates of up to eight feet in width in an existing fence or wall with no structural changes. 
(4)	Short lengths of new fence: Construction of less than eight feet of new fence, provided that such work is in compliance with the provisions of this article and all applicable building codes. 
(5)	Fences associated with active farms: Wire or wood fences associated with an active farm or single-family residential use on parcels of not less than four acres in size with a minimum road frontage of 200 feet. 
(6)	Living fences: Planting of continuous hedgerows or similar landscape features. 
b.	Permit application: Applications for fence permits shall be made upon forms provided by the community development department. The following information shall be provided with the application: 
(1)	Plot plan and construction drawings: A plot plan or lot survey shall be provided that includes the location of all existing and proposed fences, walls, structures, easements and setback dimensions. A detail of the proposed fence or wall with all appropriate dimensions shall also be provided. 
(2)	Removal agreement: The building official or zoning administrator may require a signed removal agreement for the removal of a fence and wall as deemed necessary. A bond or other acceptable surety to guarantee such removal may be required. 
(3)	Written consent of all adjacent property owners, or a certified survey verifying the location of lot boundaries, if a fence or wall is proposed to be erected or installed on a property line. 
(4)	Other information that the building official may require to show full compliance with this and all other township ordinances. 
6.	Legal nonconforming fences and walls: All existing legal nonconforming fences or walls shall be permitted to continue as such until removed, extended or altered, at which time such fences or walls shall be made to conform to the provisions of this article. A legal nonconforming chain-link fence up to four feet in height, located within the required front yard of a platted lot in the R-5 (single-family residential) zoning district, may be extended with the approval of the zoning official. 
7.	Removal of illegal or damaged fences or walls: Damaged or illegal fences or walls shall be immediately repaired, replaced or removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building or structure upon which said fence or wall shall be found. Upon identification of a damaged or illegal fence or wall, the building official shall order the property owner to remove such or make repairs within ten days. If the damaged fence or wall is not removed or repaired as ordered, the township board may authorize the township attorney to pursue court approval for the removal or repair at the expense of the property owner. All expenses related to the removal or repair shall be placed upon the tax roll for the property to which the fence is associated unless immediately reimbursed by the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2000-260, § 4, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 2001-292, 11-20-01; Ord. No. 2004-347, 10-19-04)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2000-260, adopted Dec. 19, 2000, repealed § 2114, fences, in its entirety, and replaced it with similar material as herein set out. The former provision derived from Amd. of 9-19-95. 
 
Sec. 2114.5. Sidewalks, safety paths:
(a)	Concrete paved sidewalks not less than five feet wide shall be required in all subdivisions and site condominium subdivisions. 
(b)	Concrete paved sidewalks not less than five feet wide shall be required along all access drives in cluster housing and multiple-family developments. 
(c)	Concrete paved safety paths for bicycles and pedestrians not less than eight feet wide shall be provided on both sides of all major and secondary thoroughfares as designated on the master plan of future land use. 
(d)	The planning commission may vary the width and location of safety paths in those instances where strict adherence to these provisions cannot be met due to conditions such as restriction of space, improper soil conditions or other physical impairment to the location and construction of safety paths. 
(e)	In lieu of provisions of construction of safety paths, funds may be required to be placed in escrow for construction at a later date. 
(Ord. No. 97-166, 5-20-97)
 
Sec. 2115. Site plan review.
(1)	Intent. The site plan review procedures and standards set forth herein provide a consistent and uniform method for review of proposed development plans, to ensure full compliance with the standards contained in this section, other applicable local ordinances, standard engineering practices, and county, state, and federal rules, and laws. The procedures set forth herein are further intended to: 
(a)	Achieve efficient use of the land; 
(b)	Protect natural resources; 
(c)	Minimize adverse impacts on adjoining or nearby properties; 
(d)	Provide a mechanism for review of new development and redevelopment or reuse of existing sites to ensure compliance with current standards; and, 
(e)	Encourage cooperation and consultation between the township and the applicant to facilitate development in accordance with the township's land use objectives. 
(2)	Site plan review applicability and type. A building permit shall not be issued until a site plan or sketch plan is approved in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth herein and all necessary review, inspection, and permit fees have been fully paid. The extent of site plan review for various types of projects is classified into five types in the table below (Table 2115.1). 
(a)	Exempt: Select projects, such as single family homes on an individual lot, are exempt from site plan review given their relatively low level of impact on adjacent land uses, and given that compliance with applicable building and fire code and zoning regulations can be addressed during the building permit review process. 
(b)	Full site plan: The most involved process for larger and more intense projects, including most new developments and major expansions. 
(c)	Sketch plan: Smaller scale projects and expansions or changes in use to existing sites are permitted to provide less detailed information than a full scale site plan review. The level of information is intended to be proportionate to the extent of the change and yet insure adequate review for compliance with applicable standards. Sketch plans shall still undergo a formal review by the planning commission. 
(d)	Administrative review: Select smaller scale projects and expansions or changes in use to existing sites, which are required to provide a sketch plan, do not require review by the planning commission; but instead shall undergo a formal review for approval by the township community and economic development department. 
(e)	Site condominiums and planned developments: Site plans for site condominiums and planned developments shall follow the procedure as provided in sections 2116 and 1903 respectively. Plats for subdivisions shall follow the procedures of the township subdivision regulations ordinance number 44 and the Michigan Land Division Act. Site condominiums shall be required to meet the same design standards as subdivision plats, in accordance with the township zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations ordinance and all other applicable township regulations. 
(f)	Multiple-family and condominiums: Site plans for multiple-family and condominium developments shall require the review and approval of both preliminary and final plans by the planning commission and township board. 
TABLE 2115.1 
TABLE OF ELIGIBLE USES AND REQUIRED REVIEW PROCESS 
	REQUIRED REVIEW 
SITUATION/USE 	Site 
Plan 	Sketch 
Plan PC 
Rev1 	Admin. 
Review2 	Exempt3 
NEW DEVELOPMENT: 				
Construction of one single-family dwelling unit on one lot in a residential zoning district. 				✓ 
Construction of more than one principal residential building on a single lot, such as site condominiums. 	✓ 			
Construction of any multiple-family residential or nonresidential principal building. 	✓ 			
Any use or development for which the submission of a site plan is required by any provision of this ordinance. 	✓ 			
Any use in an RM, MH, PD, OS, B, FS, IRO, I or P district. 	✓ 			
All uses not otherwise included within a specific use district, per Sec. 2107. 	✓ 			
Establishment of special conditional uses in all zoning districts, except where specifically noted elsewhere in this table. 	✓ 			
Construction of essential public service buildings and storage areas. 	✓ 			
Golf courses and public/private parks. 		✓4 		
Minor changes during construction such as changes in landscape species to a similar variety, realignment of a driveway or road due to an unanticipated and documented constraint during construction, or to improve safety or protect natural features as required by outside agencies. 			✓ 	
Construction of cellular and similar communication towers7 . 		✓ 		
Co-location of new antennas on an existing approved tower7 . 			✓ 	
Installation of new antennas on an existing building7 . 		✓ 		
Installation of new antennas on light poles or other structures7 . 		✓ 		
EXPANSIONS: 				
Expansion of one single-family dwelling unit on one lot in a residential zoning district. 				✓ 
An increase in the floor area up to 1,000 square feet or ten percent of the existing floor area, whichever is less, based on the cumulative total of the proposed expansion and any expansion within the last five years, as determined by the township community and economic development department. 		✓ 		
An increase in the floor area greater than that specified above. 	✓ 			
An increase in parking or loading area of up to ten percent or 6,000 square feet of pavement area without any building changes. 			✓5 	
An increase in parking or loading area over ten percent or 6,000 square feet of pavement area. 		✓5 		
Construction of any multiple-family residential or nonresidential accessory building. 		✓ 		
Changes to building height that do not add additional floor area. 			✓ 	
CHANGES IN USE: 				
Any change in the use of land or a building to a more intensive use, in terms of parking needs, noise, traffic volumes, and similar impacts, as determined by township. 	✓ 			
A change in use for a site that does not comply with current site design standards (such as landscaping, signage, lighting or drainage). (Refer to nonconforming regulations) 		✓ 		
A change in use to a similar or less intense use provided the site shall not require any significant changes in the existing site facilities such as parking, landscaping, lighting, signs, bikepaths or sidewalks. 			✓ 	
Improvements to outdoor recreational uses and parks that are permitted uses. 			✓ 	
A change from a nonconforming use, building or site, to a more conforming situation. 		✓ 		
OTHER TYPES OF PROJECTS: 				
Accessory open-air businesses. 		✓ 		
Accessory buildings and structures constructed or erected accessory to a permitted single-family dwelling unit; and those up to 100 square feet in area in other districts. 				✓4 
Accessory buildings and structures greater than 100 square feet associated with a non-single-family residential use in any zoning district. 			✓ 	
Accessory keeping of animals. 				✓ 
Architectural changes to a non-single-family residential structure (an elevation plan describing changes and construction materials is required). 			✓ 	
Bikepath, pathway or sidewalk construction or relocation. 			✓5 	
Construction of an entrance feature associated with a non-single-family residential use (walls, landscaping, etc.). 		✓ 		
Fences associated with a non-single-family residential use, installed or improved. 			✓5 	
Grading, excavation, filling, soil removal, creation of ponds or clearing of trees within an area up to 100 square feet, provided such activity is normally and customarily incidental to single-family uses on the site. 				✓6 
Grading, excavation, filling, soil removal, creation of ponds or clearing of trees other than that specified above. 		✓5, 6 		
Home occupations. 		✓ 		
Internal construction or change in the floor plan that does not increase gross floor area, increase the intensity of use or affect parking requirements on a site which meets all site design standards of the ordinance. 				✓ 
Landscape changes to similar species and that are consistent with the standards of this ordinance. 			✓ 	
Modifications to upgrade a non-single-family residential building to improve barrier-free design, or to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act or other federal, state or county regulations. 				
Parking lot improvements provided the total number of spaces shall remain constant. 			✓5 	
Residential care facilities licensed by the state that require special land use approval. 		✓ 		
Sign relocation or replacement provided it meets the dimensional and location standards of this ordinance. 			✓ 	
Site improvements such as installation of walls, fences, lighting or curbing consistent with ordinance standards. 			✓ 	
Temporary uses, sales and seasonal events. 		✓ 		
Utility system improvements. 				✓5 
Waste receptacle relocation to a more inconspicuous location or installation of screening around the waste receptacle. 			✓ 	

Footnotes: 
1.	Requires review and approval by the planning commission (see section 2115(3)). 
2.	The township community and economic development department has authority for approval (see section 2115(4)). If the modifications are not deemed minor, then normal site plan review by the planning commission shall be required. Planning commission review shall be required for all site plans that involve a request for a variance, a special conditional use, or discretionary decisions. 
3.	A building permit, plot plan, grading and engineering review is still required. 
4.	For a golf course, a general layout of holes, ball trajectory and natural features is required; full site plan review is required for buildings, structures and parking areas that illustrate the area around such facilities. 
5.	Construction, grading, drainage and erosion control plans must be approved by the township engineer. 
6.	See also the township natural features ordinance. 
7.	See Section 2107.1 Wireless communication towers and antennas. 
(3)	Planning commission site plan review procedures and requirements. Site plans and sketch plans must be submitted in accordance with the following procedures and requirements. Plans are reviewed and approved following a process of pre-conceptual review, preliminary site plan review by the planning commission and final site plan review by the community development department. 
(a)	Applicant attendance: The application shall be submitted by the owner of an interest in the land for which site plan approval is sought, or the designated agent of said owner. The applicant or a designated representative must be present at all scheduled review meetings or consideration of the plan shall be tabled due to lack of representation. Absence at two consecutive meetings without prior notice to the township community and economic development department shall result in denial of the application. The township office of community standards may recommend to the planning commission chairperson that the applicant's architect or engineer be required to be present at the meeting in order to address technical matters related to the application. 
(b)	Pre-application meeting: The applicant is encouraged to schedule a meeting with the township office of community standards to discuss the project, submittal requirements and review procedures. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss applicable standards and technical issues, and to determine the appropriate type of review process based on Table 2115.1. If the project is determined to be eligible for administrative approval, the procedures of section 2115(4) shall be followed; in other cases, the process shall proceed as described below. 
(c)	Preliminary site plan or sketch plan submittal: The applicant shall submit five paper copies and a single digital copy of the following to the office of community standards no more than 20 business days prior to the planning commission meeting that the site plan is tentatively scheduled for: 
1.	A complete application form supplied by the township. 
2.	A complete site plan or sketch plan that includes the information listed in section 2115(5), submittal requirements. 
3.	Any additional information the planning commission finds necessary to make the determinations required herein. 
(d)	Technical (staff) reviews: The township office of community standards shall forward the application and site plan(s) to the township planning, traffic and engineering consultants, the fire chief, and police chief. All reviews shall be submitted back to the township office of community standards. 
(e)	Planning commission consideration of preliminary site plan: Following technical review and comment, and compliance with administrative procedures, the site plan shall be placed on the agenda of the planning commission. The planning commission shall review the application for site plan approval, together with the reports and recommendations from staff, consultants and other reviewing agencies, as appropriate. The planning commission shall then make a determination based on the requirements and standards of this section. The planning commission is authorized to postpone, grant approval, approval subject to revisions or denial as follows: 
1.	Postpone: The application may be postponed if it is determined to be incomplete, the applicant has not fully responded to deficiencies identified in the technical review, an ordinance interpretation or variance is needed from the zoning board of appeals, or that revisions are necessary to bring the site plan into compliance with applicable standards and regulations. The planning commission shall direct the applicant to prepare additional information, revise the site plan or direct the township staff to conduct additional analysis. The applicant shall be required to prepare revised plans accompanied by a complete list of all changes, certified as such by the applicant's design professional. Full sets of plans must be resubmitted. Amended plans or other material which show a diligent effort to address all reasons for tabling shall be placed on the agenda of the planning commission for further review and action. 
2.	Approval: Upon determination that all requirements for site plan approval, as set forth herein, are met and a recommendation for approval has been forwarded to the planning commission by all reviewing agencies of the township, approval shall be granted subject to the applicant providing copies of all required outside agency approvals. In those instances where approval authority is vested with the township board, a recommendation shall be made by the planning commission to the township board. 
3.	Approval subject to revisions: Upon determination that a site plan is in compliance except for minor revisions, said revisions shall be identified and the applicant shall be given the opportunity to correct the site plan prior to applying for final site plan approval. The applicant shall submit with the final site plan a complete list of all changes, certified by the applicant's design professional, to the township office of community standards for final approval after said revisions have been completed. At its discretion, the planning commission may require the right to review the revised final site plan. 
4.	Denial of approval: Upon determination that a site plan does not comply with standards and regulations set forth in this section, requires extensive revision in order to comply with said standards and regulations, or the applicant has not satisfactorily addressed all reasons for site plan tabling, site plan approval shall be denied. The applicant must revise the plans and resubmit if the applicant is still interested in pursuing the project. A re-submittal shall be considered a new site plan and be required to re-initiate the full site plan review process. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning commission in denial of a site plan shall have the right to appeal the decision to the zoning board of appeals. A site plan, by request of the applicant, needs an official denial by the planning commission in order to gain access to the zoning board of appeals. 
(f)	Multiple-family and condominiums preliminary approval: Site plans for multiple-family and condominium developments shall require the review and approval of both preliminary and final plans by the planning commission and township board. The planning commission shall make a recommendation to the township board to approve, approve with conditions or deny the preliminary site plan. Following receipt of the planning commission's recommendation, the preliminary site plan shall be considered by the township board. The township board shall take action on the request following the same standards as subsection (f) above. 
(g)	Effect of preliminary site plan review action: Any preliminary site plan approved under this provision shall expire after one year from the date of such approval. If construction has not commenced within one year of site plan or sketch plan approval by the planning commission or the township office of community standards (as applicable), approval becomes null and void and a new application for site plan or sketch plan review shall be required. The applicant may request a one-year extension by the planning commission, provided a written request is received before the expiration date and the site plan complies with current standards (i.e. any amendments to the zoning ordinance since the site plan was approved). This limitation shall not apply to preliminary PD site plans accompanying approved PD rezonings. 
(h)	Final site plans (detailed construction and engineering plans): Except where otherwise set forth in this section, final site plan approval may be given administratively when all conditions set forth herein for final site plans are complied with except the planning commission may, at the time of preliminary site plan approval, require final site plan approval by the commission as well. The township office of community standards shall grant final site plan approval where the following requirements are met: 
1.	That all local, county and state requirements as may apply to the proposed use are met. The applicant shall be required to obtain all other necessary agency permits from the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, the Washtenaw County Road Commission, Drain Commission and Health Department, and all applicable utility companies. Copies of applications and approvals from all applicable outside agencies shall accompany submission of the application and final site plan to the township. 
2.	All applicable engineering requirements are met. Complete engineering plans shall be submitted for approval by the township engineer. 
3.	The design shown on the final site plan shall remain unchanged from the approved preliminary site plan. Upon determination that the final site plan does not comply with the conditions of preliminary site plan approval or that required engineering plan revisions alter the site plan configuration approved by the planning commission, the applicant shall be required to revise the site plan and engineering plans and resubmit the site plan to the body that approved the site plan for review and approval as an amended site plan. 
(i)	Multiple-family and condominiums: Final site plans for multiple-family and condominium developments shall require the review and approval by the township board based upon a review and recommendation by the planning commission. 
(j)	Final site approval: Final site plan approval, except as specifically permitted in subsections 1. and 2. below, shall not be given until all the above requirements are met. No work shall commence on any site, except as specifically permitted herein, or any buildings requiring site plan approval and no permits shall be issued until after final site plan approval is granted. 
1.	Upon request, the township may permit, when justifiable conditions are found to exist, and after preliminary site plan approval has been given, the movement of soil on the site, prior to final site plan approval, provided: 
a.	A grading and soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, drawn to local specifications and when necessary to county specifications, has been reviewed and approved. 
b.	A soil erosion permit, when required, has been secured. 
2.	Upon request, the township may permit, when justifiable conditions are found to exist, and after preliminary site plan approval has been given, the layout of footings and the construction of foundation walls prior to final site plan approval, provided: 
a.	A grading and soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, drawn to local specifications and when necessary to county specifications, has been reviewed and approved. 
b.	A soil erosion permit, when required, has been secured. 
c.	Detailed engineering plans for all aboveground and belowground utilities shall be submitted for review and approval. 
d.	Footing and foundation design plans have been approved by all applicable state, county, local departments and consultants. 
e.	A resolution absolving the Township of Ypsilanti of any liability has been submitted by the applicant and approved by the township. 
(k)	Completion of site design in accordance with approved site plan.
1.	Following approval of the site plan or sketch plan and final approval of the engineering plans by the township engineer and the office of community standards, a building permit may be obtained. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain all other applicable township, utility, county, or state permits prior to issuance of a building permit. 
2.	The approval of any site plan under this provision, other than subdivisions (subdivision shall follow the procedures of the Land Division Act) shall expire one year after the date of such approval, unless actual construction and development have been commenced in accordance with said site plan prior thereto. If such construction and development is commenced within said one year period, then such approval shall continue for a period of five years from the date thereof; provided, however, that a lapse of more than one year in continuous substantial construction and development does not occur, in which event, said approval shall expire. The township building official shall not issue a building permit for any type of construction on the basis of the approved site plan after such approval has expired unless such plan has received an extension from the planning commission or township board. Fees for review of expired site plan may be waived or reduced in those instances where no substantial change in conditions of the site plan nor of abutting uses has taken place. In those instances where conditions have changed, the fee for review of expired site plans shall be the same as for the initial submittal. Any preliminary site plan approved under this provision shall expire after one year from the date of such approval. 
3.	It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a property for which site plan approval has been granted to maintain the property in accordance with the approved site design on a continuing basis until the property is razed, or until new zoning regulations supersede the regulations upon which site approval was based, or until a new site design approval is sought. Such maintenance shall include all building and site elements depicted on the site plan including parking configuration, lighting and landscaping. Any property owner who fails to maintain a site as approved shall be deemed in violation of the applicable use provisions of this section and shall be subject to penalties. 
4.	A development agreement with suitable guarantee may be required by the township to assure compliance with an approved final site plan. 
(4)	Administrative plan review. For uses and projects eligible for administrative review, as identified in Table 2115.1, the following procedure shall apply: 
(a)	Submittal requirements: Five paper copies and a single digital copy of the sketch plan that contains the information listed in section 2115(5) shall be submitted to the township office of community standards. 
(b)	Review: The office of community standards shall review and either approve the sketch plan, approve the sketch plan with a condition that certain revisions be made, or deny the sketch plan. 
(c)	Appeal: Either the township office of community standards or the applicant shall have the option to request sketch plan review by the planning commission. 
(d)	Issuance of building permit: A building permit shall be issued following review and approval of any engineering or construction plans by the building department and township engineer, as appropriate. 
(5)	Submittal requirements. The following information shall be included with and as part of the site plan(s) or sketch plan(s) submitted for review. Each category of site plan items ((a), (b), (c), etc.) shall be included on a separate sheet. Applications considered to be incomplete by the office of community standards may not be reviewed by the planning commission. 
SITE PLAN DATA 	Required for: 
	Pre-concept 	Prelim 
Site 
Plan 	Sketch 
Plan 
(a) Application Form: The application form shall contain the following information: 			
Name and address of the applicant and property owner; 	✓ 	✓ 	✓ 
Address and common description of property and complete legal description; 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
Dimensions of land and total acreage; 	✓ 	✓ 	✓ 
Zoning on the site and all adjacent properties; 	✓ 	✓ 	✓ 
Description of proposed project or use, type of building or structures, and name of proposed development, if applicable; 	✓ 	✓ 	✓ 
Name and address of firm or individual who prepared site plan; and, 	✓ 	✓ 	✓ 
Proof of property ownership. 	✓ 	✓ 	✓ 
(b) Site Plan Descriptive and Identification Data:			
Site plans shall consist of an overall plan for the entire development, drawn to an engineer's scale of not less than 1 inch = 50 feet for property less than three acres, or one inch = 100 feet for property three acres or more in size. Sheet size shall be at least 24 × 36 inches. If a large development is shown in sections on multiple sheets, then one overall composite sheet shall be included. 	✓ 	✓ 	✓ 
Written project description, including proposed use, building(s) and site improvements; 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
Title block with sheet number/title; name, address and telephone number of the applicant and firm or individual who prepared the plans; and date(s) of submission and any revisions (month, day, year); 	✓ 	✓ 	✓ 
Scale and north-point; 	✓ 	✓ 	✓ 
Location map drawn to a separate scale with north-point, showing surrounding land, water features, zoning and streets within a quarter mile; 	✓ 	✓ 	- 
Legal and common description of property; 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
Identification and seal of architect, engineer, land surveyor, or landscape architect who prepared drawings; 	- 	✓ 	- 
Zoning classification of petitioner's parcel and all abutting parcels; 	✓ 	✓ 	✓ 
Proximity to section corner and major thoroughfares; and, 	- 	✓ 	- 
Net acreage (minus rights-of-way) and total acreage. 	✓ 	✓ 	✓ 
(c) Site Analysis:			
An aerial photograph of the entire development area with all environmental features labeled on the photo in a "bubbled" fashion to include woodlands, wetlands, groundwater recharge areas, drains, creeks, surface water, severe changes in topography, erodible soils, and floodplains. Sheet size of the aerial photograph shall be at least 24 × 36 inches. 	✓ 		
Environmental impact analysis and natural features protection documentation meeting the requirements of Chapter 26 of the Municipal Code, Environment. 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
Survey of existing lot lines, building lines, structures, parking areas and other improvements on the site and within 100 feet of the site; 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
Survey of on parcels more than one acre, topography on the site and within 100 feet of site at two-foot contour intervals, referenced to a U.S.G.S. benchmark; 	- 	✓ 	- 
Surrounding land uses and zoning; 	- 	✓ 	- 
Inventory of the location, sizes, and types of existing trees, hedgerows and landmark trees as required by the township woodlands ordinance and the general location of all other existing plant materials; 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
Location of existing drainage courses, floodplains, lakes and streams, and wetlands with elevations; 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
Surface drainage flows including high points, low points and swales; 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
Soils and watertable; 	- 	✓ 	- 
All existing easements; 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
Existing roadways and driveways within 250 feet of the site; 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
Existing sidewalks and nonmotorized pathways; 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
Cultural resources and indication of human activities, such as paths; 	- 	✓ 	- 
(d) Site Plan:			
Proposed lot lines, lot dimensions, property lines and setback dimensions; 	✓ 	✓ 	✓ 
Structures, and other improvements; 	✓ 	✓ 	✓ 
Proposed easements; 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
Location of exterior lighting (site and building lighting) in accordance with site lighting standards; 	- 	✓ 	- 
Location of trash and recycling receptacle(s) and transformer pad(s) and method of screening; 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
Extent of any outdoor sales or display area; 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
(e) Access and Circulation:			
Dimensions, curve radii and centerlines of existing and proposed access points, roads and road rights-of-way or access easements; 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
Opposing driveways and intersections within 250 feet of site; 	✓ 	✓ 	- 
Cross section details of proposed roads, driveways, parking lots, sidewalks and nonmotorized paths illustrating materials and thickness; 	- 	✓ 	- 
Dimensions of acceleration, deceleration, and passing lanes; 	- 	✓ 	- 
Dimensions of parking spaces, islands, circulation aisles and loading zones; 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
Calculations for required number of parking and loading spaces; 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
Designation of fire lanes; 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
Traffic regulatory signs and pavement markings; 	- 	✓ 	- 
Location of existing and proposed sidewalks/pathways within the site or right-of-way; 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
Location, height, and outside dimensions of all storage areas and facilities. 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
(f) Landscape Plans:			
Location, sizes, and types of existing trees as required by the township woodlands ordinance and the general location of all other existing plant materials, with an identification of materials to be removed and preserved; 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
Description of methods to preserve existing plant materials; 	- 	✓ 	- 
The location of existing and proposed lawns and landscaped areas; 	✓ 	✓ 	✓ 
Planting plan, including location and type of all proposed shrubs, trees, and other live plant material; 	- 	✓ 	- 
Planting list for proposed landscape materials with caliper size or height of material, method of installation, botanical and common names, and quantity; 	- 	✓ 	- 
Proposed dates of plant installation; and, 	- 	✓ 	- 
Landscape maintenance schedule. 	- 	✓ 	- 
(g) Building and Structure Details:			
Location, height, and outside dimensions of all proposed buildings or structures; 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
Building floor plans and total floor area; 	- 	✓ 	- 
Details on accessory structures and any screening; 	- 	✓ 	- 
Location, size, height, and lighting of all proposed site and wall signs; 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
Location, size, height and material of construction for all obscuring wall(s) or berm(s) with cross-sections, where required; 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
Building facade elevations for all sides, drawn at an appropriate scale; and, 	option 	✓ 	- 
Description of exterior building materials and colors (samples may be required). 	- 	✓ 	- 
(h) Drainage, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control:			
Location and size of existing and proposed storm sewers; 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
Stormwater retention and detention ponds, including grading, side slopes, depth, high water elevation, volume and outfalls; 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
Stormwater drainage and retention/detention calculations; 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
Indication of site grading, drainage patterns and stormwater management measures, including sediment control and temperature regulation; and, 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures. 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
(i) Information Concerning Utilities:			
Location of sanitary sewers and septic systems, existing and proposed; 	- 	✓ 	- 
Location and size of existing and proposed water mains, well sites, water service and fire hydrants; 	- 	✓ 	- 
Location of existing and proposed gas, electric and telephone lines, above and below ground; 	- 	✓ 	- 
Location of transformers and utility boxes; and, 	- 	✓ 	- 
Assessment of potential impacts from the use, processing, or movement of hazardous materials or chemicals, if applicable. 	- 	✓ 	- 
(j) Lighting Plan			
Location of all freestanding, building-mounted and canopy light fixtures on the site plan and building elevations; 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
Photometric grid overlaid on the proposed site plan indicating the overall light intensity throughout the site (in foot-candles); 	- 	✓ 	- 
Specifications and details for the type of fixture being proposed including the total lumen output, type of lamp and method of shielding; and, 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
Use of the fixture proposed. 	- 	✓ 	✓ 
(k) Additional Information Required for Residential Development			
The number and location of each type of residential unit (one bedroom units, two bedroom units, etc.); 	✓ 	✓ 	- 
Density calculations by type of residential unit (dwelling units per acre); 	✓ 	✓ 	- 
Garage and/or carport locations and details, if proposed; 	- 	✓ 	- 
Mailbox cluster location and design, if required by post master; 	- 	✓ 	- 
Location, dimensions, floor plans and elevations of common building(s) (e.g., recreation, laundry, etc.), if applicable; 	- 	✓ 	- 
Swimming pool fencing detail, including height and type of fence, if applicable; 	- 	✓ 	- 
Location and size of recreation and open space areas; and, 	- 	✓ 	- 
Indication of type of recreation facilities proposed for recreation area. 	- 	✓ 	- 
Where the site is located within 500 feet of the I-94 right-of-way, delineate that area of the site with sound levels of 61 dBA or greater. 			
(l) Traffic Impact Study			
Traffic impact study as required by subsection (6) below. 	- 	✓ 	- 

(6)	Reserved.
(Ord. No. 99-219, 8-3-99; Ord. No. 2001-266, § 4, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 2002-306, 12-17-02; Ord. No. 2003-329, 1-20-04; Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 22, 2-20-18)
 
Sec. 2116. Site condominium review:
Pursuant to authority conferred by section 141 of the Condominium Act, Act No. 59 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq., MSA 26.50(101) et seq.), as amended, all condominium subdivision plans shall be reviewed and approved by the township planning commission and township board. In determining whether to approve a condominium subdivision plan, the planning commission and township board shall consult with the township attorney, township engineer, and township planner regarding the adequacy of the master deed, deed restrictions, utility systems and streets, subdivision layout and design and compliance with all requirements of the Condominium Act. 
1.	Site condominium—General requirements:
a.	Condominium lots. For the purposes of this section, each condominium lot shall be considered equivalent to a single lot and shall comply with all regulations of the zoning district in which located. In the case of a site condominium containing single-family detached dwelling units, not more than one dwelling unit shall be located on a condominium lot nor shall a dwelling unit be located on a condominium lot with any other principal structure or use. 
b.	Revision of condominium subdivision plan. If the condominium subdivision plan is revised, the final site plan shall be revised accordingly and submitted for review and approval or denial by the planning commission before any building permit may be issued, where such permit is required. 
c.	Amendment of master deed or bylaws. Any amendment to a master deed or bylaw that affects the approved preliminary or final site plan, or any conditions of approval of a preliminary or final site plan, shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission before any building permit may be issued, where such permit is required. The planning commission may require its review of an amended site plan if, in its opinion, such changes in the master deed or bylaws require corresponding changes in the approved site plan. 
d.	Development agreement. The planning commission may require, as a condition of approval, that the applicant enter into a development agreement with the planning commission and the township, incorporating therein the terms and conditions of final site plan approval, and record the same in the office of the register of deeds for Washtenaw County. 
e.	Relocation of boundaries. Relocation of boundaries between adjoining condominium lots, if permitted in the condominium documents, as provided in section 48 of the Condominium Act, Act No. 59 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq., MSA 26.50(101) et seq.), as amended, shall comply with all regulations of the zoning district in which located and shall be approved by the building inspector. These requirements shall be made a part of the bylaws and recorded as part of the master deed. 
f.	Subdivision of lots. Each condominium lot that results from a subdivision of another condominium lot, if such subdivision is permitted by the condominium documents, as provided in section 49 of the Condominium Act, Act No. 59 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq., MSA 26.50(101) et seq.), as amended, shall comply with all regulations of the zoning district in which located and shall be approved by the building inspector. These requirements shall be made a part of the condominium bylaws and recorded as part of the master deed. 
g.	Public streets. All site condominium developments shall utilize internal public streets that conform to the design standards of the township subdivision regulations ordinance, and other conditions set forth by the township board and Washtenaw County Road Commission. 
h.	Road right-of-way. Road right-of-way shall be parcels separate from individual condominium lots and shall be accurately delineated by bearings and distances on the condominium subdivision plan and the final site plan. The right-of-way shall be for roadway purposes and for the purposes of locating, installing, maintaining and replacing of public utilities. The developer shall dedicate easements of the township for all public water and sanitary sewer lines and appurtenances. 
i.	Easement for utilities. The site condominium subdivision plan shall include all necessary easements granted to the Township of Ypsilanti for the purposes of constructing, operating, inspecting, maintaining, repairing, altering, replacing and/or removing pipelines, mains, conduits and other installations of a similar character for the purpose of providing public utilities, including conveyance of sewage, water and stormwater runoff across, through and under the property subject to said easement, and excavating and refiling ditches and trenches necessary for the location of said structure. 
j.	Monuments. Monuments shall be set at all boundary corners and deflection points and at all road right-of-way intersection corners and deflection points. Lot irons shall be set at all condominium lot corners and deflection points of condominium lot lines. 
The township engineer may grant a delay in the setting of required monuments or irons for a reasonable time, but not to exceed one year, on condition that the developer deposit with the township clerk cash, a certified check, or an irrevocable bank letter of credit in an amount as determined from time to time by resolution of the township board. Such deposit shall be returned to the developer upon receipt of a certificate by a surveyor registered in the State of Michigan that the monuments and irons have been set as required within the time specified. If the developer defaults, the township board shall promptly require a registered surveyor to set the monuments and irons in the ground, as shown on the condominium site plans, at a cost not to exceed the amount of the security deposit. 
k.	As-built drawings. A dimensionally stable copy of the as-built drawings shall be submitted to the township clerk and a second dimensional stable copy shall be recorded with the Washtenaw County register of deeds. 
2.	Site condominium—Plan requirements:
a.	The name, address and telephone number of: 
(1)	All persons, firms, or corporation with an ownership interest in the land on which the condominium project will be located, together with a description of the nature of each entity's interest (for example, fee owner optionee or land contract vendee). 
(2)	All engineers, attorneys, architects or registered land surveyors associated with the project. 
(3)	The developer or proprietor of the condominium project. 
b.	The legal description of the land on which the condominium project will be developed, together with appropriate tax identification numbers. 
c.	The acreage content of the land on which the condominium project will be developed. 
d.	The purpose of the project (for example, residential, commercial, industrial, etc.). 
e.	Number of site condominium units to be developed on the subject parcel. 
f.	A survey plan of the site condominium subdivision. 
g.	The site condominium subdivision plan shall show the size, location, area[,] vertical boundaries and volume for each unit composed of enclosed air space. A number shall be assigned to each condominium unit. The site condominium subdivision plan shall include the nature, location and approximate size of common elements. 
h.	A utility plan showing all sanitary sewer, water, and storm sewer lines, and easements granted to the township for installation, repair and maintenance of all utilities. 
i.	A street construction, paving and maintenance plan for all streets within the proposed site condominium subdivision. 
j.	A storm drainage and stormwater management plan, including all lines, swales, drains, basins and other facilities. 
k.	A detailed site grading plan of all site condominium subdivision units, common areas, road rights-of-way and all other land areas within the proposed development. 
3.	Site condominium—Plan review:
a.	Preliminary site plan:
(1)	A preliminary site plan shall be filed for review with the township. Preliminary site plans shall be reviewed and approved or denied approval by the township planning commission and the township board. 
(2)	The preliminary site plan shall include all land that the developer intends to include in the site condominium project. 
(3)	The preliminary site plan shall include all information required herein, except in the case of single-family detached dwelling units. Dwelling units and required yards shall be shown on the preliminary site plan. In those instances where dwelling unit plans are not known, the plan may show the building envelope, provided such building envelope meets all side, front and rear setback requirements of the zoning district. 
(4)	The approval of any preliminary site condominium plan shall expire one year after such date of approval unless such plan has received an extension by the planning commission or township board. Fees for review of expired site plans may be waived in those instances where no substantial change in conditions of the site condominium plan nor of abutting uses has taken place. In those instances where conditions have changed, the fee for review of expired site condominium plans for new site condominium plans shall be the same as for the initial submittal. 
b.	Final site plan:
(1)	A final site plan shall be filed for review for each phase of development shown on the approved preliminary site plan. Final site plans shall be reviewed and approved or denied by the township planning commission. 
(2)	A final site plan for any phase of development shall not be filed for review by the planning commission unless a preliminary site plan has been approved by the planning commission and township board and is in effect. 
(3)	A final site plan shall include all information required by section 66 of the Condominium Act, Act No. 59 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq.), as amended, and the master deed and bylaws. The final site plan shall also include all information required herein, except in the case of single-family detached dwelling units, the location and dimensions of condominium units shall be shown on the site plan. 
(4)	The applicant shall provide proof of approvals by all county and state agencies required to review the condominium subdivision plan, including, but not limited to, the county road commission, county drain commissioner, county health department and the Michigan department of natural resources. The township planning commission shall not approve a final site plan until all county and state agencies required to review the condominium subdivision plan have approved the condominium subdivision plan. 
4.	Condominium subdivision design and approval:
a.	All site condominium subdivision plans shall conform to the design, layout and improvements standards of township subdivision regulations ordinance, as amended. The requirements for subdivision approval in the township subdivisions regulations ordinance shall not apply to condominium subdivision plans, except that a deposit in the form of cash, certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit acceptable to the township board shall be made with the Township of Ypsilanti to guarantee the installation and completion of any required public sanitary sewer, water supply, drainage facilities and street and walkway improvements within a length of time agreed upon from the date of final approval of the site condominium subdivision plan by the planning commission. 
b.	No permits for erosion control, building construction, grading, or installation of water or sanitary sewage facilities shall be issued for property in a site condominium development until a final site plan therefor has been approved by the planning commission and is in effect. This requirement shall include contractible, conversion, and expandable site condominiums, as defined in the Condominium Act, Act No. 59 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq.), as amended. 
c.	The approval of any final site condominium plan under this provision shall expire one year after the date of such approval, unless actual construction and development has been commenced in accordance with said site plan prior thereto. If such construction and development is commenced within said two-year period, then such approval shall continue for a period of five years from the date thereof; provided, however, that a lapse of more than one year in continuous, substantial construction and development does not occur, in which event, said approval shall expire. The township building official shall not issue a building permit for any type of construction on the basis of the approved site condominium plan after such approval has expired unless such plan has received an extension by the planning commission or township board. Fees for review of expired site plans may be waived in those instances where no substantial change in conditions of the site condominium plan nor of abutting uses has taken place. In those instances where conditions have changed, the fee for review of expired site condominium plans for new site condominium plans shall be the same as for the initial submittal. 
d.	All site improvements, including sanitary sewers, water mains, storm sewers, retention basins, site grading and street improvements, shall meet or exceed the minimum design standards of the Charter Township of Ypsilanti and the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority, as published in the "Engineering Design Specifications for Site Improvements" adopted by the township board on October 6, 1981, and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
e.	A final survey plan of the site condominium subdivision or phase thereof shall be submitted, together with a closure sheet of the external boundary and internal common areas, condominium land units, blocks of condominium units, street rights-of-way and all other land units, for review and approval by the township engineer. The exact length and bearing of all external and internal boundaries shall be clearly shown on the plan. The bearing source of orientation of the survey plan shall conform with that of an existing adjacent recorded subdivision or other established survey. 
5.	Notice of proposed action: The notice required by section 71, of the Condominium Act, Act No. 59 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq.), as amended, to be filed with Ypsilanti Township and other agencies. 
(Ord. No. 2001-290, 11-20-01)
 
Sec. 2117. Frontage on a public street:
No lot shall be used for any purpose permitted by this ordinance unless said lot abuts a public street, unless otherwise provided for in this ordinance or other ordinances of the township. 
 
Sec. 2118. Reserved.
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2020-491 , § 5, adopted July 21, 2020, repealed former § 2118 which pertained to access to major thoroughfares or collector street, and derived from Ord. 74, adopted May 17, 1994. 
 
Sec. 2119. Special land uses:
1.	Whenever a special land use, namely, a use permitted subject to special conditions, is requested pursuant to sections 402, 502, 602, 802, 903, 1003, 1102, 1302, 1402, 1501(4), or 1702 of this ordinance, then the provisions and conditions of this section shall apply in addition to the provisions and conditions of the other aforesaid sections. 
2.	The township planning commission shall have the authority to grant special land use permits and to attach conditions to a permit. Only those uses listed in sections 402, 502, 602, 802, 903, 1003, 1102, 1302, 1402, 1501(4), or 1702 of this ordinance shall be considered for special land use permit review and approval. 
3.	Application for a special land use permit shall be made by filing the application form, required information, and required fee with the building official. The fee shall be set by resolution by the township board, except that no fee shall be required for a special land use permit application for the construction of a single-family residence or of any governmental body or agency. No part of the fee shall be returnable to the applicant. The building official shall transmit a copy of the application and submitted information to the township planning commission. 
4.	An application for a special land use permit shall contain the following information: 
a.	The applicant's name, address, and telephone number. 
b.	The names and addresses of all record owners and proof of ownership. 
c.	The applicant's interest in the property and if the applicant is not the fee-simple owner, the owner's signed authorization for the application. 
d.	Legal description, address, and tax parcel number of the property. 
e.	A scaled and accurate survey drawing correlated with a legal description and showing all existing buildings, drives, and other improvements. 
f.	A detailed description of the proposed use. 
g.	A site plan, if requested by the planning commission, which plan shall meet all the requirements of section 2115 herein. 
5.	The planning commission shall review the particular circumstances and facts of each proposed use in terms of the following standards and required findings, and with respect to any additional standards set forth in the ordinance. The planning commission shall find and report adequate data, information, and evidence showing that the proposed use meets all required standards and: 
a.	Will be harmonious, and in accordance with the objectives, intent, and purpose of this ordinance; and 
b.	Will be compatible with a natural environment and existing and future land uses in the vicinity; and 
c.	Will be compatible with the township master plans; and 
d.	Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services, such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage ways and structures, refuse disposal, or that the persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to provide adequately for such services; and 
e.	Will not be detrimental, hazardous, or disturbing to existing or future neighboring uses, persons, property, or the public welfare; and 
f.	Will not create additional requirements at public costs for public facilities and services that will be detrimental to the economic welfare of the community. 
6.	The planning commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny special land use permit application. The planning commission's decision, the basis for their decisions, and all conditions imposed, shall be described in a written statement which shall be made a part of the record of the meeting. 
7.	In granting a special land use permit, the planning commission shall impose any conditions it deems necessary to achieve the objective and standards of this ordinance, the standards of the Township Rural Zoning Act, Act No. 184 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1943 (MCL 125.271 et seq.), as amended, and the public health, safety, and welfare of the township. Failure to comply with such conditions shall be considered a violation of the ordinance. An approved special land use permit, including all tax conditions, shall run with the parcel in the approval and shall remain unchanged except upon the consent of the planning commission. Any such changes shall be entered into township records and recorded in the minutes of the planning commission meeting at which the action occurred. The procedures required for an original application shall be followed with respect to any proposed changes. 
8.	An application for a special land use permit which has been denied wholly or in part by the planning commission should not be resubmitted for a period of 365 days from the date of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions found by the planning commission to be valid. 
9.	A special conditional use approval runs with the land until such time as the use designated in the "approval" is changed by the occupant. The land then reverts back to only the uses permitted in that specific zoning district. 
10.	The decision of the planning commission with respect to a special land use permit shall not be appealable to the board of appeals. 
 
Sec. 2120. Performance standards:
No use otherwise allowed shall be permitted within any district which does not conform to the following standards of use, occupancy, and operation, which standards are hereby established as the minimum requirements to be maintained within said area: 
1.	Smoke: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit the emission of any smoke from any source whatever to a density greater than that density described as no. 2 on the Ringelmann chart; provided that the following exceptions shall be permitted: 
a.	Smoke, the shade or appearance of which is equal to but not darker than no. 3 on the Ringelmann chart for a period, or periods, aggregating four minutes in any 30 minutes. 
b.	Smoke, the shade or appearance of which is equal to but not darker than no. 3 of the Ringelmann chart for a period or periods, aggregating three minutes in any 15 minutes, when building a new fire or when breakdown of equipment occurs such as to make it evident that the emission was not reasonably preventable. 
Method of measurement: For the purposes of grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann chart, as now published and used by the United States Bureau of Mines, which is hereby made a part of this ordinance, shall be the standard. However, the umbrascope readings of smoke densities may be used when correlated with Ringelmann's chart. 
2.	Dust, dirt and fly ash: No person, firm or corporation shall operate or cause to be operated, maintain or cause to be maintained, any process for any purpose, or furnace or combustion device for the burning of coal or other natural or synthetic fuels, without maintaining and operating while using said process or furnace or combustion device, recognized and approved equipment, means, method, device or contrivance to reduce the quantity of gasborne or airborne solids of fumes emitted into the open air, which is operated in conjunction with said process, furnace, or combustion device so that the quantity of gasborne or airborne solids shall not exceed 0.20 grains per cubic foot of the carrying medium at a temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit. 
Method of measurement: For the purpose of determining the adequacy of such devices these conditions are to be conformed to when the percentage of excess air in the stack does not exceed 50 percent at full load. The foregoing requirement shall be measured by the A.S.M.E. Test Code of dust-separating apparatus. All other forms of dust, dirt and fly ash shall be completely eliminated insofar as escape or emission into the open air is concerned. The building inspector may require such additional data as is deemed necessary to show that adequate and approved provisions for the prevention and elimination of dust, dirt and fly ash have been made. 
3.	Glare and radioactive materials: Glare from any process (such as or similar to arc welding, or acetylene torch cutting) which emits harmful ultraviolet rays shall be performed in such a manner as not be seen from any point beyond the property line, and as not to create a public point beyond the property line, and as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines. Radioactive materials and wastes, and including electromagnetic radiation such as X-ray machine operation, shall not be emitted to exceed quantities established as safe by the U.S. Bureau of Standards, when measured at the property line. 
4.	Fire and explosive hazards:
a.	In the I-1 industrial district, the storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning, as determined by the fire marshal, is permitted, subject to compliance with all other performance standards above mentioned. 
b.	The storage, utilization, or manufacture of materials, goods, or products ranging from free to active burning to intense burning, as determined by the fire marshal is permitted subject to compliance with all other yard requirements and performance standards previously mentioned, and provided that the following conditions are met: 
(1)	Said materials or products shall be stored, utilized or produced within completely enclosed buildings or structures having combustible exterior walls, which meet the requirements of the building code. 
(2)	All such buildings or structures shall be set back at least 40 feet from lot lines, or in lieu thereof, all such buildings or structures shall be protected throughout by an automatic sprinkler system complying with installation standards prescribed by the National Fire Association. 
(3)	The storage and handling of flammable liquids, liquified petroleum gases, and explosives shall comply with the state rules and regulations as established by Public Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1941 (MCL 29.1 et seq., MSA 4.559(1) et seq.), as amended. 
5.	Noise: The emission of measurable noises from the premises shall not exceed 60 decibels as measured at the boundary property lines, except where normal street traffic noises exceed 60 decibels during such periods, the measurable noise emanating from such premises may equal, but not exceed, such traffic noises. This provision shall apply in all districts except as hereinafter specified for the IRO, I-1, I-2, I-3 and IC districts. 
IRO, I-1, I-2, I-3 and IC districts: The measurable noise emanating from the premises used for activities permitted shall not exceed 75 decibels during the normal work periods of between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. and shall not exceed 70 decibels during the sleeping hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., as measured at the property lines. Noises shall be muffled so as not to become objectional due to intermittence, beat frequency or high frequency. 
6.	Vibration: Machines or operations which cause vibration shall be permitted in industrial districts, but no operation shall cause a displacement exceeding 0.003 of one inch as measured at the property line. 
7.	Odors: Creation of offensive odors shall be prohibited. 
 
Sec. 2121. Reserved.
 
Sec. 2122. Reserved.
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2018-476 , § 22, adopted Feb. 20, 2018, repealed former § 2122, which pertained to state-licensed residential child and adult care facilities, and derived from Ord. No. 2006-369, adopted Jan. 16, 2007; and Ord. No. 2016-468 , § II, adopted Oct. 18, 2016. 
 
Sec. 2123. Access management and driveway standards.
Uses permitted in this section shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)	In those instances where the planning commission finds that an excessive number of ingress or egress points may occur with relation to major or secondary thoroughfares, thereby diminishing the carrying capacity of the thoroughfare, or where the township master plan designates thoroughfares for the provision of marginal service roads, the commission may require the provision of marginal service roads and to assure adequate traffic circulation on the site, may require the development of parking so that contiguous lots on abutting properties will allow traffic circulation from one property to another without reentering the public thoroughfare. 
(2)	The pavement of the marginal service road shall be located 30 feet from the future right-of-way line of the thoroughfare and shall be at least 24 feet wide and shall be constructed in accord with "Engineering Design Specifications for Site Improvements," section 6, unless otherwise provided herein. Such service road shall be an easement which will permit the use of the service road for traffic circulation from one property to another. Such easement shall be in a written form acceptable to the township board and approved by the township board prior to the issuance of a building permit. No permanent structures such as curbs shall be permitted within the easement. Each property owner shall be responsible for maintenance of the easement so that it remains usable as a means of getting from one property to another. The easement shall be recorded with the county register of deeds prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. 
(3)	In reviewing the site plan, the planning commission may permit parking in the easement area, provided that the layout is such that parking can be removed at a later date when the marginal service road is needed for access to adjacent properties without disrupting the layout of the parking area. Temporary parking spaces permitted within the marginal service road easement shall not be included in computing the minimum off-street parking requirements under section 2104. 
(4)	Where marginal service roads are required, the planning commission shall recommend that the entire 24 foot area be paved up to the abutting properties. Backing from parking spaces onto the marginal service road shall not be permitted except on a temporary basis. The site plan shall indicate the proposed elevation of the marginal service road at the property line and the building inspector shall maintain a record of all marginal service road elevations so that their grades can be coordinated. Marginal service road elevations shall conform to elevations established by the Township or, if not so established be not more than one foot above or below the elevation of the adjoining property. Paving of the marginal service road shall meet construction specifications set by the township. 
(5)	The 30-foot setback area between the future road right-of-way and the marginal service road shall be kept in grass and landscaped in accordance with plans approved by the planning commission. The maintenance of the grass and the landscaped area shall be the obligation of the abutting property owner. 
(6)	Temporary entrances and exits may be approved for individual sites provided money is placed in escrow to assure elimination of temporary entrances and exits. Occupancy permits shall not be issued until monies have been deposited with the township. As a guideline, the national highway institute standards may be utilized by the planning commission in determining spacing for temporary entrances and exits. 
Highway Speed 

(mph) 	Minimum 

Spacing (feet) 
20 	 85 
25 	105 
30 	125 
35 	150 
40 	185 
45 	230 
50 	275 

(7)	In determining which entrances and exits will be permanent and which shall be temporary, the planning commission shall generally be guided by a minimum distance of 600 feet between entrances and exits and by the location of existing or approved drives on the opposite side of the street. 
(8)	Before obtaining a building permit for a permitted use, the owners of all property shall submit to the township a properly executed and witnessed license agreement which gives the township board the authority to open and dose marginal service roads and driveways whenever necessary in order to guarantee, to the satisfaction of the township board, a safe and efficient movement of traffic. The license may be recorded in the office of register of deeds of Washtenaw County, Michigan. Acceptance of this license shall in no way obligate the township to build, repair, maintain or clear the marginal service roads and no public funds may be spent by the township to build, repair, maintain or close the marginal service roads. The intent of this subsection is to require owners to construct a marginal service drive across the front of their property and to allow the township to enforce its traffic ordinances movement of traffic. All necessary pavement markings, signs and signals will be provided in accord with acceptable traffic engineering standards by the adjacent property owners. 
(9)	For any residential subdivision or site condo development, cluster housing or multiple-family development access shall be provided from a major or secondary thoroughfare by means of not less than two entrances (streets or drives) for properties of more than 700 feet in depth from such major or secondary thoroughfare or where a cluster housing or multiple-family development will contain more than 70 dwelling units. 
(Ord. No. 99-220, 7-20-99)
 
Sec. 2124. Reserved.
 
Sec. 2125. Exterior building wall design.
The purpose of this section is to provide a set of exterior building wall material standards, the intent of which is to enhance the visual environment of the township. Furthermore, the review of exterior building wall design and the consistent administration of standards can help to maintain the township's sense of place by encouraging consistent quality and character when structures are built or redeveloped. 
1.	This section shall apply to all construction, except single family residential structures, for all exterior building walls and shall consist of those materials and combinations of materials as set forth in this section. 
2.	The use of exterior wall materials shall be in compliance with the maximum percentages permitted in the "Schedule Regulating Exterior Building Wall Materials." 
3.	The application of these standards should promote integration and mixture of materials where more than one material is used on a building. If only one material is used, architectural detailing and articulation, massing, texture and form must be introduced into the building's design. Building roof materials should be in harmony with the style and material used on the building walls. 
4.	When building walls are 100 feet or greater in length, design variations must be applied to assure that the building is not monotonous in appearance. Such variations include but are not limited to the following: 
a.	Recess and projections along the building facade. Variations in depth should be a minimum of ten feet. 
b.	Architectural details or features. 
c.	Enhanced ornamentation around building entryways. 
d.	Landscaping. 
e.	Streetscape elements. 
f.	Variations in building height. 
5.	When a particular building design and the materials or combination of materials proposed to be used in exterior walls are found by the planning commission, after consultation and review by an appropriate design professional, to be in keeping with the intent and purpose of this section, but which may differ from the strict application of the schedule regulating material use of this section (e.g., use of new materials not covered in the Building Wall Materials Schedule), the planning commission may waive the requirements of this section pertaining to materials. When a waiver is requested under this subsection, the proposed building design and materials schedule shall be accompanied by a written design statement which shall describe how the selected wall materials and material combinations will be consistent with and enhance the building design. 
6.	Where a new wall material is proposed for an existing building wall, only that portion of the building being altered shall be subject to the standards of this section. However, in considering the proposed alteration, the planning commission shall view it in context of the architecture of the entire building. 
7.	Where an addition is proposed to an existing building, the planning commission may allow the use of existing wall materials for the addition provided that the design of the alteration is consistent with the existing building wall design. 
8.	This section is not intended to regulate the quality, workmanship and requirements for materials relative to strength, durability and endurance, maintenance, performance, load capacity, or fire resistance characteristics. 
Schedule Regulating Exterior Building Wall Materials 
Building Material 	Maximum Percent of Wall to be Covered by Certain Building Materials by Zoning District1 
	RM Districts 	RM-5 District 	B-5 and B-6 
Districts 	OS-12 	Commercial 
Districts2 	IRO2 	Industrial Districts 
	100 	75 	50 	25 	100 	75 	50 	25 	100 	75 	50 	25 	100 	75 	25 	100 	75 	50 	25 	100 	75 	50 	25 	100 	75 	25 
Masonry/Stone 					• 				• 																	
Face brick or ceramic 	• 				• 				• 				• 			• 				• 				• 		
Split face or ribbed block 			• 					• 				• 			• 				• 		• 			• 		
Stone 	• 						• 			• 			• 			• 				• 				• 		
Precast concrete 				• 										• 				• 			• 			• 		
Concrete formed in place 				• 										• 				• 					• 		• 	
Metal3 				• 								• 			• 			• 				• 			• 	
Glass 								• 			• 															
Tinted and reflective 			• 											• 			• 				• 				• 	
Glass block 			• 											• 				• 		• 					• 	
Wood (fire resistant only) 		• 					• 				• 															
Wood siding (beveled, lap, TEG, batten) 		• 					• 				• 			• 			• 						• 			- -5 
Finishes4 			• 					• 				• 		• 				• 			• 				• 	

  

2. All walls exposed to public view from adjacent residential, office, or business districts, or from a street, shall be constructed of not less than 75 percent masonry or stone, not to include unfinished concrete block. Metals, if utilized, shall be ribbed panels or other decorative finish in suitable colors. 
3. Flat sheets and seamed or ribbed panels include aluminum, porcelain, stainless steel, etc. 
4. Includes drivit, cement, plaster, stucco, or similar materials. Such materials shall not be used where contact with vehicles may occur, such as parking areas, traffic ways, or loading areas adjacent to building walls, unless such walls are adequately protected to prevent wall damage. 
5. Not permitted. 
(Ord. No. 98-184, 2-17-98; Ord. No. 2001-288, 12-18-01)
 
Sec. 2126. Essential services:
Essential services shall be permitted as authorized under any franchise in effect with the township, subject to regulations as provided in any law of the State of Michigan or in any ordinance of the township provided it is the intent of this section to ensure conformity of all structures and uses to the requirements of this zoning ordinance wherever such conformity shall be practicable and not in conflict with the specific requirements of such franchise, state legislation or township ordinance. In the absence of such conflict, the zoning ordinance shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2001-273, 8-21-01)
 
Sec. 2127. Voting place:
The provisions of this ordinance shall not be so construed as to interfere with the temporary use of any property as a voting place in connection with a municipal or other public election. 
(Ord. No. 2001-273, 8-21-01)
 
Sec. 2128. Lots adjoining alleys:
In calculating the area of a lot that adjoins an alley for the purpose of applying lot area requirements of this ordinance, one-half of the width of such alley abutting the lot shall be considered as part of such lot. 
(Ord. No. 2001-273, 8-21-01)
 
[Sec. 2129. Ford Lake waterfront access:]
1.	Purpose. It is the intent of this section to promote the integrity of Ford Lake within any zoning district in the township while preserving the quality of recreational use of the lake; to protect the quality of Ford Lake by discouraging excessive use; to promote the ecological health of Ford Lake and its wetlands by limiting incompatible land use of the wetlands associated with Ford Lake; and to maintain the beauty of Ford Lake by minimizing man-made adjustments to the current shorelines. 
2.	Regulations. In any zoning district where a parcel of land is contiguous to Ford Lake, such parcel of land may be used as access property or as common open space held in common by a subdivision, association or any similar agency; or held in common by virtue of the terms of a plat of record; or provided for common use under deed restrictions of record; or owned by two or more dwelling units located away from the waterfront only if the following conditions are met: 
a.	That said parcel of land shall contain at least 70 lineal feet of property contiguous to Ford Lake and a lot depth of at least 100 feet for each dwelling unit or each single family unit to which such privileges are extended or dedicated. Frontage shall be measured by a straight line which intersects each side lot line at the water's edge. 
b.	That in no event shall water frontage of such parcel of land consist of a swamp, marsh or bog as shown on the most recent U.S. geological survey maps, or as shown on the Michigan Resources Information System map (MIRIS); as shown by the National Wetlands Inventory; as determined to be wetland by the Michigan DEQ; or as shown on the Washtenaw County Wetlands Coverage Map; and that in no event shall a swamp, marsh, or bog be altered by the addition of earth or fill material or by the drainage of water for the purpose of increasing the water frontage required by this regulation. 
c.	That in no event shall such parcel of land abut a man-made canal or channel, and no canal or channel shall be excavated for the purpose of increasing the water frontage required by this regulation. 
d.	That access property, as provided for in and meeting the conditions of this section, regardless of total area, shall not be used as a residential lot for the purpose of constructing a dwelling and/or accessory structure(s), or for any commercial or business use. 
(Ord. No. 2004-333, § 2, 4-20-04)
 
[Sec. 2130. Marina and public launch access:]
A.	Short title. This section shall be known as the Marina and Public Access Launch Site Ordinance. 
B.	Purpose. To promote the health, safety and welfare of township residents by regulating the development of marinas and public access launch sites on Ford Lake in Ypsilanti Township. 
C.	Expansion of existing facilities.
i.	Approval of the planning commission shall be required for any increase in the number of watercraft allowed to be docked or moored at an existing marina over and above that allowed by the state department of environmental quality at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
ii.	Approval of the planning commission shall be required for any increase in the size, capacity or utilization of an existing public access launch site, including the number of watercraft allowed to be launched from the site and the number of watercraft trailers allowed to be parked at the facility over and above the size, capacity and utilization of any such site allowed by the state department of environmental quality at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
D.	Approval required for new facilities. Approval of the planning commission shall be required for the development and construction of all new marinas and public access launch sites on Ford Lake. The planning commission in giving such approval shall specify the maximum number of watercraft that can be docked or moored at and launched from such facility and the maximum number of watercraft trailers that can be parked or stored on the site. 
E.	Application for permits and standards. An application for a permit to develop and construct a new marina or public access launch on Ford Lake shall be filed with the planning commission. 
An application for a permit to expand an existing marina or public access launch site on Ford Lake shall be filed with the planning commission. 
The planning commission shall consider the environmental impact and recreational carrying capacity of the proposed new marina, public access launch site, expansion of a marina or expansion of a public access launch site. The planning commission may refer an application to the water conservation advisory commission for its recommendation on the proposed development. A permit shall not be granted if it is determined that: 
1.	The water quality of Ford Lake would be adversely impacted; or 
2.	The proposed addition or expansion of a marina or public access launch site would cause congested, unsafe conditions on the waters of Ford Lake due to the additional numbers of watercraft. 
F.	Right of appeal. Appeal may be taken as provided in sections 2402 through 2405 to the zoning board of appeals by any person, firm entity or corporation or by any officer, department, board or bureau affected by a decision of the planning commission with respect to the subject matter of this section. 
G.	Enforcement.
i.	All persons who violate any of the provisions of this section whether as owner, lessee, licensee, agent servant, or employee shall be liable as principals. 
ii.	In addition to, or in lieu of, seeking to enforce this section by issuance of municipal civil infraction(s), the township may institute an appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking equitable relief including, but not limited to, an order to remove the structure. 
iii.	Any persons who shall violate any provision or provisions of this section shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction which shall be punishable by a fine of $500.00 and provided further that each day's violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2004-334, § 2, 4-20-04)
 
ARTICLE XXII. NONCONFORMITIES 
 
Sec. 2201. General provisions:
1.	Intent: Nonconformities are lots, structures, sites or uses of land that do not conform to one or more provisions of this ordinance, but which were lawfully established prior to the date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance. Regulations are hereby established to govern the completion, restoration, reconstruction, extension and substitution of nonconformities, and to specify the circumstances and conditions under which nonconform- 
ities shall be permitted to continue. 
The objectives of this ordinance are as follows: 
a.	To permit nonconforming structures and uses of land to remain until discontinued or removed. 
b.	To encourage the upgrading of site improvements that were developed in compliance with the standards in force at the time of their construction, but which do not meet the site design standards of this ordinance. 
c.	To promote the combination of contiguous lots of record to create lots that conform to current standards for minimum lot width, lot area and street frontage. 
d.	To eliminate nonconforming uses of land that are incompatible with and more intense than permitted uses in a particular zoning district, or to encourage their redevelopment into more compatible uses. 
e.	To allow for the perpetuation of certain nonconforming structures or uses of land that do not significantly depress the value of nearby properties and are not contrary to the public health, safety and welfare. 
f.	To terminate and remove illegal structures or uses of land. 
2.	Definitions:
a.	Nonconforming structure: A structure or portion thereof lawfully existing at the effective date of this ordinance or amendments thereto that does not conform to ordinance provisions for the district in which it is located, but is otherwise in compliance with all other applicable federal, state, county and township laws, ordinances, regulations and codes. 
b.	Nonconforming use of land: A use that lawfully occupied a parcel or contiguous parcels of land or structure and land in combination at the effective date of this ordinance or amendments thereto that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located, or does not have special land use approval in accordance with section 2119 (special land uses) where provisions of this ordinance require such approval, but is otherwise in compliance with all other applicable federal, state, county and township laws, ordinances, regulations and codes. 
c.	Nonconforming lot: A platted or unplatted parcel of land lawfully existing at the effective date of this ordinance or amendments thereto that does not conform to ordinance provisions for the district in which it is located. 
d.	Nonconforming sign: See section 2109 (signs). 
e.	Nonconforming site: A parcel of land that was developed or improved with structures and other site improvements prior to the date of adoption of current zoning ordinance provisions for site design, landscaping, pedestrian access, exterior lighting, paving and other site elements. 
f.	Class A nonconforming designation: A nonconforming structure or use of land that has been designated by the planning commission to be allowed to be perpetuated and improved in accordance with the provisions of this article and an approved site plan. 
g.	Class B nonconforming status: Nonconforming structures or uses of land, other than those designated as Class A, are considered to be Class B and are allowed to continue within the restricted provisions of this ordinance. 
h.	Illegal structure: A structure or portion thereof, which is not a conforming or a nonconforming structure, or is not in compliance with all applicable federal, state, county and township laws, ordinances, regulations and codes. 
i.	Illegal use of land: A use that occupies one or more contiguous parcels of land, or structures and land in combination, which is not a conforming or a nonconforming use, or is not in compliance with all applicable federal, state, county and township laws, ordinances, regulations and codes. 
j.	Cessation: To terminate, abandon or discontinue a use of land for a period of time that, under the provisions of this ordinance, would prevent the use from being resumed. 
3.	Determinations: The zoning official shall determine the status of a structure, lot or use of land as conforming, nonconforming or illegal in accordance with the definitions and provisions of this ordinance. 
4.	Change of tenancy or ownership: There may be a change of tenancy, ownership or management of any existing nonconforming structure or use of land. 
5.	Appeals: All appeals of actions, orders, requirements, permits, decisions or refusals made by an administrative official charged with enforcement of any of the provisions of this section shall be made to the zoning board of appeals in accordance with Article 24 (XXIV) of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2001-273, 8-21-01)
 
Sec. 2202. Class A nonconforming designation:
1.	Public hearing: Upon petition, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing for consideration of a Class A designation for a nonconforming structure or a use of land. 
2.	Conditions for approval of a Class A designation: Subsequent to a public hearing, the planning commission may grant a Class A designation upon finding that all of the following conditions exist: 
a.	A determination that the structure or use of land is nonconforming as defined in this ordinance. 
b.	The nonconformity does not significantly depress the value of nearby properties. 
c.	The nonconformity is not contrary to the public health, safety and welfare. 
d.	No useful purpose would be served by the strict application of requirements for such a nonconformity under this ordinance. 
e.	Signage: Signage associated with the use shall be in compliance with section 2109 (signs). 
f.	Plan for site improvements: A plan for site improvements has been submitted in accordance with section 2115 (site plan review) and section 2206 (nonconforming sites) that is satisfactory to the planning commission. The planning commission may require improvements to landscaping, site design and layout, pedestrian access, building materials, screening, off-street parking, exterior lighting or other improvements as deemed necessary to protect surrounding uses. 
g.	Other conditions may be attached to the approval to assure that the structure or use of land does not become contrary to the public health, safety or welfare, or the spirit and purpose of this ordinance. 
3.	Effect of approval of a Class A designation: Class A nonconforming uses of land shall be permitted to be perpetuated and expanded in accordance with an approved plan and under the provisions of this ordinance. Class A nonconforming structures shall be permitted to be perpetuated, expanded, improved or replaced if damaged or destroyed in accordance with an approved plan and under the provisions of this ordinance. 
4.	Effect of denial of a Class A designation: An application for a Class A designation that has been denied wholly or in part by the planning commission may not be appealed to the zoning board of appeals, but may be resubmitted for planning commission consideration after a minimum of 365 days have elapsed from the date of denial. 
5.	Cessation or removal of Class A nonconforming structures or uses of land: When a Class A nonconforming structure is permanently removed, or when a Class A nonconforming use of land is replaced by a conforming use, the designation shall be deemed removed. Any subsequent structure or use of land shall conform to ordinance provisions for the district in which it is located. 
6.	Rescinding approval of a Class A designation: Failure of the property owner, or the owner, operator or person having beneficial use of land occupied by a Class A designated nonconforming structure or use of land to maintain or improve the site in accordance with this ordinance, an approved site plan or any conditions of approval shall be grounds for the planning commission to rescind a previously-approved Class A designation. Such action shall be subject to the following: 
a.	Public hearing: Such action may be taken only after a public hearing has been held pursuant to reasonable advance notice, at which time the property owner, or the owner, operator or person having beneficial use of land occupied by a Class A designated nonconforming structure or use of land shall be given an opportunity to present evidence in opposition to rescission. 
b.	Subsequent to the hearing, the planning commission's decision with regard to the rescission shall be made and written notification provided to said property owner, or the owner, operator or person having beneficial use of land occupied by a Class A designated nonconforming structure or use of land. 
7.	Class A designations for existing single family residential dwellings: Single-family residential dwellings, which are so used and so existing in non-residential zoning districts before the effective date of this ordinance or amendments thereto, are hereby designated as Class A nonconforming structures and Class A nonconforming uses of land. Such dwellings and accessory buildings may be repaired, expanded or replaced if destroyed, subject to the following conditions: 
a.	The expansion of the dwelling or accessory structures shall conform with all applicable yard dimensions, setbacks and other requirements for the R-4 (single-family residential) zoning district. 
b.	If an existing structure is destroyed, the replacement dwelling or accessory structure shall conform with all applicable yard dimensions, setbacks and other requirements for the R-4 (single-family residential) zoning district. 
c.	The use of the dwelling and associated parcel of land shall conform with the use district provisions of the R-4 (single-family residential) zoning district. 
d.	The dwelling and accessory structures shall conform to all other applicable federal, state, county and township laws, ordinances, regulations and codes. 
(Ord. No. 2001-273, 8-21-01)
 
Sec. 2203. Nonconforming lots:
1.	Division of nonconforming lots: Parcels shall not be divided in a manner that increases nonconformity, causes an existing structure or site improvement to become nonconforming or creates one or more nonconforming lots. 
2.	Use of a nonconforming lot: Any nonconforming lot shall only be used as permitted in the district in which it is located. A single nonconforming lot may be developed or improved with a principal building, and customary accessory structures, provided that the following conditions have been met: 
a.	The structures and lot shall conform with all applicable yard dimensions, setbacks and other requirements, other than minimum lot width and lot area, for the district in which the lot is located. 
b.	A lot of the same or smaller lot area and lot width, with frontage on the same street or a connecting street within 200 feet of the lot in question, has been lawfully developed with a principal building. 
c.	The lot is not under contiguous single ownership with other lots that could be combined into one or more conforming lots. 
d.	The lot and principal building shall be served by public water and public sanitary sewer. 
3.	Use of contiguous nonconforming lots under the same ownership: Two or more contiguous, nonconforming lots under the same ownership shall be considered one parcel and may only be independently improved with principal buildings, and customary accessory structures under the following conditions: 
a.	A lot that has been developed with a principal building must meet the minimum ordinance requirements for its own lot to allow the independent development of the adjacent lots under the same ownership. 
b.	All lots shall conform with all applicable ordinance requirements, including minimum lot width and lot area, for the district in which the lot is located. 
(Ord. No. 2001-273, 8-21-01)
 
Sec. 2204. Nonconforming structures:
1.	Class A nonconforming structures: See section 2202. 
2.	Class B nonconforming structures: No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity, except as provided for herein. Such structures may be enlarged or altered in a manner that does not increase its nonconformity. 
3.	Normal repairs and maintenance: Normal repair, maintenance or replacement of interior non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring, plumbing or heating and cooling systems in Class B nonconforming structures may be permitted in accordance with applicable code requirements, provided that such improvements do not result in an enlargement of a nonconforming structure or an expansion of a nonconforming use of land, and provided that the cost of such improvements does not exceed the assessed value or, if higher, 50 percent of the market value of the property. 
4.	Buildings under construction: Nothing in this ordinance shall require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building for which construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of this ordinance or amendments thereto and diligently carried on until completion. Construction shall include the placement of materials in a permanent manner or demolition and removal of an existing structure preparatory to rebuilding in accordance with an approved site plan. 
5.	Damaged or unsafe structures: Class B nonconforming structures that are declared to be physically unsafe by the building official, or otherwise damaged or destroyed by any means to an extent greater than the assessed value or, if higher, 50 percent of the market value of the property shall not thereafter be restored, repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
6.	Active farm operations: Class B nonconforming structures used in active farm operations may be expanded if approved by the zoning official, subject to the following requirements: 
a.	Farming shall be a permitted use and the intended use of the structure shall be a permitted use in the district in which it is located. 
b.	The expansion shall meet all requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. The existing structure and the expansion shall not exceed the ground floor coverage or floor area ratio limits of the district in which they are located. 
7.	Single-family dwellings: See section 2202.7. 
(Ord. No. 2001-273, 8-21-01)
 
Sec. 2205. Nonconforming uses of land:
1.	Class A nonconforming uses of land: See section 2202. 
2.	Class B nonconforming uses of land: Such uses may continue after the effective date of this ordinance or amendments thereto, subject to the following conditions: 
a.	The property owner, or the owner, operator or person having beneficial use of land occupied by a Class B nonconforming use of land shall demonstrate that the use is maintained in compliance with all other applicable federal, state, county and township laws, ordinances, regulations and codes. Failure to do so, or failure to bring the use into compliance with revised laws, ordinances, regulations and codes within six months of their effective date, shall constitute grounds for the township to seek court approval to terminate or remove the use at the owner's expense. 
b.	The use shall not be enlarged or increased, extended to occupy a greater area of land or moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the parcel or structure. No additional signage shall be permitted. 
c.	If the use ceases for a period of more than 180 days, the use shall not be resumed and subsequent uses of such land shall conform to ordinance provisions for the district in which it is located. Structures occupied by seasonal uses shall be excepted from this provision. 
d.	No additional structures may be constructed in association with the nonconforming use. If the structure associated with a nonconforming use is removed or destroyed, the nonconformity shall be deemed removed and subsequent uses of such land shall conform to ordinance provisions for the district in which it is located. 
e.	If the use is superseded by a permitted use, subsequent uses of such land shall conform to ordinance provisions for the district in which it is located. 
3.	Determination of status of a use of land as nonconforming: A determination of the status of a use of land as nonconforming shall be made by the zoning official only upon finding that the following conditions have been met: 
a.	A finding that the use of land does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
b.	A finding that the use of land is in compliance with all other applicable federal, state, county and township laws, ordinances, regulations and codes. 
c.	A finding that evidence from a minimum of three of the following sources clearly demonstrates that the use of land was legally established as a conforming use prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance or amendments thereto: 
(1)	Local and county government files or records: Such evidence may include, but shall not be limited to permits, inspection reports, dated photographs or notarized statements of township officials, agents, representatives or employees. 
(2)	The "R.L. Polk City Directory" or other dated telephone directories serving Washtenaw County. 
(3)	Utility records, including, but not limited to telecommunication service providers, Detroit Edison, Michigan Consolidated Gas Co. or the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority. 
(4)	Dated advertising or other information published in a newspaper or magazine serving Washtenaw County. 
(5)	Dated aerial photos from Washtenaw County governmental departments, the Southeastern Michigan Council of Governments (SEMCOG) or other sources as approved by the zoning official. 
(6)	Other relevant information, as may be accepted by the zoning official: Such evidence may include, but shall not be limited to date-stamped photographs, diary or log entries, affidavits or notarized statements. 
4.	Determination of cessation of a nonconforming use of land: A determination that a Class B nonconforming use of land has ceased shall be made by the zoning official only upon finding that a minimum of three of the following statements are true: 
a.	Local and county government files or records provide clear evidence that the nonconforming use of land has ceased. Such evidence may include, but shall not be limited to permits, inspection reports, dated photographs or notarized statements of township officials, agents, representatives or employees. 
b.	The "R.L. Polk City Directory" or other dated telephone directories serving Washtenaw County provide clear evidence that the nonconforming use has ceased. Such evidence may include, but shall not be limited to entries that show the address associated with the use as vacant or occupied by another use, or show the telephone number associated with the use as disconnected or in use at another location. 
c.	Utility records, including, but not limited to telecommunication service providers, Detroit Edison, Michigan Consolidated Gas Co. or the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority, provide clear evidence that the nonconforming use has ceased. Such evidence may include, but shall not be limited to records indicating that the address of the use is vacant or occupied by another use, the utility service associated with the use has been disconnected or the business, organization or individual associated with the use has moved to another location. 
d.	Dated advertising or other information published in a newspaper or magazine serving Washtenaw County provides clear evidence that the nonconforming use of land has ceased. Such evidence may include, but shall not be limited to a "going out of business sale," "moving sale," or "grand opening" event at a new location. 
e.	Dated aerial photos from Washtenaw County governmental departments, the Southeastern Michigan Council of Governments (SEMCOG) or other sources as approved by the zoning official provides discernible evidence that the nonconforming use of land has ceased. 
f.	Other relevant information, as may be accepted by the zoning official, provides clear evidence that the nonconforming use of land has ceased. Such evidence may include, but shall not be limited to date-stamped photographs, diary or log entries, affidavits or notarized statements. 
5.	Substitution of nonconforming uses of land: Upon petition, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing for consideration of a request to substitute one nonconforming use for another nonconforming use on the same parcel. Subsequent to a public hearing, the planning commission may grant approval of such a request upon finding that all of the following conditions exist: 
a.	The proposed nonconforming use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. Where a nonconforming use is changed to a more conforming use, it shall not thereafter be changed to a less conforming use. 
b.	Signage: Signage associated with the proposed nonconforming use shall be in compliance with section 2109 (signs). 
c.	Plan for site improvements: A plan for site improvements has been submitted in accordance with section 2115 (site plan review) and section 2206 (nonconforming sites) that is satisfactory to the planning commission. The planning commission may require improvements to landscaping, site design and layout, pedestrian access, building materials, screening, off-street parking, exterior lighting or other improvements as deemed necessary to protect surrounding uses. 
d.	Other conditions may be attached to the approval to assure that the use of land does not become contrary to the public health, safety or welfare, or the spirit and purpose of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2001-273, 8-21-01)
 
Sec. 2206. Nonconforming sites:
The purpose of this section is to encourage improvements and minor modifications to nonconforming sites by establishing standards for prioritizing site improvements that are designed to gradually bring the site into compliance with the site design requirements of this ordinance. Nonconforming sites shall not be improved or modified in a manner that increases noncompliance with this ordinance. Nonconforming sites subject to review in accordance with section 2115 (site plan review) may be improved or modified without a complete upgrade of all site elements under the following conditions: 
1.	The proposed site improvements shall include exterior lighting, landscaping, screening and building improvements that are in reasonable proportion to the scale and construction cost of proposed building improvements, expansions or other improvements. 
2.	The proposed site improvements resolve public safety deficiencies, including building and fire code violations, emergency access and pedestrian/vehicle conflicts. 
3.	The proposed site improvements include the installation, restoration or expansion of sidewalks and non-motorized paths within and through the site consistent with the provisions of this ordinance. 
4.	A reasonable timeline for completion of site improvements may be approved as part of any site plan approval. Failure to complete improvements in accordance with an approved timeline shall be deemed a violation of the approved site plan. 
(Ord. No. 2001-273, 8-21-01)
 
ARTICLE XXIII. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
 
Sec. 2300. Enforcement:
The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the building official or by such deputies of his department as the building official may delegate to enforce the provisions of this ordinance. 
 
Sec. 2301. Duties of building official:
The building official shall have the power to grant zoning compliance and occupancy permits, to make inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this ordinance. It shall be unlawful for the building official to approve any plans or issue any permits or certificates of occupancy for any excavation or construction until he has inspected such plans in detail and found them to conform with this ordinance. 
The building official shall record all nonconforming uses existing at the effective date of this ordinance for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of section 2102. 
Under no circumstances is the building official permitted to make changes to this ordinance nor to vary the terms of this ordinance in carrying out his duties as building inspector. 
The building official shall not refuse to issue a permit when conditions imposed by this ordinance are complied with by the applicant despite violations of contracts, such as covenants or private agreements which may occur upon the granting of said permit. 
 
Sec. 2302. Plot plan:
The building official shall require that all applications for building permits for uses not covered in section 2115 shall be accompanied by plans and specifications including a plot plan, in triplicate, drawn to scale, showing the following: 
1.	The actual shape, location, and dimensions of the lot. 
2.	The shape, size and location of all buildings or other structures to be erected, altered, or moved and of any building or other structures already on the lot. 
3.	The existing and intended use of the lot and of all such structures upon it, including, in residential areas, the number of dwelling units the building is intended to accommodate. 
4.	Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this ordinance are being observed. 
 
Sec. 2303. Permits:
The following shall apply in the issuance of any permit: 
1.	Permits not to be issued: No building permit shall be issued for the erection, alteration or use of any building or structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all provisions of this ordinance. 
2.	Permits for new use of land: No land heretofore vacant shall hereafter be used or an existing use of land be hereafter changed to a use of a different class or type unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the new or different use. 
3.	Permits for new use of building: No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be changed to or occupied by a use of a different class or type unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the new or different use. 
4.	Permits required: No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be hereafter erected, altered, moved, or repaired unless a building permit shall have been first issued for such work. The terms "altered" and "repaired" shall include any changes in structural parts, stairways, type of construction, type, class or kind of occupancy, light or ventilation, means of egress and ingress, or other changes affecting or regulated by the Township of Ypsilanti building code, housing law or this ordinance, except for minor repairs or changes not involving any of the aforesaid features. 
 
Sec. 2304. Certificates:
No land, building, or part thereof, shall be occupied by or for any use unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such use. The following shall apply in the issuance of any certificate: 
1.	Certificates not to be issued: No certificates of occupancy shall be issued for any building, structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all the provisions of this ordinance. 
2.	Certificates required: No building or structure, or parts thereof, which is hereafter erected, or altered, shall be occupied or used or the same caused to be done, unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such building or structure. 
3.	Certificates including zoning: Certificates of occupancy as required by the township building code for new buildings or structures, or parts thereof, or for alterations to or changes of use of existing buildings or structures, shall also constitute certificates of occupancy as required by this ordinance. 
4.	Certificates for existing buildings: Certificates of occupancy shall be issued for existing buildings, structures, or parts thereof, or existing uses of land if, after inspection, it is found that such buildings, structures, or parts thereof, or such use of land, are in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
5.	Record of certificates: A record of all certificates issued shall be kept on file in the office of the building official, and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the property involved. 
6.	Certificates for dwelling accessory buildings: Buildings or structures accessory to dwellings shall not require separate certificates of occupancy but may be included in the certificate of occupancy for the dwelling when shown on the plot plan and when completed at the same time as such dwellings. 
7.	Application for certificates: Application for certificates of occupancy shall be made in writing to the building official on forms furnished by that department, and such certificates shall be issued within five days after receipt of such application if it is found that the building or structure, or part thereof, or the use of land is in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. If such certificate is refused for cause, the applicant therefor shall be notified of such refusal and cause thereof, within the aforesaid five-day period. 
 
Sec. 2305. Final inspection:
The holder of every building permit for the construction, erection, alteration, repair, or moving of any building, structure or part thereof, shall notify the building official immediately upon the completion of the work authorized by such permit, for a final inspection. 
 
Sec. 2306. Fees:
Fees for zoning change review, site plan review for projects requiring review under sec. 2115, uses permitted subject to special conditions, inspection and the issuance of permits or certificates or copies thereof required or issued under the provisions of this ordinance may be collected by the building official in advance of issuance. The amount of such fees shall be established by resolution of the township board and shall cover the cost of inspection and supervision resulting from enforcement of this ordinance. 
 
Sec. 2307. Security for completion of improvements:
Approval of a preliminary plat or site condominium plan shall be conditioned upon the execution of a development agreement which secures the completion of improvements required on the plat or site condominium plan. Where the timing or nature of improvements require such security, the approval of a site plan may be conditioned upon the execution of a development agreement. Unless designated as optional, all improvements shown on the site plan shall be completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. However, where it would be impractical to delay occupancy prior to the completion of certain improvements, a certificate of occupancy can be issued upon the approval of the building official if an adequate guarantee as required in section 2308 is presented to the township to secure the improvements. 
 
Sec. 2308. Guarantee:
Guarantee in the form of a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit or surety bond shall be provided in a form acceptable to the township. The amount of such guarantee shall cover all improvements not normally covered in the building permit, i.e., berms, walls, landscaping, lighting, surfacing of drives, parking, service drives, acceleration/deceleration lanes, bypass lanes and other traffic control devices, etc. The guarantee shall include a schedule of costs assigned to the different improvements. Monies may be released to the applicant in proportion of work completed on the different elements after inspection of work and approval of the building official. Any partial release of funds shall be less than ten percent which shall be retained by the township until all work has been completed and subsequently inspected and approved by the building official. 
If more than one bond or guarantee is involved in construction of the improvements required in this section, each such assurance shall be treated as a separate agreement and the ten-percent holdback may be released upon satisfactory completion of such phase of construction and approval of the building official. 
In instances where all improvements, as required in this section, are not completed, and a temporary certificate of occupancy is requested, the estimated cost of such improvement shall be verified by the building official, particularly with respect to any delay to another construction season. In those instances where the estimated cost has changed, then a revised guarantee, acceptable to the township, shall be filed with the clerk covering such improvements. 
 
Sec. 2309. Establishment of a planning commission with zoning authority:
1.	Scope, purpose and intent. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority granted the Charter Township of Ypsilanti Board (hereinafter township board) under the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3801 et seq., and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, MCL 125.3101 et seq., to establish a planning commission with the powers, duties and limitations provided by those Acts and subject to the terms and conditions of this ordinance and any future amendments to this ordinance. 
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide that the township board shall hereby confirm the establishment under the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3801 et seq., of the Charter Township of Ypsilanti Planning Commission formerly established under the Township Planning Act, Public Act 168 of 1959, MCL 125.321 et seq., to establish the appointments, terms, and membership of the planning commission; to identify the officers and the minimum number of meetings per year of the planning commission; and to prescribe the authority, powers and duties of the planning commission. 
2.	Establishment. The township board hereby confirms the establishment under the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3801 et seq., of the Ypsilanti Township Planning Commission (hereinafter planning commission) formerly established under the Township Planning Act, Public Act 168 of 1959, MCL 125.321 et seq. The planning commission shall have seven members. Members of the planning commission as of the effective date of this ordinance shall, except for an ex officio member whose remaining term on the planning commission shall be limited to his or her term on the township board, continue to serve for the remainder of their existing terms so long as they continue to meet all of the eligibility requirements for planning commission membership set forth within the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3801 et seq. 
3.	Appointments and terms. Subject to approval by a majority vote of the elected and serving members of the township board, the township supervisor shall appoint all members of the planning commission, including one member of the township board who shall serve as an ex officio member with full voting rights. The planning commission members, other than the ex officio member, shall serve for terms of three years each. The ex officio member's term shall expire with his or her term on the township board. A planning commission member shall hold office until his or her successor is appointed. A vacancy shall be filled by appointment to the unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointment. Other than the ex officio member, no other elected officer or employee of the township is eligible to be a member of the planning commission. 
Planning commission members shall be qualified electors of the township, except that one planning commission member may be an individual who is not a qualified elector of the township. The membership of the planning commission shall be representative of important segments of the community, such as the economic, governmental, educational, and social development of the township, in accordance with the major interests as they exist in the township, such as agriculture, natural resources, recreation, education, public health, government, transportation, industry, and commerce. The membership shall also be representative of the entire geography of the township to the extent practicable. 
4.	Removal. The township board may remove a member of the planning commission for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written charges and after a public hearing. 
5.	Conflict of interest. The planning commission shall in its bylaws provide rules regarding what constitutes a conflict of interest. 
6.	Compensation. The planning commission members may be compensated for their services as provided by township board resolution. The planning commission may adopt bylaws relative to compensation and expenses of its members for travel when engaged in the performance of activities authorized by the township board, including, but not limited to, attendance at conferences, workshops, educational and training programs and meetings. 
7.	Officers and committees. The planning commission shall elect a chairperson and a secretary from its members, and may create and fill other offices as it considers advisable. An ex officio member of the planning commission is not eligible to serve as chairperson. The term of each office shall be one year, with opportunity for reelection as specified in the planning commission bylaws. 
The planning commission may also appoint advisory committees whose members are not members of the planning commission. 
8.	Bylaws, meetings and records. The planning commission shall adopt bylaws for the transaction of business. 
The planning commission shall hold at least four regular meetings each year, and shall by resolution determine the time and place of the meetings. 
Unless otherwise provided in the planning commission's bylaws, a special meeting of the planning commission may be called by the chairperson or by two other members, upon written request to the secretary. Unless the bylaws otherwise provide, the secretary shall send written notice of a special meeting to planning commission members at least 48 hours before the meeting. 
The business that the planning commission may perform shall be conducted at a public meeting held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of 1976, MCL 15.261 et seq. 
The planning commission shall keep a public record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations. A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by the Planning Commission in the performance of an official function shall be made available to the public in compliance with the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act 442 of 1976, MCL 15.231 et seq. 
9.	Annual report. The planning commission shall make an annual written report to the township board concerning its operations and the status of the planning activities, including recommendations regarding actions by the township board related to planning and development. 
10.	Authority to make master plan. Under the authority of the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3801 et seq., and other applicable planning statutes, the planning commission shall make a master plan as a guide for development within the township's planning jurisdiction. The procedure for adoption or amendment of a master plan shall be as prescribed in Article III of the Act, MCL 125.3831 through 125.3851. 
Final authority to approve a master plan or any amendments thereto shall rest with the township board after recommendation of the planning commission in accordance with the Act. The township board shall pass a resolution in accordance with MCL 125.3843(3) asserting its right to approve or reject a master plan. 
Unless rescinded by the township, any plan adopted or amended under the Township Planning Act, Public Act 168 of 1959, MCL 125.321 et seq., need not be readopted under the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3801 et seq. 
11.	Zoning powers. The township board hereby confirms the transfer of all powers, duties, and responsibilities provided for zoning boards or zoning commissions by the former Township Zoning Act, Public Act 184 of 1943, MCL 125.271 et seq.; the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, MCL 125.3101 et seq.; or other applicable zoning statutes to the Charter Township of Ypsilanti Planning Commission formerly established under the Township Planning Act, Public Act 168 of 1959, MCL 125.321 et seq. 
Any existing zoning ordinance shall remain in full force and effect except as otherwise amended or repealed by the township board. 
12.	Subdivision and land division recommendations. The planning commission may recommend to the township board provisions of an ordinance or rules governing the subdivision of land. Before recommending such an ordinance or rule, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed ordinance or rule. The planning commission shall give notice of the time and place of the public hearing not less than 15 days before the hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the township. 
The planning commission shall review and make recommendation on a proposed plat before action thereon by the township board under the Land Division Act, Public Act 288 of 1967, MCL 560.101 et seq. The planning commission shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval of a plat within 63 days after the plat is submitted to the planning commission unless the plat proprietor waives this requirement and consents to an extension of the 63-day period. Before making its recommendation, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed plat. A plat submitted to the planning commission shall contain the name and address of the proprietor or other person to whom notice of a hearing shall be sent. Not less than 15 days before the date of the hearing, notice of the date, time and place of the hearing shall be sent to that person at that address by mail and shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the township. Similar notice shall be mailed to the owners of land immediately adjoining the proposed platted land. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, §§ I—XII, 6-21-11)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2011-414, §§ I—XII, adopted June 21, 2011, has been treated as superseding § 2309, Township planning commission, to read as herein set out. Former § 2309 derived from the original codification. 
 
ARTICLE XXIV. BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
 
Sec. 2400. Creation and membership:
1.	There is hereby established a zoning board of appeals, which shall perform its duties and exercise its powers as provided in Act No., 110 of 2006, as amended, MCL 125.3101, et seq., and in such a way that the objectives of this ordinance shall be observed, public safety, and welfare secured and substantial justice done. 
2.	The zoning board of appeals shall be composed of five members. The first regular member of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be a member of the Planning Commission. The remaining members shall be selected from the electors of Ypsilanti Township residing outside of the City. The members selected shall be representative of the population distribution and of the various interests present in the Township. One regular member may be a member of the Township Board. An elected officer of the Township shall not serve as chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals. An employee or contractor of the Township Board may not serve as a member of the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
3.	The township board may appoint not more than two alternate members for the same term as regular members to the zoning board of appeals. An alternate member may be called upon as specified herein to sit as a regular members of the zoning board of appeals in the absence of a regular member if a regular member is absent from or unable to attend one or more consecutive meetings. An alternate member may also be called to serve in the place of a regular member for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which the regular member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest. The alternate having been appointed shall serve in the case until a final decision has been made. While serving, the alternate member shall have the same voting rights as a regular member of the zoning board of appeals. 
4.	Terms shall be for the three years, except for members serving because of their membership on the planning commission, or township board, whose terms shall be limited to the time they are members of the planning commission, or township board, respectively, and the period stated in the resolution appointing them, a successor shall be appointed not more than one month after the term of the preceding member has expired. Vacancies for unexpired terms shall be filled for the remainder of the term. 
(Ord. No. 2008-385, 10-7-08)
 
Sec. 2401. Meetings:
1.	The zoning board of appeals shall adopt rules and regulations to govern its procedures. The zoning board of appeals shall elect a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary from its membership. 
2.	A concurring vote of a majority of the members of the zoning board of appeals shall be necessary for any decision. The zoning board of appeals shall not conduct business unless a majority of its members is present. 
3.	Any person may appear on his or her behalf at a hearing or may be represented by an agent or attorney. 
4.	The zoning board of appeals shall decide upon all matters within a reasonable time, not to exceed 90 days from the filing date. The decision of the zoning board of appeals shall be in the form of a resolution containing a full record of its findings and determinations in each case. The time limit may be extended by agreement between the applicant or appellant and the zoning board of appeals. 
5.	Meetings of the zoning board of appeals should be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as the zoning board of appeals and its rules and regulations may specify. Minutes shall be kept of each meeting and the zoning board of appeals shall record into the minutes all findings, conditions of approval, facts, and other relevant factors and all of its official actions. A vote of each member upon a question, or absence or abstention, shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting. All meetings and records shall be open to the public. All minutes shall be filed in the office of the township clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2008-385, 10-7-08)
 
Sec. 2402. Appeals:
Appeals may be taken by the person, firm or corporation aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, agency, or bureau of the township or, state governments. In addition, a variance in the zoning ordinance may be applied for and granted under section 4 of the Uniform Condemnation Procedures Act, 1980 PA 87, MCL 213.54, and as provided under the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, MCL 125.3101, et seq. The zoning board of appeals shall state the grounds of any determination made by the board. 
(Ord. No. 2008-385, 10-7-08)
 
Sec. 2403. Fees:
The township board may from time to time prescribe and amend by resolution a reasonable schedule of fees to be charged to applicants for appeals to the zoning board of appeals. A fee shall be paid to the township treasurer at the time of filing the appeal and shall be deposited in the township's general fund. 
(Ord. No. 2008-385, 10-7-08)
 
Sec. 2404. Jurisdiction:
The zoning board of appeals shall not have the power to alter or change the zoning district classification of any property, nor to make any change in the terms of this ordinance, but does have power to act on those matters where this ordinance provides for an administrative review, interpretation, exception or to authorize a variance as defined in this section and laws of the State of Michigan. Said powers include: 
1.	Administrative review: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirement, permit, decision or refusal made by an administrative official or body charged with enforcement of any of the provisions of this ordinance. 
Appeals shall be filed within 60 days of the decision in question. The appeal shall be filed with the township clerk and a copy shall be filed with the zoning board of appeals, and a copy shall be filed with the person or body whose decision is appealed. The appellant shall submit a clear description of the order, requirement, decision, or determination for which the appeal is made and the grounds of the appeal. The appellant may be required by the zoning board of appeals to submit additional information to clarify the appeal. The administrative person or body appealed from shall transmit to the zoning board of appeals copies of all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
2.	Variance: To authorize, upon an appeal, a variance from the strict application of the provisions of this ordinance where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape or area of a specific piece of property at the time of enactment of this ordinance or amendments to this ordinance or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional conditions of such property, the strict application of the regulations enacted would result in peculiar or exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional undue hardship upon the owner of such property, provided such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this ordinance. In granting a variance, the zoning board of appeals may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed uses as it may deem reasonable in furtherance of the purpose of this ordinance. A violation of any condition imposed shall be a violation of this ordinance under section 3100 herein and shall result in revocation of any variance granted. In granting a variance, the zoning board of appeals shall state the grounds upon which it justifies the granting of a variance. 
a.	An application for a variance shall be filed with the Community and Economic Development Department by the record owner of the property in question or by a person authorized to act on the record owner's behalf. The applications shall consist of a completed application form, fee, and the information required. The Community and Economic Development Department shall transmit the application and information to the zoning board of appeals and to the township clerk. 
b.	An application for a variance shall contain the following information: 
(1)	Legal description, address, and tax parcel number of the subject property. 
(2)	An accurate scale drawing of the property, showing all property lines, dimensions, and bearings or angles correlated with the legal description; and all existing and proposed structures and uses on the property; and dimensions of structures and the dimensional locations; lot area calculations necessary to show compliance with the regulations of this ordinance; and location of drives, sidewalks, and other paved areas on the property and on the adjacent streets. 
(3)	Location and dimensions of the nearest structures on adjacent properties. 
(4)	Name and address of the applicant, property owner, and the interest of the applicant in the property. 
c.	The filing fee for a variance as determined by the Ypsilanti Township board shall be paid to the township treasurer at the time of the filing of the application for variance and shall be deposited in the township's general fund. 
d.	The zoning board of appeals may grant a dimensional or non-use variance only upon a finding that compliance with the strict letter of the restrictions governing area, setbacks, frontage, height, bulk, density, or other dimensional provisions would create a practical difficulty and unreasonably prevent the use of the property. A finding of practical difficulty shall require demonstration that all the following conditions are met: 
(1)	That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the property in question that do not apply generally to other properties or classes of uses in the same zoning district. Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions include but may not be limited to: 
(a)	exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific property; 
(b)	exceptional topographic conditions; 
(c)	any other physical situation on the land, building or structure deemed by the zoning board of appeals to be extraordinary; or, 
(d)	development characteristics of land immediately adjoining the property in question that creates a exceptional constraint. 
(2)	That a variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other properties in the same zoning district and in the vicinity; 
(3)	That the authorizing of such variance will not be a substantial detriment to adjacent property and will not materially impair the purposes of this ordinance or the public interest; and 
(4)	The problem and resulting need for the variance has not been self-created by any action of the applicant or the applicant's predecessors. 
e.	An application for variance which has been denied wholly or in part by the zoning board of appeals shall not be resubmitted for a period of 365 days from the date of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or changed conditions found by the zoning board of appeals to be valid. 
f.	A variance granted shall not be the basis of a request for a further variance. 
3.	Exceptions and special approvals: To hear and decide in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, requests for exceptions, for interpretations of the zoning map, and for decisions on special approval situations on which this ordinance specifically authorizes the zoning board of appeals to pass. Any exception or other matter on which this ordinance specifically authorizes the zoning board of appeals to pass shall be subject to such conditions as the zoning board of appeals may require in order to preserve and promote the character of the zone district in question and otherwise promote the purpose of this ordinance, including the following: 
a.	Interpret the provisions of this ordinance in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the plan, as shown upon the zoning map fixing the use districts, accompanying and made part of this ordinance, where street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the map aforesaid. 
b.	Permit the erection and use of a building or use of premises for public utility purposes, upon recommendation of the planning commission. 
c.	Permit the modification of the automobile parking space or loading space requirements where, in the particular instance, such modification will not be inconsistent with the purpose and intent of such requirements. 
d.	Permit such modification of the height and area regulations as may be necessary to secure an appropriate improvement of a lot which is of such shape, or so located with relation to surrounding development of physical characteristics, that it cannot otherwise be appropriately improved without such modification. 
e.	Permit temporary buildings and uses for periods not to exceed two years in undeveloped sections of the township and for periods not to exceed six months in developed sections. 
f.	Permit, upon proper application, the following character of temporary use, not otherwise permitted in any district, not to exceed 12 months with the granting of 12-month extensions being permissible: Uses which do not require the erection of any capital improvement of a structural nature. 
The zoning board of appeals, in granting permits for the above temporary uses, shall do so under the following conditions: 
(1)	The granting of the temporary use shall in no way constitute a change in the basic uses permitted in the district nor on the property wherein the temporary use is permitted. 
(2)	The granting of the temporary use shall be granted in writing stipulating all conditions as to time, nature of development permitted and arrangements for removing the use at the termination of said temporary permit. 
(3)	All setbacks, land coverage, off-street parking, lighting and other requirements to be considered in protecting the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Township of Ypsilanti, shall be made at the discretion of the zoning board of appeals or township planning commission as the case may be. 
(4)	In classifying uses as not requiring capital improvement, the zoning board of appeals shall determine that they are either demountable structures related to the permitted use of the land; recreation developments, such as, but not limited to: golf driving ranges and outdoor archery courts; or structures which do not require foundations, heating systems or sanitary connections. 
(5)	The use shall be in harmony with the general character of the district. 
(6)	No temporary use permit shall be granted without first giving notice to owners of adjacent property of the time and place of a public hearing to be held as further provided for in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2008-385, 10-7-08)
 
Sec. 2405. Orders:
In exercising the above powers, the zoning board of appeals may reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may condition or modify the orders, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought be to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the administrative official or body from whom the appeal is taken. 
(Ord. No. 2008-385, 10-7-08)
 
Sec. 2406. Miscellaneous:
No order of the zoning board of appeals permitting the erection of a building shall be valid for a period longer than one year, unless a building permit for such erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. 
Use variances as described in Act 110 of 2006, as amended, MCL 125.3101, et seq., shall not be permitted in the Township. In the event an application is made for such a use variance, the zoning board of appeals shall deny the application and advise the applicant that use variances are prohibited in the Township by the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2008-385, 10-7-08)
 
Sec. 2407 Notice:
Notice shall be provided for each variance, appeal of an administrative decision, exception or special approval in advance of a zoning board of appeals meeting in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended, MCL 125.3101, et. seq. 
(Ord. No. 2008-385, 10-7-08)
 
ARTICLE XXV. ZONING COMMISSION
 
Sec. 2501. Zoning commission:
The township planning commission is hereby designated as the commission specified in section 11, of Act No. 168 of the Public Acts of Michigan 1959 (MCL 125.321 et seq.), and shall perform the zoning duties of said commission as provided in the statute in connection with the amendment of this ordinance. 
 
ARTICLE XXVI. PLANNING COMMISSION APPROVAL
 
Sec. 2601. Planning commission approval:
In cases where the township planning commission is empowered to approve certain use of premises under the provisions of this ordinance, the applicant shall furnish such surveys, plans or other information as may be reasonably required by said commission for the proper consideration of the matter. 
The planning commission shall investigate the circumstances of each such case and shall notify such parties, who may in its opinion be affected thereby, of the time and place of any hearing which may be held relative thereto as required under its rules of procedure. 
The planning commission may impose such conditions or limitations in granting approval as may in its judgment be necessary to fulfill the spirit and purpose of this ordinance. 
Any approval given by the planning commission, under which premises are not used or work is not started within six months or when such use or work has been abandoned for a period of six months, shall lapse and cease to be in effect unless otherwise provided for in this ordinance. 
State law reference(s)—Township planning commission, MCL 125.323, MSA 5.2963(103). 
 
ARTICLE XXVII. CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS 
 
Sec. 2701. Initiation of amendments:
The township board may from time to time, on recommendation from the planning commission, amend, supplement or change the district boundaries or the regulations herein, or subsequently established herein. Amendments to the provisions of this ordinance (i.e. ordinance text amendment) may be initiated by the township board, the planning commission or by petition from one or more residents or property owners of the township. An amendment to the official zoning map (i.e. rezoning) may be initiated by the township board, the planning commission or by the owner or owners of the property that is the subject of the proposed amendment. All proposed amendments to the provisions of this ordinance or the official zoning map shall be referred to the planning commission for public hearing and recommendation to the township board, prior to consideration thereof by the township board pursuant to the authority and procedure established in Act. No. 184 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1943 (MCL 125.271 et seq.) Act No. 110 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 2006 (MCL 125.3101 et seq.), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2003-327, 1-20-04; Ord. No. 2019-486 , § 1, 6-18-19)
 
Sec. 2702. Application procedure:
An amendment to this ordinance text or the official zoning map shall be initiated by submission of a completed application on a form supplied by the community and economic development director, including an application fee, which shall be established by resolution of the township board. Amendments initiated by the township board or planning commission do not require an application or fee. 
(a)	In the case of an amendment to the official zoning map, the application shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)	The name and address of the owner of the subject property and a statement of the applicant's interest in the subject property, if not the owner in fee simple title; 
(2)	A legal description and street address of the subject property; 
(3)	A written description of how the requested rezoning satisfies the requirements identified in section 2703; 
(4)	A site analysis plan, the scale of which shall be no less than one inch = 200 feet and includes the following information: 
a.	A title indicating the nature of the rezoning request, the applicant's name and the site address or general location; 
b.	A legend indicating the owner of record, the engineer, surveyor or drafter, as applicable, the date of submission, scale and north arrow; 
c.	A boundary survey of the subject property; 
d.	The location of existing site boundary lines, buildings, structures or other improvements, parking areas, driveways, points of ingress and egress for the site and adjacent parcels; 
e.	The location, width and names of existing streets and public or private easements adjacent to the site; 
f.	The location of existing and proposed man-made features, including but not limited to drainage or utility structures or improvements; 
g.	The location of existing natural features, including but not limited to the location of existing drainage courses, regulated floodplains or wetlands and other relevant information the planning commission has determined to be necessary and essential to making an informed recommendation to the township board; and 
h.	Existing and proposed zoning classification(s) of the site and adjacent parcels. 
(Ord. No. 2003-327, 1-20-04)
 
Sec. 2703. Amendment procedure—Public hearing and notice:
(a)	Upon certification by the community and economic development department that the application for amendment is complete, the item shall be scheduled before the planning commission to set a public hearing. 
(b)	In all cases of a text amendment or rezoning of individual or multiple properties, the planning commission shall conduct a public hearing to present the request and to receive comments. Notice of the hearing shall be given in accordance with the requirements of Section 103 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Act 110 of 2006, as amended. An affidavit of mailing shall be maintained. 
(c)	If an individual property or several adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning, the township shall give separate notice for each property for which approval is being considered. Such notice shall be consistent with the notice required by paragraph (b) above. 
(d)	A sign shall be placed on the subject property to inform the public that a request for rezoning has been filed, and to indicate the location of information regarding the request. The sign shall be placed in a conspicuous location where it is readable from the public road, not less than 15 days prior to the date the application will be considered for approval. The sign shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)	The sign shall be three feet by three feet in area, painted white with black lettering. 
(2)	The sign shall state "This property petitioned for rezoning from XX to XX" with four-inch tall block letters. The sign shall also state "If you have any questions call the Charter Township of Ypsilanti Community Development Department at 734-485-3943" and indicate the rezoning identification number assigned by the township with two-inch tall block letters. 
(e)	Following the public hearing, the planning commission shall identify and evaluate factors relevant to the petition and the criteria in this article and shall make its recommendation to the township board. 
(f)	The community and economic development department shall forward a copy of the application, planning commission recommendation and minutes of the public hearing to the township board and request the township clerk to place the application on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the township board. 
(g)	Following receipt of the findings and recommendation of the planning commission, the township board shall consider the proposed amendment. The township board shall conduct two readings on the proposed amendment. The township board then shall approve or deny the amendment, based on the criteria contained in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003-327, 1-20-04; Ord. No. 2008-386, 10-7-08)
 
Sec. 2704. Criteria for amendment of the official zoning map:
In considering any petition for an amendment to the official zoning map, the planning commission and township board shall consider the following criteria in making its findings, recommendations and decision: 
(a)	Consistency with the goals, policies and future land use map of the Charter Township of Ypsilanti Master Plan, including any sub-area or corridor plans. If conditions have changed since the master plan was adopted, the rezoning may be found to be consistent with recent development trends in the area. 
(b)	Compatibility of the site's physical, geological, hydrological and other environmental features with all uses permitted in the proposed zoning district compared to uses permitted under current zoning. 
(c)	Evidence the applicant cannot receive a reasonable return on investment through developing the property with at least one of the uses permitted under the current zoning. 
(d)	The compatibility of all uses permitted in the proposed zoning district with surrounding uses and zoning in terms of land suitability, impacts on the environment, density, nature of use, traffic impacts, aesthetics, infrastructure and potential influence on property values compared to uses permitted under current zoning. 
(e)	The capacity of township utilities and services sufficient to accommodate all the uses permitted in the requested district without compromising the "health, safety and welfare" of the township. 
(f)	The capacity of the street system to safely and efficiently accommodate the expected traffic generated by uses permitted in the requested zoning district. A traffic impact study in accordance with the requirements of the township traffic impact study ordinance shall be provided if the proposed rezoning district permits uses that could generate 100 or more directional trips during the peak hour, or at least 1,000 more trips per day than the majority of the uses that could be developed under the current zoning, as determined by the community and economic development department. 
(g)	The apparent demand for the types of uses permitted in the requested zoning district in the township, and surrounding area, in relation to the amount of land in the township, and surrounding area, currently zoned and available to accommodate the demand. 
(h)	The boundaries of the requested zoning district are sufficient to meet the dimensional regulations for the zoning district listed in article XX, schedule of regulations. 
(i)	If a rezoning is appropriate, the requested zoning district shall be more appropriate from the township's perspective than another zoning district. 
(j)	The requested rezoning will not create an isolated and unplanned spot zone. 
(k)	The request has not previously been submitted within the past one year, unless conditions have changed or new information has been provided. 
(l)	Other criteria as determined by the planning commission or township board which would protect the health and safety of the public, protect public and private investment in the township, and enhance the overall quality of life in Charter Township of Ypsilanti. 
(Ord. No. 2003-327, 1-20-04)
 
Sec. 2705. Conditional amendment of the official zoning map:
The township board shall have the authority to place conditions on an amendment to the official zoning map, commonly referred to as a conditional rezoning, provided the conditions have been voluntarily offered in writing by the applicant and are acceptable to the township board. In exercising its authority to consider a conditional rezoning, the township is also authorized to impose the following limitations: 
(a)	An owner of land may voluntarily offer written conditions relating to the use and/or development of land for which a conditional rezoning is requested. This offer may be made either at the time the application for conditional rezoning is filed, or additional conditions may be offered at a later time during the conditional rezoning process as set forth below. 
(1)	The owner's offer of conditions may not authorize uses or developments not permitted in the requested zoning district. The owner's offer of conditions shall bear a reasonable and rational relationship to the property for which the conditional rezoning is requested. 
(2)	A conditional rezoning that would also require approval of a conditional use, variance or site plan under the terms of this ordinance shall not be effective until approval for a conditional use, variance or site plan is ultimately granted in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(b)	The offer of conditions may be amended during the process of conditional rezoning consideration, provided that any amended or additional conditions are entered voluntarily by the owner and confirmed in writing. An owner may withdraw in writing all or part of its offer of conditions any time prior to final rezoning action of the township board, provided that, if such withdrawal occurs subsequent to the planning commission's public hearing on the original rezoning request, then the rezoning application shall be referred back to the planning commission for a new public hearing with appropriate notice and a new recommendation. 
(c)	The procedure for consideration of conditional rezoning request by the planning commission and township board shall be the same as provided in section 2702 for all other requests for amendments to the official zoning map. The following additional information shall also be required: 
(1)	A conditional rezoning request shall be initiated by the submission of a proposed conditional rezoning agreement. A conditional rezoning agreement shall include the following: 
a.	A written statement prepared by the applicant that confirms the conditional rezoning agreement was proposed by the applicant and entered into voluntarily. 
b.	A written statement prepared by the applicant that confirms that the property shall not be used or developed in a manner that is inconsistent with conditions placed on the rezoning. 
c.	A list of conditions proposed by the applicant. 
d.	A timeframe for completing the proposed improvements. 
e.	A legal description of the land. 
f.	A sketch plan in sufficient detail to illustrate any specific conditions proposed by the applicant. 
(2)	The notice of public hearing on a conditional rezoning request shall include a general description of the proposed agreement being considered. A review of the proposed agreement shall be conducted at the public hearing. 
(3)	A conditional rezoning may be approved upon the criteria set forth in section 2704 and a finding and determination that all of the following are satisfied: 
a.	The conditions, proposed development, and/or proposed use of the land are designed or proposed for public health, safety, and welfare purposes. 
b.	The conditions, proposed development and/or proposed use are not in material conflict with the master plan, or, if there is material conflict with the master plan, such conflict is due to one of the following: 
i.	A change in township policy since the master plan was adopted. 
ii.	A change in conditions since the master plan was adopted. 
iii.	An error in the master plan. 
c.	The conditions, proposed development and/or proposed use are in accordance with all terms and provisions of the zoning district to which the land is to be rezoned, except as otherwise allowed in the conditional rezoning agreement. 
d.	The conditions, proposed development and/or proposed use shall insure compatibility with adjacent uses of land. 
(d)	Upon approval by the township board of a conditional rezoning request and a conditional rezoning agreement, as provided by this section, the zoning map shall be amended to reflect a new zoning classification along with a relevant designation that will provide reasonable notice of the conditional rezoning agreement. 
(e)	A conditional rezoning approval shall expire following a period of time from the effective date of the rezoning established by the township board, unless progress has been diligently pursued and substantial completion has occurred in accordance with permits issued by the township. 
(1)	In the event the conditional rezoning expires, the rezoning and the conditional rezoning agreement shall be void and of no effect. 
(2)	If the conditional rezoning becomes void, no development shall be undertaken and no permits for development shall be issued until such time as a new zoning district classification of the property has become effective as a result of one or both of the following actions that may be taken: 
a.	The property owner seeks a new rezoning classification for the property; and/or 
b.	The township initiates a new rezoning request for the property to a reasonable district classification, in accordance with the conventional rezoning procedure. 
(f)	Recording. A conditional rezoning approval shall not become effective until the conditional rezoning agreement is recorded with the Washtenaw County Register of Deeds and a certified copy of the agreement is filed with the township clerk. 
(g)	Violation of conditional rezoning agreement. If development and/or actions are undertaken on or with respect to the property in violation of the conditional rezoning agreement, such development and/or actions shall constitute a violation of this ordinance and deemed a nuisance per se. In such case, the township may issue a stop work order relative to the property and seek any other lawful remedies. Until curative action is taken to bring the property into compliance with the conditional rezoning agreement, the township may withhold, or, following notice and an opportunity to be heard, revoke permits and certificates, in addition to or in lieu of such other lawful action to achieve compliance. 
( Ord. No. 2019-486 , § 1, 6-18-19)
 
ARTICLE XXVIII. REPEAL OF PRIOR ORDINANCE
 
Sec. 2801. Repeal of prior ordinance:
The zoning ordinance adopted by the Township of Ypsilanti, on November 19, 1974, and all amendments thereto, are hereby repealed. The repeal of the above ordinance and its amendments does not affect or impair any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued, or acquired or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time enforced, prosecuted or inflicted. 
 
ARTICLE XXIX. INTERPRETATION
 
Sec. 2901. Interpretation:
In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience, or general welfare. It is not intended by this ordinance to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way to impair or interfere with any existing provision of law or ordinance other than the above-described zoning ordinance, or with any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to the law relating to the use of buildings or premises; provided, however, that where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction than is required by existing ordinance or by rules, regulations or permits, the provisions of this ordinance shall control. 
 
ARTICLE XXX. VESTED RIGHT
 
Sec. 3001. Vested right:
Nothing in this ordinance should be interpreted or construed to give rise to any permanent vested rights in the continuation of any particular use, district, zoning classification or any permissible activities therein; and, they are hereby declared to be subject to subsequent amendment, change or modification as may be necessary to the preservation or protection of public health, safety, and welfare. 
 
ARTICLE XXXI. ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND OTHER REMEDIES
 
Sec. 3100. Violations, civil infractions:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this ordinance shall be responsible for a civil infraction and shall be subject to a fine as follows: 
(1)	The fine for any first violation shall be $100.00; 
(2)	The fine for any violation which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of once before, shall be $250.00; 
(3)	The fine for any violation which the violator has, within the past two years, been found in violation of twice before, shall be $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 96-151, 6-18-96)
 
Sec. 3101. Public nuisance per se:
Any building or structure which is erected, altered or converted, or any use of premises or land which is begun or changed subsequent to the time of passage of this ordinance and in violation of any of the provisions thereof is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. 
 
Sec. 3102. Owners knowingly assisting:
Any person, firm or corporation which owns a building, structure, or premise or part thereof, where any condition in violation of this ordinance shall exist or shall be created, and who has assisted knowingly in the commission of such violation, shall be responsible for a civil infraction and shall be subject to a fine as set forth in section 3100(1), (2), and (3). 
(Ord. No. 96-151, 6-18-96)
 
Sec. 3103. Each day a separate civil infraction:
A separate civil infraction shall be deemed committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 96-151, 6-18-96)
 
ARTICLE XXXII. SEVERANCE CLAUSE
 
Sec. 3201. Severance clause:
Sections of this ordinance shall be deemed to be severable and should any section, paragraph, or provision hereof be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such holdings shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any part hereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
 
ARTICLE XXXIII. EFFECTIVE DATE
 
Sec. 3301. Effective date:
Public hearing having been held hereon, the provisions of this ordinance are hereby given immediate effect upon its publication, pursuant to the provisions of section 11, of Act No. 184 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1943 (MCL 125.271 et seq.), as amended. 
Made, passed and adopted by the township board of the Charter Township of Ypsilanti, Washtenaw County, Michigan on this 18th day of May, 1994. 
 
APPENDIX B FRANCHISES
 
ARTICLE I. COLUMBIA ASSOCIATES, L.P. CABLEVISION FRANCHISE
ORDINANCE NO. 135 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A NONEXCLUSIVE RENEWAL FRANCHISE TO COLUMBIA ASSOCIATES, L.P. TO OPERATE AND MAINTAIN A CABLE SYSTEM IN THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF YPSILANTI, MICHIGAN, AND SETTING FORTH CONDITIONS ACCOMPANYING THE GRANT OF FRANCHISE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWNSHIP BOARD OF THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF YPSILANTI, MICHIGAN: 
 
Sec. 1. Statement of intent and purpose: authority.
1.01 Statement of intent and purpose. Grantee has been operating a cable communications system pursuant to Ordinance No. 94 (The Ypsilanti Township CATV Ordinance), as amended. Township intends, by the adoption of this franchise, to authorize the continued operation of a system following expiration of the current franchise. Such a development can contribute significantly to the communication needs and interests of the township, and many individuals, associations and institutions. 
1.02 Authority. Insofar as the State of Michigan had delegated to township the authority to grant a franchise for cable system operation within the township's territorial boundaries, the township hereby exercises its authority to grant a nonexclusive franchise permitting the operation of a cable system within the township. 
 
Sec. 2. Short title.
This ordinance shall be known and cited as the "Township of Ypsilanti Cable Franchise Ordinance." Within this document it shall also be referred to as "this franchise." 
 
Sec. 3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this franchise, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
3.01 Cable service territory shall mean the area within the township limits of the Charter Township of Ypsilanti, Michigan and to any other area henceforth annexed to or otherwise added to township. 
3.02 Channel shall mean a frequency band which is capable of carrying either one video signal, a number of audio, digital or other nonvideo signals, or some combination of such signals. 
3.03 Township shall mean the Charter Township of Ypsilanti, Michigan. 
3.04 FCC shall mean the Federal Communications Commission. 
3.05 Grantee shall mean Columbia Associates, L.P. and its successors, transferees or assignees. 
3.06 Gross revenues shall mean all revenues received from subscribers within the township, including subscriber monthly fees for programming, installation and reconnection fees, fees from per channel or per program offerings, advertising revenues, converter and other equipment fees and auxiliary service fees, but excluding taxes or other assessments collected for governmental authorities, and subscriber deposits as explicitly permitted by federal statute. 
3.07 Owner shall mean a person with a legal or equitable interest in ownership of real property. 
3.08 Person shall mean any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, individual or organization, governmental organization, or any natural person. 
3.09 Public property shall mean any real property owned by township other than a street. 
3.10 Street shall mean the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, fleeway, lane, path, public way, alley, court, sidewalk, boulevard, parkway, drive or any easement or right-of-way now or hereafter held by township, or dedicated for use by the township, use by the general public, or use compatible with cable system operations. 
3.11 Cable communications system also referred to as "cable system", means a system of antennas, fiber optic cables, transmitters and receivers, coaxial cables and amplifiers, towers, microwave or other wireless transmission links, cablecasting studios, and any other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities, designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying, storing, processing, switching, or distributing audio, video, digital or other forms of electronic or electrical signals sold or distributed to subscribers. 
3.12 Subscriber shall mean any person or entity who subscribes to a service provided by grantee by means of the system. 
 
Sec. 4. Grant of authority.
4.01 Grant of franchise. For the purposes of constructing, upgrading, operating and maintaining a system in the cable service territory, grantee may erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct and retain in, on, over, upon, across and along the streets and public property such lines, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals, attachments and other property and equipment as are necessary and appropriate to the operation of the system. 
4.02 Franchise term. The initial term of this franchise shall commence upon July 18, 1995, and shall expire 15 years from said date, unless renewed as herein provided. 
4.03 Conditions of franchise. The rights afforded to grantee by sections 4.01 and 4.02 are granted subject to the conditions hereinafter provided. 
 
Sec. 5. Design and service provisions.
5.01 System design. Grantee's system has been constructed to include a residential network with a 550 MHz (75 channel) capacity. 
5.02 Technical requirements. Grantee shall maintain a system that meets at least the technical standards applied by the FCC. Procedures for testing the technical capacity of the system shall conform with the technical and testing standards applied to cable systems by the FCC. The results of any tests required by the FCC shall be available for inspection by the township. 
5.03 Level of services. Grantee shall provide a basic service consisting of at least 15 channels of video programming or other programming services. Grantee's current basic program services are set forth in Exhibit A, but grantee retains the right, to the extent permitted by law, to add, delete, replace and/or rearrange programming during the franchise term provided that basic service shall include any channels set aside by the township and used for public, educational or governmental access. 
5.04 Service to schools and other public service locations. Grantee shall make installations and maintain basic service on a reasonable number of outlets to all schools, fire stations, police stations, public libraries and township hall within 500 feet of its system. 
5.05 Provision of F.E.T.N. Subject to the conditions contained in this paragraph, grantee shall provide the fire emergency training network ("F.E.T.N.") without charge to grantor's fire department(s). Grantee's obligation to provide F.E.T.N. programming shall continue so long as: 
(i)	Fire and emergency response personnel utilize the programming for training and, 
(ii)	Adequate channel capacity exists on the cable communication system to deliver the F.E.T.N. programming. In the event that grantee determines that channel space being utilized to deliver F.E.T.N. should be used for other purposes, grantee shall give the grantor six months' advance written notice of grantee's intention to reclaim the channel being utilized to deliver F.E.T.N. programming, and will assist the grantor in securing a satellite dish of other equipment necessary to receive F.E.T.N. programming at the grantor's fire station(s). 
 
Sec. 6. Construction provisions.
6.01 Service availability and line extensions. All existing residential households within the cable service territory will be provided with access to service from the system as set forth in Exhibit B, provided that access to service can be provided from streets or public property and all such permission as may be required from property owners is reasonably and timely available without cost to grantee, and that service to multiple dwelling units need be provided only on terms acceptable to grantee. In addition to construction set forth in Exhibit B, areas with occupancy densities of more than 25 homes per mile which are contiguous to the system will be provided with access to service to the extent service is economically feasible and technically possible. In areas with less than 25 homes per mile, service shall be offered in conformance with grantee's service extension policies. 
6.02 Construction requirements. Grantee shall make use of existing poles and other facilities available to grantee. Grantee may erect its own poles and install its own conduit, with approval of the township, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. All poles and conduit installed within the cable service territory shall be made available for attachment or use by grantee, at just and reasonable rates. 
In case of new construction or property development where utilities are to be placed underground, the developer or property owner shall give grantee reasonable notice of not less than 30 days prior to such construction or development, and of the particular date on which open trenching will be available for grantee' s installation of conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals to be provided at grantee's expense. Grantee shall also provide specifications as needed for trenching. Easements required to bring service to the development shall be provided by the developer or property owner. 
6.03 Construction codes and permits. Grantee shall obtain any required permits from township and any other governmental agency (including the Washtenaw County Road Commission) before commencing construction involving the opening or disturbance of any street or public property. The township shall cooperate with the grantee and use its best efforts to ensure the granting of any permits required. Grantee shall arrange its lines, cables and other appurtenances, on any street or public property, in such a manner as to cause no unreasonable interference with the usual and customary use of said street or public property of any person. 
6.04 Repair of streets and public property. Any and all streets or public property which are disturbed or damaged during the construction, operation or maintenance of the system shall be promptly repaired by grantee, at its expense and to the condition, or substantially similar condition, prior to the disturbance or damage. 
6.05 Movement of facilities. In the event it is necessary to temporarily move or remove any of grantee's wires, cables, poles, or other facilities placed pursuant to this franchise, in order to lawfully move a large object, vehicle, building or other structure over the streets of township, upon 30 days prior notice by township to grantee, grantee shall move at the expense of the person requesting the temporary removal such of his facilities as may be required to facilitate such movements. Grantee may require such expense payments be made in advance of performing any work. 
 
Sec. 7. Operation and maintenance.
7.01 Annual reports. Within 120 days after the end of each calendar year, grantee shall file with township: 
A.	An annual ownership report listing the names and addresses of grantee' s principal management personnel and of those parties having a five percent or greater equity interest in grantee. 
B.	An annual financial statement for the previous fiscal year, prepared in accordance with generally-accepted accounting principles applied on a consistent basis, certified by an officer of grantee. 
C.	On request of the township, copies of all public filings made with federal, state, and local agencies with respect to the system. 
7.02 Maintenance and complaints.
A.	Grantee shall maintain a local office which shall be open during all usual business hours, and shall have a publicly-listed, toll-free telephone number, so as to receive subscriber complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments. 
B.	Grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and interrupt service only for good cause. Whenever it is necessary to shut off or interrupt service for the purpose of making repairs, adjustments, or installations, grantee shall do so at such time as will cause the least amount of inconvenience to its customers. Unless such interruption is unforeseen and immediately necessary, it shall give reasonable notice thereof to all customers affected thereby. 
7.03 Inspection. After reasonable (72-hours) advance notice, township shall have the right to inspect, during normal business hours, the nonconfidential records of grantee relating to service within the cable service territory; provided that, in order to protect the privacy of subscribers, inspection of complaint records shall not include records of individual complaints. 
7.04 Safety.
A.	Grantee shall at all times take reasonable precautions for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage or injury to the public, to employees of grantee, and to public or private property. 
B.	All lines, equipment, and facilities within the cable service territory shall at all times be kept and maintained in a safe and suitable condition and in good order and repair. 
7.05 Subscriber practices.
A.	Grantee shall maintain an installation and repair service capable of making installations within 14 days and repairs under normal conditions within 48 hours after a request unless other arrangements are requested by subscriber. 
B.	Upon failure of grantee to remedy a loss of service within 24 hours of receipt of notification of such loss, the grantee shall rebate one-thirtieth of the regular monthly charge to each subscriber so affected, for each 24 hours or fraction thereof, until service is restored unless restoration is prevented by cause beyond the control of the grantee. 
C.	Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex or age. Grantee shall adhere to the equal employment opportunity requirements of the FCC. 
D.	The grantee may conduct promotional campaigns in which rates are discounted or waived. 
E.	Grantee may offer bulk rate discounts for multiple unit dwellings, hotels, motels, and similar institutions. 
F.	Grantee shall comply with applicable federal law regarding the protection of the privacy of subscribers, including the collection, sale and release of information relating to subscribers. 
G.	Grantee shall have authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be necessary or appropriate to enable grantee to operate under this franchise. 
 
Sec. 8. Franchise fee.
8.01 Franchise fee. Grantee shall pay to the township an annual franchise fee in the amount of five percent of its gross revenues. Franchise fees may be passed through to subscribers as a line item on subscriber invoices, and otherwise. 
8.02 Payment period. Payments due the township under these provisions shall be submitted quarterly by the 25th of the month following the end of each quarter, with a statement of calculations showing the gross revenues and amounts due for the months in which payment is made. 
 
Sec. 9. Rates.
9.01 Jurisdiction. Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the township may regulate the rates of grantee's basic service tier and the rates for installation and lease of equipment used by subscribers to receive the basic service tier and the rates for installation and monthly use of connections for additional television receivers. Such regulation shall be in accordance with regulations, procedures and formulas specified by the FCC or other authorized regulatory agency. 
9.02 Assumption of jurisdiction. The township shall have the right to determine whether or not it shall assume regulation authority. Such determination shall be made once annually at a regularly scheduled board meeting. Should the township elect to assume rate regulation authority, it shall: 
A.	Adopt regulations with respect to the rates subject to its control that are consistent with the regulations, procedures and formulas of the FCC or other authorized regulatory agency. 
B.	Designate sufficient and appropriate personnel to administer such regulations and adequately fund and support said administration of rates. 
C.	Obtain certification from the FCC as to the validity of its assumption of jurisdiction over grantee's basic service rates. 
D.	Modify and revise its regulations and procedures as necessary to comply with directives of the FCC and to comport with the requirements of due process. 
E.	Section (A) through (D) notwithstanding, the township may withdraw from rate regulation in accordance with FCC procedures and by notifying grantee of its intent to do so. 
9.03 Forbearance from jurisdiction. Should the township elect to forebear from rate regulation, grantee may establish and revise its rates for basic cable service, installation and lease of equipment therefor, and rates for additional sets, provided that written notice is given to subscribers and the township at least 30 days in advance of implementation of the rate change. 
9.04 Nondiscrimination in rates. Grantee shall administer any and all rates and charges so as not to give preference to, nor to discriminate among, subscribers of like category or class. Nothing in the foregoing shall be deemed to prevent grantee from establishing: 
A.	Special temporary reduced rates for periodic promotional offers. 
B.	Reasonable policies for deposits or denial of service as to subscribers which are bona fide credit risks. 
C.	Separate categories of rates for commercial and noncommercial subscribers. 
9.05 Advance charges and deposits. Grantee may require subscribers to pay for service one month in advance. Grantee may also require a reasonable security deposit for provision of a converter, remote or similar devices which are normally placed in subscriber's homes. Such deposit, in the absence of theft or avoidable damage to the equipment, shall be refundable to the subscriber. 
9.06 Disconnection. There shall be no charge for the disconnection of any installation or outlet. If any subscriber falls to pay a properly due fee or charge, grantee may disconnect the subscriber's service outlet, provided, however, that such disconnection shall not occur until 30 days after the due date of said fee or charge and shall include seven days' written notice of the intent to disconnect, properly mailed to the subscriber in question. After disconnection, upon payment in full of the delinquent fee or charge, any reasonable collection expense or penalty, and the payment of a reconnection charge, grantee shall promptly reinstate the subscriber's cable service. 
9.07 Refunds to subscribers. If any subscriber terminates service prior to the end of a prepaid period, all unearned service fees as of the date grantee receives written notice of said termination shall be refunded to the subscriber within 45 days. 
 
Sec. 10. Insurance, indemnity.
10.01 Indemnity. Grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the township and its consultants, agents and employees at all times during the term of this franchise from and against all claims for injury or damages (including reasonable attorney fees) to persons or property, both real and personal, caused by the construction, erection, operation, and maintenance of the system. As a condition of said indemnification, township shall provide grantee with timely notice of any claim, cooperate with grantee in the defense of the claim, make employees, representatives and records available to grantee and refrain from compromising or settling the claim without grantee's consent. 
10.02 Insurance. The grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise a policy of liability insurance covering the grantee, which shall name the township as an additional insured, in amounts no less than the following, and with such deductibles as are ordinary and reasonable in keeping with industry standards: 
A.	Comprehensive general liability: Combined single limit of not less than $1,000,000.00 as to any one person and $2,000,000.00 general aggregate. 
B.	Comprehensive automobile liability: Combined single limit of not less than $1,000,000.00. 
C.	Umbrella liability. In addition to the types and limits of insurance set forth in sections 10.02(A) and 10.02(B), grantee shall maintain an umbrella policy covering excess liability in an amount not less than $5,000,000.00 for each occurrence and $5,000,000.00 aggregate. 
 
Sec. 11. Remedies.
11.01  Notice of violation. Township shall provide grantee with a detailed written notice of any franchise violation upon which it proposed to take action, and provide a 90-day period within which grantee may demonstrate that a violation does not exist or with which it may cure an alleged violation; provided that, if the violation cannot be corrected in 90 days, grantee may submit a plan satisfactory to the township to correct the violation. 
11.02  Default. If grantee fails to disprove or correct the violation within 90 days or, in the case of a violation which cannot be corrected in 90 days and grantee has timely submitted a satisfactory plan, fails to implement the plan, then township may declare the grantee in default, which declaration must be in writing. In the event that the township declares grantee in default, the township shall have the right to institute legal proceedings to collect damages from the date of declaration of default, or to exercise any other rights and remedies afforded to the township in law or equity, provided, however, that the township may institute revocation proceedings against grantee only after declaration of default, pursuant to section 10.06 and only on the grounds set forth therein. 
11.03  Hearing available to grantee. Within 15 days after receipt of a written declaration of default from the township, grantee may request, in writing, a hearing before the township or its agent, in a full public proceeding affording due process. Such hearing shall be held within 30 days of the receipt of the request therefor and a decision rendered within ten days after the conclusion of the hearing. Any decision shall be in writing and shall be based upon written findings of fact. 
11.04 Appeal of default. Grantee may appeal a declaration of default to arbitration. 
11.05 Procedures applicable to arbitration. Any arbitration held pursuant to this franchise shall be conducted in accordance with the Michigan Arbitration Act MCL 600.5001, or more specifically as follows: 
A.	Grantee and the township (or such substitute party to the arbitration) each shall, within 15 days of the decision to proceed to arbitration, appoint one arbitrator experienced in the cable television business, which arbitrators shall mutually select a third arbitrator of similar qualifications. 
B.	Within 30 days after appointment of all arbitrators and upon 15 days' written notice to the parties to the arbitration, the arbitrators shall commence a hearing on the dispute. 
C.	The hearing shall be recorded and may be transcribed at the request of either township or grantee. 
D.	At the close of the hearings and within 30 days, the arbitrators shall prepare written findings and serve such decision upon township and grantee. 
E.	The decision of a majority of the arbitrators shall be binding upon the parties to the arbitration. 
F.	Either parry may seek judicial relief to the arbitrators' decision under the following circumstances: 
(1)	Either party fails to select an arbitrator; 
(2)	The arbitrators fail to select a third arbitrator; 
(3)	One or more arbitrator is unqualified; 
(4)	Designated time limits have been exceeded; 
(5)	The arbitrators have not proceeded expeditiously; or 
(6)	Based upon the record, the arbitrator' decision is arbitrary, capricious, unsupported by substantial evidence, an abuse of discretion, or based upon a mistake of law. 
G.	All costs of arbitration shall be borne equally by the parties to the arbitration unless otherwise ordered by the arbitrators. 
11.06 Revocation. The township may revoke the franchise only after declaration of default and only for defaults by grantee arising from the following circumstances: 
A.	Material misrepresentation by grantee to township in information required to be provided under the franchise. 
B.	Grantee becomes insolvent or is adjudged bankrupt. 
C.	Grantee willfully violates any material orders or rulings of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the franchise. 
D.	Grantee willfully fails to acquire the insurance required by the franchise. 
11.07 Procedures governing revocation.
A.	The township shall give written notice to the grantee of its intent to revoke the franchise and the lawful grounds therefor. Grantee shall have 90 days from such notice to object, in writing, and to state its reasons for such objection. In the event the township has not received a response satisfactory to it, it may then proceed to place its request for termination of the franchise at a board meeting. The township shall cause to be served upon the grantee, at least ten days prior to the time and place of such meeting, a written notice of this intent to request such termination, and the time and place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published by the township at least once, ten days before such meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the township. 
B.	At the designated meeting, the board shall give the grantee an opportunity to state is position on the matter, after which it shall determine whether or not the franchise shall be revoked. Grantee may appeal such determination to the Circuit Court of Washtenaw County, which shall have the power to review the decision of the council de novo and to modify or reverse such decision, as justice may require. Such appeal to the circuit court must be taken within 30 days of the issuance of the determination of the board. Appeals from the decision of the circuit court shall be in accordance with Michigan law and rules of procedure. 
C.	The board may, at its sole discretion, take any other lawful action which it deems appropriate to enforce the township's rights under the franchise in lieu of revocation of the franchise. 
11.08 Unauthorized operations. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or to carry on the business of distributing to any persons in the cable service territory any television signals or radio signals by means of a system unless a franchise therefor has first been obtained, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. 
11.09 Unauthorized use.
A.	No person shall intercept, descramble, decode, or receive or assist in intercepting, descrambling, decoding or receiving any signals from the system unless specifically authorized to do so by grantee. "Assist in intercepting, descrambling, decoding, or receiving" includes the manufacture or distribution of equipment intended by the manufacturer or distributor (as the case may be) for unauthorized reception of signals over a system. 
B.	No person shall tamper with, remove or injure any cable, wires, or other devices used with the system unless specifically authorized to do so by grantee. 
C.	No person shall intentionally deprive grantee of a lawful charge for cable service. 
D.	No person shall resell grantee's cable services without grantee' express, written consent. 
E.	Grantee may bring an action to restrain or enjoin a violation or threatened violation of this section and for damages resulting from the violation. 
F.	A knowing violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each day of infraction. 
G.	If an unauthorized device designed to intercept, descramble, or decode a cable television signal is present on the premises or property occupied and used by a person, it is presumed that the person knowingly used the device to intercept, descramble or decode cable signals. If an unauthorized cable connection is present on the premises or property occupied and used by a person, it is presumed that the person knowingly used the connection to intercept cable signals. If equipment of grantee which has been tampered with, changed, or modified is present on the premises or property occupied by a person, it is presumed that the person knowingly used the equipment to intercept, descramble, or decode cable signals. 
H.	Grantee has expressly reserved its applicable rights and remedies available in law or in equity. 
11.10 Conditions of access. In addition to the provisions of section 4.01, no person who owns or controls any residential multiple dwelling unit, trailer park, condominium or apartment complex, or subdivision shall interfere with the right of any tenant or lawful resident thereof to receive service from the grantee, nor demand or accept payment of any fee, charge, or thing of value from grantee or any tenant or resident in exchange for giving such tenant or resident access to service from the grantee; provided, however, that an owner may receive reasonable reimbursement for direct adverse economic impact of such access, if any, based upon evidence of the diminution of investment-backed expectations, the impairment of the premises' usefulness, the amount of space occupied by the facilities of the system, the prior use, if any, of the space, the continued physical availability of space on the premises for installation of alternative modes of television program reception or delivery, the difference in fair market value of the premises resulting from the installation of system facilities and other reasonable, nonspeculative factors excluding the hold-up value resulting from a landlord's monopoly control of such access. The aforesaid economic impact shall be rebuttably presumed to be a one-time charge of $1.00 per dwelling unit. Any controversy or dispute over the reasonableness of reimbursement shall be submitted for resolution pursuant to section 10.05. 
 
Sec. 12. Variance and renewal.
12.01 Variance. Applications for a variance to this franchise, to accommodate a significant change in circumstances, to prevent unreasonable hardship to grantee, or to permit technical variations which will satisfy the purpose of this franchise, may be made by the grantee to township. Township shall review the application within 30 calendar days and shall issue a report of the findings of the township and shall act on a request within 60 days. If grantee cannot reach agreement with the township on the variance within such time, it may resort to the procedure of section 10.05 for resolution of the dispute. 
12.02 Franchise renewal.
A.	This franchise may be renewed for an additional 15 years if: 
(1)	The grantee has substantially complied with the material terms of the existing franchise and with applicable law; 
(2)	The quality of the grantee's service, including signal quality, response to consumer complaints, and billing practices, but without regard to the mix, or quality of cable services or other services provided over the system has been reasonable in light of community needs; 
(3)	The grantee has the financial, legal, and technical ability to provide the services, facilities, and equipment set forth in the grantee's proposal; and 
(4)	The grantee' s proposal is reasonable to meet the future cable-related community needs and interests, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and interests. The township may not declare grantee's proposal unreasonable and deny renewal, nor may community needs be established, on the basis of facilities, equipment, or services which another party has indicated it is willing to provide. 
B.	In any renewal proceeding, the grantee shall be afforded adequate notice and the grantee and the township, or its designee, shall be afforded fair opportunity for full participation, including the fight to introduce evidence, to require the production of evidence, and to question witnesses. A transcript shall be made of any such proceeding. 
C.	A proceeding under this subsection shall be completed within 12 months of its commencement, within which time the township shall issue a written decision granting or denying the proposal for renewal based upon the record of such proceeding, and transmit a copy of such decision to the grantee. Such decision shall state the reasons therefor. 
D.	Any denial of a proposal for renewal shall be based on one or more adverse findings made with respect to the factors described in subsection A, pursuant to the record of the proceeding under subsection A. Township may not base a denial of renewal on a failure to substantially comply with the material terms of the franchise under subsection A or on events considered under subsection A unless the township has provided grantee notice and the opportunity to cure, or in any case in which township has waived its fight to object, or has effectively acquiesced. 
E.	Grantee is expressly reserved its rights of appeal under federal and state law. In addition to such fights, this franchise shall remain in effect at all times during which a renewal proceeding or appeal remains pending. 
F.	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections A through E of this section, grantee may submit a proposal for the renewal of franchise, and township may, after affording the public adequate notice and opportunity for comment, grant or deny such proposal at any time (including after proceedings pursuant to this section have commenced). The denial of a renewal pursuant to this subsection shall not affect action on a renewal proposal that is submitted in accordance with subsections A through E. 
G.	Township may not, upon the expiration of this franchise, or otherwise, acquire an ownership interest in the system, or require a sale of the system to any other person, unless township or such other person acquires the ownership interest at not less than fair market value for the system as a going concern. 
 
Sec. 13. Miscellaneous.
13.01  Emergency use of facilities. In the case of any emergency of disaster, the grantee shall, upon request of the township, make available its facilities to the township for emergency use during the duration of such emergency or disaster. 
13.02  Future cablecasting of township board meetings. In the case that township determines that it desires to cablecast its township meetings over the system, grantee shall enter into discussions with township in good faith to determine the availability of channel capacity and the expense of equipment required to cablecast said meetings. Should the parties proceed with the purchase of required equipment and the cablecasting of the township meetings, all expenses associated therewith which are paid by grantee shall be deemed a requirement of this franchise for the support of public, educational and government access channels. 
13.03 Compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances. Grantee shall at all times during the life of this franchise be subject to the lawful exercise of the police power of the township and to such reasonable regulations as the township shall hereinafter provide, and shall comply with all applicable state and federal regulations. 
13.04 Severability. If any law, ordinance, regulation or court decision shall render any provision of this franchise invalid, the remaining provisions of the franchise shall remain in full force and effect. 
13.05 Force majeure. Prevention or delay of any performance under this franchise due to circumstances beyond the control of grantee or township, unforeseen circumstances, or acts of God, shall not be deemed noncompliance with or a violation of this franchise. 
13.06 Nonexclusive. This franchise is nonexclusive. Township reserves the right to award additional franchises; provided, however, the township authority agrees to impose similar conditions on all companies offering the same service to the extent such companies are subject to the township's legal authority. Grantee' s corresponding obligations shall reflect terms and conditions which are no more burdensome and no less favored than those applied to any other grantee; and provided, that if township authorizes or permits another cable television system to operate within the township, it shall do so on condition that such cable television system indemnify and hold harmless the grantee from and against all costs and expenses incurred in strengthening poles, replacing poles, rearranging attachments, placing underground facilities, and all other costs including those of grantee, township, and utilities, incident to inspections, make ready, and construction of an additional cable television system in the franchise area; and provided further that grantee shall be designated a third party beneficiary of such conditions as are incorporated into the authorization(s) granted to another cable television system. 
13.07 Entire agreement. This franchise and all attachments hereto represent the entire understanding and agreement between the parties hereto with respect to the subject matter hereof, supersedes all prior oral negotiations between the parties, and can be amended, supplemented, modified or changed only by an agreement in writing which makes specific reference to this franchise or the appropriate attachment and which is signed by the party against whom enforcement of any such amendment, supplement, modification or change is sought. 
13.08 Laws governing. This franchise shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Michigan, and applicable federal law. 
13.09 Effective date. This franchise shall be effective when adopted for the term set forth in section 4.02. 
 
Sec. 14. Federal cable television customer service standards.
14.01 Definitions. When used in this section: 
(A)	Normal business hours means 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday to Friday and 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Saturday, excluding holidays. 
(B)	Normal operating conditions means those service conditions which are within the control of the cable operator. Those conditions which are not within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. 
(C)	Service interruption means the loss of picture or sound on one or more cable channels. 
14.02 Exceptions. Nothing in this section is intended to prevent or prohibit: 
(A)	The township and a cable operator from agreeing to customer service requirements that exceed the standards set forth in this section: 
(B)	The township from enforcing through the end of the franchise term pre-existing customer service requirements that exceed the standards set forth in this section and are contained in current franchise agreements; 
(C)	The township from enacting or enforcing any consumer protection law; or 
(D)	The establishment or enforcement of any ordinance or regulation concerning customer service that imposes customer service requirements that exceed or address matters not addressed by the standards set forth in this section. 
14.03 Customer service standards. A cable operator is subject to the following customer service standards certified quarterly by the cable operator: 
(A)	The cable operator will maintain a local, toll-free or collect call telephone access line which will be available to subscribers 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Trained company representatives shall be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries 9:00 a.m. to midnight seven days a week. 
(B)	From midnight to 9:00 a.m., the access line may be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine. Inquiries received from midnight to 9:00 a.m. will be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business day. 
(C)	Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a company representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30 seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed 30 seconds. These standards shall be met no less than 90 percent of the time under normal operating conditions measured on a quarterly basis. 
(D)	Under normal operating conditions, the customers may receive a busy signal less than 3% of the time measured on a quarterly basis. 
(E)	Customer service center and bill payment locations will be open at least during normal business hours and will be conveniently located. A customer service center and bill payment location shall be in the township. 
(F)	Under normal operating conditions, each of the following five standards will be met no less than 95% of the time measured on a quarterly basis: 
(1)	Standard installations will be performed 7 business days after an order has been placed. Standard installations are those that are located not more than 125 feet from the existing distribution system. 
(2)	Excluding conditions beyond the control of the operator, a cable operator shall begin working on service interruptions promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes known. The cable operator must begin actions to correct other service problems the next business day after notification of the service problem. 
(3)	The appointment window for installations, service calls, and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at maximum, a four hour block during normal business hours. The operator may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer. 
(4)	A cable operator may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. 
(5)	If a cable operator representative is running late for an appointment and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer will be contacted, the appointment rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer. 
(G)	The cable operator shall provide written information on each of the following areas at the time of installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request: 
(1)	Products and services offered; 
(2)	Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services; 
(3)	Installation and service maintenance policies; 
(4)	Instructions on how to use the cable service; 
(5)	Channel positions of programming carried on the system; and 
(6)	Billing and complaint procedures, including the business address and telephone number of the cable operator. 
(H)	Bills shall be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills shall clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including operational charges, rebates and credits. In case of a billing dispute, a cable operator must respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days. 
(1)	Refund checks shall be issued promptly, but not later than: 
(2)	The customer's next billing cycle, following resolution of the request or 30 days, whichever is earlier; or 
(3)	The return of the equipment supplied by the cable operator if service is terminated. 
(I)	Credits will be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. 
14.04 Enforcement.
(A)	A cable operator shall file with the township clerk a notarized statement signed by an officer or employee certifying compliance with these customer service standards on a quarterly basis. 
(B)	An officer or employee who knowingly and intentionally signs a false certificate shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by up to 90 days in jail or a fine of $500.00 or both. 
(C)	Failing to file a certificate shall subject a cable operator to pay a civil forfeiture to the township of $500.00 per day. 
(D)	A cable operator in non-compliance shall on a quarterly basis file a statement specifying areas of non-compliance along with a remedial plan. Failing to file a non-compliance statement and remedial plan shall subject a cable operator to pay a civil forfeiture to the township of $500.00 per day. 
14.05 Conflicts. In the event of a conflict between this section and any cable communication franchise agreement, that provision which provides the greatest benefit to the township, in the opinion of the township council, shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2001-276, §§ 1—5, 9-18-01)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 2001-276, §§ 1—5, adopted Sept. 18, 2001, did not specifically amend the Code and has been included herein as § 14 of Art. I at the direction of the township. 
 
ARTICLE II. MICHIGAN CONSOLIDATED GAS COMPANY GAS FRANCHISE
YPSILANTI TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE NO. 129-93 
AN ORDINANCE, GRANTING TO MICHIGAN CONSOLIDATED GAS COMPANY, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, THE RIGHT, POWER, AND AUTHORITY TO LAY, MAINTAIN, AND OPERATE GAS MAINS, PIPES AND SERVICES ON, ALONG, ACROSS AND UNDER THE HIGHWAYS, STREETS, ALLEYS, BRIDGES AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES, AND TO DO A LOCAL GAS BUSINESS IN THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF YPSILANTI, WASHTENAW COUNTY, MICHIGAN FOR A PERIOD OF THIRTY YEARS. 
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF YPSILANTI ORDAINS: 
 
Sec. 1. Grant of revocable and nonexclusive gas franchise and consent to laying of pipes, etc.
Subject to all the terms and conditions mentioned in this ordinance, consent is hereby given to Michigan Consolidated Gas Company, a corporation organized under the laws of the State of Michigan (the "Company"), and to its successors and assigns, to lay, maintain, operate, and use gas pipes, mains, conductors, service pipes, and other necessary equipment in the highways, streets, alleys, and other public places in the Charter Township of Ypsilanti, Washtenaw County, Michigan, and a revocable and nonexclusive franchise is hereby granted to the Company, its successors and assigns, to transact local business in said Charter Township of Ypsilanti for the purposes of conveying gas into and through and supplying and selling gas in said Charter Township of Ypsilanti and all other matters incidental thereto. 
 
Sec. 2. Gas service and extension of system.
If the provisions and conditions herein contained are accepted by the company, as in section 6 hereof provided, then the company shall furnish gas to applicants residing therein in accordance with applicable laws, rules and regulations; and provided further that such initial installation and any extensions shall be subject to the main extension provisions, the area expansion program provisions (if and where applicable), and other applicable provisions now or from time to time hereafter contained in the company's rules and regulations for gas service as filed with the Michigan Public Service Commission or successor agency having similar jurisdiction. 
 
Sec. 3. Use of streets and other public places.
The company, its successors and assigns, shall not unnecessarily obstruct the passage of any of the highways, streets, alleys, or other public places within said Charter Township of Ypsilanti and shall within a reasonable time after making an opening or excavation, repair the same and leave it in as good condition as before the opening or excavation was made. The company, its successors and assigns, shall use due care in exercising the privileges herein contained and shall be liable to said Charter Township of Ypsilanti for all damages and costs which may be recovered against Charter Township of Ypsilanti arising from the default, carelessness, or negligence of the company or its officers, agents, and servants. 
No road, street, alley, or highway shall be opened for the laying of trunk lines or lateral mains except upon application to the highway commissioner or the Charter Township of Ypsilanti or other authority having jurisdiction in the premises, stating the nature of the proposed work and the route. Upon receipt of such application, it shall be the duty of the highway commissioners or the charter township board, or such other authority as may have jurisdiction, to issue a permit to the company to do the work proposed. 
 
Sec. 4. Standards and conditions of service; rules, regulations and rates.
The company is now under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Public Service Commission to the extent provided by statute; and the rates to be charged for gas, and the standards and conditions of service and operation hereunder, shall be the same as set forth in the company's schedule of rules, regulations, and rates as applicable in the several cities, villages, and townships in which the company is now rendering gas service, or as shall hereafter be validly prescribed for the Charter Township of Ypsilanti under the orders, rules, and regulations of the Michigan Public Service Commission or other authority having jurisdiction in the premises. 
 
Sec. 5. Successors and assigns.
The words "Michigan Consolidated Gas Company" and "the Company", wherever used herein, are intended and shall be held and construed to mean and include both Michigan Consolidated Gas Company and its successors and assigns, whether so expressed or not. 
 
Sec. 6. Effective date: term of franchise ordinance; acceptance by company.
This ordinance shall take effect the day following the date of publication thereof, which publication shall be made within 30 days after the date of its adoption, and shall continue in effect for a period of 30 years thereafter, subject to revocation at the will of the Charter Township of Ypsilanti at any time during said 30-year period; provided, however, that when this ordinance shall become effective the charter township clerk shall deliver to the company a certified copy of the ordinance accompanied by written evidence of publication and recording thereof as required by law, and the company shall, 60 days after the date this ordinance takes effect, file with the charter township clerk its written acceptance of the conditions and provisions hereof. 
 
Sec. 7. Effect and interpretation of ordinance.
All ordinances and resolutions, and parts thereof, which conflict with any of the terms of this ordinance are hereby rescinded. In the case of conflict between this ordinance and any such ordinances or resolutions, this ordinance shall control. The catch line headings which precede each section of this ordinance are for convenience in reference only and shall not be taken into consideration in the construction or interpretation of any of the provisions of this ordinance. 
 
ARTICLE III. THE DETROIT EDISON COMPANY FRANCHISE
YPSILANTI TOWNSHIP ORDINANCE NO. 130-93 
 
Sec. 1. Grant of revocable and nonexclusive franchise.
Permission is hereby granted to THE DETROIT EDISON COMPANY, a Michigan corporation, its successors and assigns, to construct, maintain and operate in the public streets, highways, alleys and other public places in the Township of Ypsilanti, Washtenaw County, Michigan, all needful and proper poles, towers, wires, pipes, mains, conduits and all such lines and other apparatus requisite for the transmission, transforming and distribution of electricity for public and private use, and to transact a local electric business within said township, subject, however, to all conditions and restrictions hereinafter contained. 
 
Sec. 2. [Conditions.]
The conditions of the foregoing grant are as follows: 
A.	The grantee shall do no injury to any street, highway, alley or other public place, or to any shade trees, or in any manner disturb or interfere with any water or gas pipes, or with any public or private sewer, now or hereafter laid or constructed by any authorized person or corporation. 
B.	To ensure the reliability of service and the safety of the general public, line clearance of trees shall be done in compliance with all existing governmental laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
C.	The construction of the said lines shall be in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Michigan Public Service Commission or its successor. 
D.	The said grantee, before entering upon any street, highway, alley or other public place for the purpose of erecting and constructing any poles, wires, pipes, mains, conduits, or other apparatus, shall notify, in writing, the township or its representatives of the proposed construction, and shall if the township so requires, file with them a sufficient plan and specification, showing the nature and "tent of the proposed erection and construction. 
E.	No street, highway, alley or public place shall be allowed to remain open or encumbered by the construction work of the said grantee for a longer period than shall be necessary to execute the said work, and the grantee shall at all times conform to all ordinances of the Township, now or hereafter in force, relative to the fencing and lighting of obstructions and excavations. 
F.	The grantee shall save the township harmless from any judgment that may be recovered against the township by reason of the wrongdoing or gross negligence of the said grantee in the erection and maintenance of said poles, mains, wires and other apparatus or construction. 
G.	Said grantee shall make due provisions, upon five days notice in writing, by raising its wires or otherwise, for the passage of any barn, building or other structure on or over any street, highway, or public place occupied by the poles, mains, wires, and other apparatus of said grantee. 
 
Sec. 3. [Rates and charges.]
In consideration of the granting of this franchise, grantee agrees that its rates and charges for electric service in the Township of Ypsilanti shall not exceed its rates and charges for like service elsewhere in its service area, as evidenced by its uniform rate schedules at the time on file with and approved by the Michigan Public Service Commission. It is understood that the grantee is subject to regulation by the Michigan Public Service Commission and that any order, rule, or regulation by that Commission, or its successor, will prevail over any regulation herein contained or provided for in case of conflict. 
 
Sec. 4. [Effective date.]
This ordinance shall take effect the date of publication thereof, which publication shall be made within seven days after the date of its adoption. This franchise is nonexclusive and revocable upon 60 days' written notice of revocation by the township given to the grantee at: 
The Detroit Edison Company 
2000 Second Ave 
Detroit, MI 48226 
Room 688 WCB 
 
Sec. 5. [Duration.]
This franchise and ordinance shall be and remain in effect for a period of 30 years, thereafter, subject to revocation, at the will of Township of Ypsilanti at any time during said 30-year period. 
 
Sec. 6. [Public access.]
Nothing in this grant shall be construed to alienate the title of the public in and to any street, highway, alley or public place or any portion thereof, neither shall anything herein be construed in any manner as a surrender by the Township of Ypsilanti of its legislative power with respect to the subject matter hereof, or with respect to any other matter whatsoever; nor as in any manner limiting the right of the said Township of Ypsilanti to lawfully regulate the use of any street, avenue, highway or public place within its jurisdiction, as to all other matters. 
 
ARTICLE IV. DTE ENERGY MARKETING, INC. FRANCHISE
ORDINANCE NO. 2000-253 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A LIMITED ELECTRIC FRANCHISE TO DTE ENERGY MARKETING, INC. 
 
Sec. 1. Grant of franchise.
The Charter Township of Ypsilanti, 7200 S. Huron River Drive, Ypsilanti, Michigan, 48197 ("Township") grants to DTE Energy Marketing, Inc., 101 N. Main, Suite 300, Ann Arbor, State of Michigan, 48104, a Michigan corporation ("Grantee"), limited non-exclusive permission to market and supply electricity through and over existing and future electrical lines operated and owned by another authorized public utility and to conduct a local electric business as an electric power marketer and third-party supplier of electricity in the Township for a period of five (5) years. 
 
Sec. 2. Conditions.
(a)	As an electric power marketer and third-party supplier of electricity, grantee will not directly distribute electricity to customers in the township, nor impair or attempt to control or occupy any streets, alleys, or public places, nor engage in any construction in any public street, alley, or other public place or right-of-way. 
(b)	Grantee shall indemnify and hold harmless the township from any and all judgments, damages, decrees, losses, costs and expenses, including attorney fees, which the township may incur or which may be legally obtained against the township for or by reason of the wrongful or negligent construction, maintenance or repair of the structures and equipment, or the use and occupation of any highway, street, alley, or other public place in the township by the grantee pursuant to the terms of this franchise or resulting from the exercise by the grantee of any of these privileges. 
(c)	The township may establish reasonable standards of service, prevent unjust discrimination in service, and impose any other regulations as may be determined by the township board to be conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public. Grantee shall be and remain subject to all ordinances, rules and regulations of the township now in effect, or which might be adopted. 
 
Sec. 3. Rates.
Grantee may charge its customer(s) for electricity and electrical services at a rate that is mutually agreeable to grantee and the customer, subject to the parties' agreement that they will abide by all applicable federal and state laws and Michigan Public Service Commission Regulations. 
 
Sec. 4. Insurance.
(a)	The grantee and any contractor hired by the grantee may not commence marketing electricity, as permitted by this franchise, until it has obtained the insurance required by this section. All insurance coverage shall be with insurance carriers reasonably acceptable to the township. If any insurance is written with a deductible or self-insured retention, the grantee or its contractor shall be solely responsible for said deductible or self-insured retention. The purchase of insurance and the furnishing of a certificate of insurance shall not be a satisfaction of the grantee's duty to indemnify the township. The grantee and any contractor shall procure and maintain during the term of the franchise the following coverage: 
(1)	Workers' compensation insurance in accordance with all applicable statutes of the State of Michigan. Coverage shall include employers liability coverage. 
(2)	Commercial general liability insurance on an "occurrence" basis with limits of liability not less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injury and personal injury, and $1,000,000.00 per occurrence for property damage. Coverage shall include the following extensions: 
a.	Contractual liability; 
b.	Products and completed operations; 
c.	Independent contractors coverage; 
d.	Broad form general liability extensions or equivalent; 
e.	If applicable, coverage for X, C and U hazards. 
(3)	Motor vehicle liability coverage, including Michigan No-Fault coverage for all vehicles used in the performance of the contract. Limits of liability shall not be less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence combined single limit bodily injury and property damage. 
(4)	Additional named insured. Commercial general liability insurance and automobile liability insurance as described above shall include an endorsement stating the following shall be an additional named insured: 
"The township, including all past, present and future elected and appointed officials, boards, commissions, officers, agents and employees and the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority." 
(5)	Cancellation notice. Workers' compensation insurance, commercial general liability insurance, and motor vehicle liability insurance as described above shall include an endorsement stating the following: 
"It is understood and agreed that this insurance policy may not be canceled by the insurer nor the intention not to renew be stated by the insurer until thirty (30) days after receipt by the township, by certified or registered mail, of a written notice of such intention to cancel or not renew." 
Said notice shall be sent to: 
Charter Township of Ypsilanti 
Township Clerk 
7200 S. Huron River Drive 
Ypsilanti, Michigan 48197 
(b)	If so requested by the township, the grantee and any contractor shall within sixty (60) days of such request supply a copy of the insurance policy of any of the insurance coverage required under this section. 
 
Sec. 5. Interpretation.
Nothing in this franchise shall be construed to alienate the title of the public in and to any highway, street, alley or public place. Nothing in this franchise shall be construed in any manner as a surrender by the township of its legislative power with respect to the subject matter of this agreement or with respect to any other matter or in any manner limiting the right of the township to lawfully regulate the use of any highway, street, alley or public place in the township. 
 
Sec. 6. Limitations.
Nothing in this franchise shall be construed as a waiver by grantee of any of its rights under state or federal law. Grantee will, as to all other conditions and elements of service not addressed or fixed by this franchise, be subject to the rules and regulations applicable to electric service by the Michigan Public Service Commission, or its successor, if any. 
 
Sec. 7. Acceptance.
Upon acceptance and publication this franchise shall constitute a contract between the township and the grantee. 
 
Sec. 8. Revocation.
This franchise shall be revocable upon sixty (60) days written notice by one party to the other. The township may repeal this ordinance for misuse, nonuse or failure to comply with its provisions. 
 
Sec. 9. Annual reporting requirement.
In the event grantee (or any subsidiary, affiliate or other related company), pays a fee, charge or other payment of any kind on a periodic basis (i.e.) monthly, quarterly, annually) to any municipality in the State of Michigan which is higher or in addition to any fee and charges set forth in this franchise the grantee shall notify the township in writing of the details of such other arrangement within sixty (60) days of its effective date. A one-time charge prior to and for the installation of a new service shall not be considered a periodic fee unless the charge is unreasonably higher than that paid to other municipalities. 
 
APPENDIX C SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
ORDINANCE NO. 2000-243 
AN ORDINANCE ENACTED UNDER ACT 288, PUBLIC ACTS OF 1967, AS AMENDED, AND ACT 168, PUBLIC ACTS OF 1959, AS AMENDED, OF THE STATE OF MICHIGAN ESTABLISHING REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND: PROVIDING STANDARDS, PROCEDURES AND RULES FOR THE PREPARATION AND FILING OF PLATS, AND TO PROVIDE FOR PRELIMINARY AND FINAL APPROVAL OR REJECTION OF SUCH PLATS BY THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF YPSILANTI, WASHTENAW COUNTY, MICHIGAN; AND IMPOSING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF THIS ORDINANCE. 
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF YPSILANTI ORDAINS: 
 
ARTICLE I. TITLE, PURPOSE AND SCOPE
 
Sec. 01.01. Short title.
This Ordinance shall be known and may be designated as the "Charter Township of Ypsilanti Subdivision Regulations Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
Sec. 01.02. Purposes.
Pursuant to the provisions of Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended, and Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, being MCL § 560.101, et. seq., and MCL §§ 125.1501 to 125.1531 et. seq., respectively, the Charter Township of Ypsilanti, Washtenaw County, Michigan, by and through its Board of Trustees, enacts this Ordinance regulating and controlling the subdivision of land within the Township for the following purposes: 
01.02.01 Provide means for carrying out the Township's responsibilities relative to the platting of land under the laws of the State of Michigan. 
01.02.02 Provide for orderly growth and harmonious development of the Township, consistent with the Master Plan, the Zoning Ordinance and other plans and Ordinances related to development. 
01.02.03 Protect the character, the social and the economic stability of all parts of the Township, and encourage an orderly and beneficial development of the Township through appropriate control of the timing and phasing of the development process, promotion of infill development in existing neighborhoods and areas with adequate public facilities, and protection of sensitive environmental areas. 
01.02.04 Establish reasonable standards for design of subdivision lots, streets, utilities, and landscaping to further the orderly layout and use of land. 
01.02.05 Provide for adequate light, air, and privacy; to secure safety from fire, flood, and other danger. 
01.02.06 Prevent the overcrowding of the land and population. 
01.02.07 Achieve maximum utility and livability on individual lots. 
01.02.08 Protect and conserve the value of land, buildings and improvements by minimizing conflicts among both existing and planned land uses. 
01.02.09 Provide for efficient traffic circulation through a coordinated functionally-classified street system in order to lessen existing or potential congestion on the existing or planned street system. 
01.02.10 Ensure that facilities exist or are provided concurrent with development; ensure that these facilities safely and efficiently accommodate traffic associated with the proposed subdivision without requiring the Township or Washtenaw County to bear the cost of providing said facilities. 
01.02.11 Provide convenient facilities within the subdivision for pedestrians and bicyclists; link with other existing or planned non-motorized transportation systems. 
01.02.12 Ensure that public facilities, such as water, sewerage and drainage, are available concurrent with development, and will have sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision without requiring the Township to bear the cost of providing the facilities. 
01.02.13 Ensure that public services, such as police and fire protection, are available and adequate to serve the proposed subdivision without requiring the Township to bear more than its fair share of the cost of providing the services. 
01.02.14 Provide opportunities for efficient design and layout of the land in a manner that retains or provides usable open space, parks, playgrounds and other recreational facilities within subdivisions. 
01.02.15 Encourage the wise use and management of natural resources; require additional tree plantings or landscaping to preserve the rural character, integrity, stability and beauty of the Township. 
01.02.16 Assist in protecting important wetlands regulated by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
01.02.17 Prevent the pollution of air, surface, and ground water. 
01.02.18 Ensure proper survey, legal description, and placement of monuments on subdivided land. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
Sec. 01.03. Scope of regulations and vested rights.
01.03.01 These regulations apply to all subdivisions created after the effective date of this Ordinance that are located totally or partially within the boundaries of the Township of Ypsilanti including those which received tentative preliminary plat approval, or were submitted for review but did not receive approval under the prior Subdivision Regulations. 
01.03.02 A subdivision which received final preliminary plat or final plat approval from the Township Board prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall be processed in accordance with the standards and procedures established in the previous Subdivision Regulations in accordance with all of the following stipulations: 
(a)	Building permits must be approved, and actual construction of building footings or foundations must be diligently and continuously carried on within one (1) year of the effective date of this Ordinance. 
(b)	If the proprietor proposes a change or changes to the approved final preliminary plat or final plat for a subdivision or phase of a subdivision, including any change required by the Township or an outside agency, such change shall conform to the standards herein and the applicable regulations of the Zoning Ordinance, unless the Planning Commission determines it to be a "major change", as defined by Section [3.01.03] of this Ordinance. 
(c)	The Township may require compliance with the standards established herein upon a determination that compliance is necessary for the preservation or protection of health, safety and welfare. 
01.03.03 No land may be subdivided or combined through the use of any legal description unless approved by the Township in accordance with this Ordinance (for platted subdivisions) or the Zoning Ordinance (for unplatted lands). 
01.03.04 No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any parcel or plat of land created by subdivision after the effective date of, and not in substantial conformity with, the provisions of this Ordinance. No excavation of land or construction of any public or private improvements shall take place or be commenced except in conformity with these regulations. 
01.03.05 No subdivisions or lots that were nonconforming under the previous regulations gain any new rights through the adoption of this Ordinance unless they become more conforming or conforming. 
01.03.06 This Ordinance shall not abrogate or annul any easement, by law, master deed, deed restriction, covenant, private agreement or dedicated public right-of-way, except where the regulations or standards of this Ordinance are more restrictive or impose a higher standard. 
01.03.07 The regulations established herein are considered to be the minimum necessary to achieve the purposes listed above. Any conflicting Ordinances, regulations, or laws of a more restrictive nature shall supersede the appropriate provisions of this Ordinance. 
01.03.08 Except as otherwise provided above, no vested rights shall accrue to the owner or developer of any subdivision until the actual signing of the final plat by the Township Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
ARTICLE II. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
 
Sec. 02.01. Rules of construction.
The following rules of construction shall apply to this Ordinance: 
02.01.01 The particular shall control the general. 
02.01.02 Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by a conjunction, the conjunctions shall have the following meaning: 
(a)	"And" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
(b)	"Or" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination (i.e. "or" also means "and/or"). 
(c)	"Either" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
02.01.03 The phrase "such as" shall mean "such as, but not limited to." 
02.01.04 The phrase "including" shall mean including, but not limited to." 
02.01.05 Use of "including," "includes," "such as," "additional," or "supplemental" means that the examples provided are illustrative and not an exhaustive listing, unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary. 
02.01.06 Where an illustration accompanies any provision in this Ordinance, the written text shall have precedence over the illustration, unless the context indicates to the contrary. 
02.01.07 References to departments, commissions, boards, and other offices are to those of the Charter Township of Ypsilanti, unless otherwise indicated. 
02.01.08 A reference to a public official or staff person of the Township is to that person who performs the function referred to, and may include a designee of the public official or staff person. 
02.01.09 A reference to days is to calendar days unless otherwise indicated in this Ordinance or specified by State law. If a deadline falls on a weekend or Township holiday, the deadline shall be extended to the next working day. A working day is defined as normal business hours of any day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or official Township holiday. 
02.01.10 In computing a period of days, the day of the act or event from which the designated period of days begins to run shall be excluded, and the last day of the period is included, unless the last day is not a working day. If the last day is not a working day, the period runs until the end of the next working day. 
02.01.11 Use of "shall," "will" or "must" is mandatory; use of "may" is permissive, with the decision made by the Township. 
02.01.12 Words in the present tense include the future tense, words used in the plural include the singular, and the singular plural, unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary. 
02.01.13 The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation, as well as an individual. 
02.01.14 "Across" or "across from" shall mean "on the opposite side" and shall not be interpreted as having the same meaning as "adjacent" or "contiguous" unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary. 
02.01.15 All measurements shall be to the nearest integer unless otherwise specified. 
02.01.16 Singular words shall include the plural and masculine words shall include the feminine and neuter. 
02.01.17 Words or terms not defined herein shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
Sec. 02.02. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, certain words, terms and phrases shall be defined as follows: 
All terms as defined in the Land Division Act shall control in this Ordinance unless indicated to the contrary in this Section 201. 
Abutting: Having a common border with, or being separated from such common border by, an easement. 
Adjacent: See "Contiguous".
Alley: A dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on another street and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Application: A Tentative Preliminary Plat, Final Preliminary Plat, or Final Plat application, submitted for review in one complete package, that substantially meets all of the submission requirements of this Ordinance. 
Berm: A mound of soil, either natural or manmade, suited to obstruct views. Unless otherwise indicated or appropriate, required berms shall be measured from the average grade adjacent to the berm or the grade of pavement area adjacent to the berm. 
Bicycle (bike) path: A pathway, usually separated from the roadway, designed specifically to satisfy the physical requirements of bicycling, in accordance with the standards of the Township Non-motorized Pathways Plan, Township engineering standards and the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO). 
Block: That property abutting one side of the street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets, or between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, river or live stream; or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of development. 
Block length: The distance between intersections of through streets; such distance being measured along the longest street bounding the block, and from right-of-way line to right-of-way line of the two intersection streets. 
Board: The Township Board of Trustees of the Charter Township of Ypsilanti. 
Bond: Any form of a surety bond in an amount satisfactory to the Township and in a form satisfactory to the Township Attorney. (see also "Performance Guarantee") 
Buffer or buffer zone: An area within a subdivision required adjacent to certain zoning districts to improve views, and reduce noise impacts between uses that may otherwise be conflicting. The buffer zone may consist of natural existing vegetation that is preserved, or may be created or enhanced by trees, shrubs, fences, or berms. 
Buildable portion of a lot: The buildable portion of the lot shall generally include that portion of the lot on which the principal building may be constructed in compliance with all Ordinances and laws. 
Building: Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind. 
Building line or setback line: A line, usually fixed parallel to the street right-of-way, beyond which a building or part thereof cannot extend unless otherwise permitted under the terms of the Zoning Ordinance. 
Caliper: The diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches, six (6) inches above ground level for trees up to and including four (4) inches in diameter, and twelve (12) inches above ground level for trees over four (4) inches in diameter. This measurement is for nursery stock trees only, (see diameter at breast height (DBH) for measurement of existing trees). 
Caption: The name by which the plat is legally and commonly known. 
Clerk: The Township Clerk of the Charter Township of Ypsilanti. 
Commission: See: "Planning Commission."
Comprehensive plan: The comprehensive plan for the Township, which includes graphics, maps and text indicating the general location and design recommended for land use, roads, parks, schools, public buildings, zoning districts, and all physical developments of the Township including any unit or part of such plan separately adopted, and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof adopted by the Planning Commission. 
Condominium: A condominium is a system of separate ownership of individual units in multiunit projects created according to Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended. In addition to the interest acquired in a particular unit, each unit owner is also a tenant in common in the underlying fee and in the spaces and building parts used in common by all the unit owners. 
Construction plans: The drawings accompanying a subdivision plat that show the specific location and design of improvements to be installed in the subdivision. 
Contiguous: Lots are contiguous when at least one boundary line of one lot shares a boundary line or lines of another lot. 
Culvert: A structure designed to convey a water course not incorporated in a closed drainage system, under a road or pedestrian walk. 
Date of filing:
(a)	Date of filing for tentative approval of the preliminary plat: Is the date of the initial Planning Commission meeting that the proprietor presents the preliminary plat for consideration. 
(b)	Date of filing for final approval of the preliminary plat: Is the date the proprietor files the tentatively approved preliminary plat and a certified list of all authorities required for approval with the Community & Economic Development Department. 
(c)	Date of filing for final plat approval: Is the date the proprietor files the necessary prints of the final plat with the Community & Economic Development Department. 
Dedication: A conveyance of land by the owner in the nature of a gift or grant and an acceptance of that land by or on behalf of the public. 
Density: The number of dwelling units situated on or to be developed per net or gross acre of land. For purposes of calculating maximum density, only twenty-five (25) percent of the acreage comprised of open water, land within the 100-year floodplain elevation, and/or wetlands protected by the Goemaere-Anderson Wetland Protection Act, PA 203 of 1979, shall be calculated toward the total site acreage. All open bodies of water, public rights-of-way, private road easements and areas within overhead utility line easements are excluded from calculation. 
Detention basin: A manmade or natural water collector facility designed to collect surface and subsurface water in order to impede its flow and to release the same gradually at a rate not greater than that prior to the development of the property, into natural or manmade outlets. 
Development: A planning or construction project involving substantial property improvement and, usually, a change of land-use character within the site; the act of using land for building or extractive purposes. 
Diameter at breast height (D.B.H.): The diameter in inches of an existing tree measured at four and one-half (4½) feet above the existing grade. 
Drainage: The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, grading, or other means. 
Drainage system: The system through which water flows from the land, including pipelines, swales, ditches, drains, watercourses, water bodies and wetlands. 
Driveway: A private lane, serving one (1) principal dwelling, designed primarily for vehicular access to connect a building with a street. 
Easement: A specific area of land over which a liberty, privilege, or advantage is granted by the owner to the public, a corporation, or some particular person or part of the public for specific uses and purposes, and which shall be designated a "public" or "private" easement, depending on the nature of the user. 
Environmentally sensitive areas: Features, natural resources or land characteristics that are sensitive to improvements. Such constraints may require conservation measures, the application of creative development techniques, or limited development to prevent degradation of the environment. See also Environmental and Natural Features Protection Ordinance. 
Erosion: The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments, or the wearing away of the land surface by water, wind, ice, or gravity. 
Escrow: A deed, a bond, money, or interest in a piece of property temporarily deposited with the Community & Economic Development Department or a neutral third party called the escrow agent, by the agreement of two parties. The escrow agent will hold the deposit until the conditions of the agreement are met, at which time the agent will release it to the grantee. 
Fence: An artificially constructed unroofed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire, metal, or similar manufactured material which may or may not serve as an enclosure. 
Grade: The slope of a street, other public way, or land specified in percentage (%) terms. 
Ground cover: A planting of low-growing plants or sod that in time forms a dense mat covering the area, preventing soil from being blown or washed away and the growth of unwanted plants. 
Greenbelt: A strip of land of definite width and location reserved for the planting of a combination of shrubs, trees and ground cover to serve as an obscuring screen and buffer for noise or visual enhancement, in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
Improvements: Grading, street surfacing, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains, fire hydrants, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, culverts, bridges, landscaping and other additions to the natural state of land which increase its value, utility or habitability. 
Land Division Act: The Land Division Act, Michigan Public Acts 288 of 1967, as amended. 
Lot: A parcel of land separated from other parcels on a preliminary or recorded plat for the purpose of sale, lease, or separate use. 
Lot area: The total horizontal land area within the lot lines of a lot. For purposes of calculation of minimum lot area, submerged lands, easements for overhead utilities, public rights-of-way, private access easements shall be excluded; areas within the 100-year floodplain elevation or determined to be MDEQ regulated wetlands shall be included, except as noted under the definition of "density". 
Lot, corner: As defined by the Zoning Ordinance. 
Lot depth: The arithmetic mean of the shortest and longest distances from the front lot line to the rear lot line. 
Lot, interior: Any lot other than a corner lot. 
Lot line: As defined by the Zoning Ordinance. 
Lot, reverse frontage: A lot abutting and/or [a] collector thoroughfare and a minor street(s) with vehicular access only to the minor street. 
Lot, through: Any interior lot having frontage on two more or less parallel streets as distinguished from a corner lot. In the case of a row of double frontage lots, all yards of said lots adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and front yard setbacks shall be provided as required. 
Lot, width: See Zoning Ordinance. 
Major streets or thoroughfare plan: The part of the Master Plan that sets forth the location, alignment and dimensions of existing and proposed streets and thoroughfares. 
Median: That portion of a divided street separating lanes of traffic proceeding in opposite directions. 
MDEQ: Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
MDPH: Michigan Department of Public Health. 
MDOT: Michigan Department of Transportation. 
Off-site: Any premises not located within the area of the property to be subdivided, whether or not in the common ownership of the proprietor for subdivision approval. 
Off-street parking: Parking that is provided within a parking lot, parking structure, or private driveway. 
On-street parking: Parking that is permitted on a dedicated street right-of-way or approved private road. 
Outlot: A lot set aside for purposes other than a building site, park or other land dedicated to public use or reserved to private use, when included within the boundary of a recorded plat. An outlot must have a specific dedicated use such as a future road extension. 
Pedestrian through-block connector: A pedestrian pathway located at street level, but perpendicular to the street, to provide short cuts through development blocks. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, limited partnership, firm, corporation, or association and their lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by any court. In the instance of a legal entity, the individual(s) who is (are) the general partners of a partnership, whether limited or not, the trustee(s) and any beneficiary having the power to appoint or constitute a trustee of a trust, the officers and directors of a corporation and any receiver thereof shall be equally liable with the legal entity for any requirements or penalties provided for in this Ordinance. In any instance an agent having the apparent authority to control the use or occupation of such persons having property regulated by this Ordinance shall be equally liable with his, her or its principal for any requirements or penalties provided in this Ordinance. 
Planned development (PD): A development under the regulations of Article 19, Planned Development, of the Zoning Ordinance. 
Planning commission: The Planning Commission of the Charter Township of Ypsilanti. 
Plat: A map or chart of a subdivision of land. 
(a)	Preliminary plat: A map showing all requisite details of a proposed subdivision submitted to an approving authority for purposes of preliminary consideration, prepared in conformance with the Land Division Act. 
(b)	Final plat: A map of all or part of a subdivision providing substantial conformance to the Preliminary Plat of the Subdivision prepared in conformance with the requirements of the Land Division Act and this Ordinance and suitable for recording by the County Register of Deeds. 
Parcel (or tract): A continuous area or acreage of land that can be described as provided for in the Michigan Land Division Act. 
Proprietor: A person who may hold any ownership interest in land, whether recorded or not. 
Public reservation: A portion of a subdivision, which is set aside for public use and made available for public use and acquisition. 
Public sewer: A sewage system as defined in Part 41 of Michigan Public Act 450 of 1994. 
Public utility: Any person, firm or corporation, municipal department, board or commission, or other public authority duly authorized to furnish, and furnishing under governmental regulations, to the public: Gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, public water, telephone lines (not cellular phone transmissions), cable television services (not communication antennas), communication, telegraph, transportation, water or other services to residents of the Township. 
Public walkway: A right-of-way dedicated for the purpose of a pedestrian access through residential areas, and located so as to connect to two or more streets, or a street and a public land parcel. 
Record drawings: Construction plans that have been revised upon completion of construction to illustrate the recorded location and details of improvements. 
Replat: The process of changing, or the map or plat which changes, the boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat or part thereof. The legal dividing of an outlot within a recorded subdivision plat without changing the exterior boundaries of the outlot is not a replat. 
Retention basin: A pond, pool or basin used for the permanent storage of water runoff. 
Road commission: See: "WCRC" 
Right-of-way: A strip of land reserved and dedicated for a street, alley, walkway, or other public purpose, and which may be occupied by public utilities, such as electric transmission lines, gas pipelines, cable television lines, fiber optics lines, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewer mains, street trees, or other utility uses. Rights-of-way established and shown on the final plat are to be distinct and separate from the lots or parcels adjoining such rights-of-way, and are not to be included in the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. 
Right-of-way lines: The lines that form the boundaries of a right-of-way. 
Sedimentation: A deposit of soil that has been transported from its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity, or other natural means as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation basin: A manmade or natural water collection facility designed to collect surface water in order to remove sand, silt, debris and other material which would damage the downstream water course. 
Setback: As defined by the Zoning Ordinance. 
Sidewalk: A concrete path that provides for pedestrian use and is usually located at the side of a road within the right-of-way. 
Sight distance: The length of roadway visible to a driver. Generally related to the distance and time considered to be sufficient for the driver to safely execute a maneuver (such as complete a left turn for an access point), under normal weather conditions, as specified by WCRC. 
Single means of access: A road layout with a circulation system where, at some point, access to a lot or lots is only provided at one point. A "single means of access", for example, may be a dead end street or a loop road system with only one (1) outlet to a public street. 
Sketch plan: A plan drawn to scale showing existing and proposed features of a site and its surroundings and the general layout of a proposed subdivision. The plan may include a description of general topographic and soil conditions on the site including water level information, description of existing and proposed manmade features important to the proposed development, description of significant natural features on the site, description of general site conditions that are to be retained or modified in the proposed development, description of uses and facilities to be incorporated in the development, and description of approximate phases of development. 
Street: Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct, alley or other way which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway; or, a street or way shown in a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or approved by official action; or, a street or way on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the County Register of Deeds. A street includes the land between the street right-of-way lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas, and lawns. 
(a)	Major thoroughfare: An arterial street of greater continuity which is intended to serve as a large volume traffic-way for both the immediate Municipality area and region beyond, and may be designated on the Township's Major Thoroughfare Plan, as a major thoroughfare, parkway, expressway, or equivalent term to identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the street plan. 
(b)	Collector street (secondary thoroughfare): Collector streets and roads provide access to abutting properties and traffic circulation within residential, commercial, industrial, and public uses. The purpose of a collector road is to collect traffic throughout the Township and channel it to the major thoroughfare (arterial) system. 
(c)	Minor/local street: A street of limited continuity used primarily for access to abutting residential properties. 
(d)	Marginal access street: A minor street paralleling and adjacent to a major thoroughfare which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
(e)	Boulevard street: A street developed with two-2 lane, one-way pavements, separated by a median. 
(f)	Dead-end street: A street or road that terminates with no current or proposed thoroughfare to another street or road. 
(g)	Divided street: A street or road having an island, boulevard, median or other barrier separating moving lanes. 
(h)	Half-street: A street or road containing less than the required right-of-way width. 
(i)	Turn-around: A short boulevard street permanently terminated by a vehicular turn-around. 
(j)	Cul-de-Sac street: A minor street of short length, having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated at the other end by a vehicular turn-around. 
(k)	Loop street: A minor street of short length with two openings to traffic beginning from the same street, and projecting parallel to each other and connecting at their termination by a loop. 
(l)	Stub street: A portion of a street or road for which an extension has been proposed and approved, and is terminated by a temporary cul-de-sac. 
Street tree: A canopy tree along a public street or approved private road that is typically located in a street right-of-way or access easement (see also "tree".) 
Subdivision control act: Michigan Public Acts 288 of 1967, as amended to now be called the Land Division Act. (See Land Division Act.) 
Subdivision: The partitioning or dividing of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors, or assigns for the purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development, where the act of division creates more parcels of land than allowed under the Land Division Act. 
Subdivision rules and drainage policies: A document prepared by the Washtenaw County Drain Commissioner which sets the minimum standards for drainage facilities within the County. 
Topographical map: A map prepared by a surveyor showing existing physical characteristics, with contour lines at sufficient intervals to permit determination of proposed grades and drainage. 
Township: The Charter Township of Ypsilanti, Washtenaw County, Michigan. 
Township board: The Board of Trustees of the Charter Township of Ypsilanti, Washtenaw County, Michigan. 
Township engineer or engineer: The staff engineer or consulting engineer of the Township. 
Township planner or planner: The staff planner or consulting planner of the Township. 
Tree: A woody plant which has an erect perennial trunk, which at maturity is thirteen (13) feet or more in height, which has a more or less definite crown of foliage. For purposes of this Ordinance the following definitions of types of trees shall apply: 
(a)	Deciduous trees: A tree that has foliage that is shed at the end of the growing season. 
(b)	Evergreen trees: A tree that has foliage that persists and remains green throughout the year. 
(c)	Ornamental tree: A deciduous tree which is typically grown because of its shape, flowering characteristics, or other attractive features, and which grows to a mature height of twenty-five (25) feet or less. 
(d)	Canopy tree: A deciduous tree which has a mature crown spread of greater than fifteen (15) feet and a mature height of forty (40) or more feet in southern Michigan, and which has a trunk with at least five (5) feet of clear stem at maturity. 
Variance: A waiver granted by the Township Board from compliance with a specific provision of the Subdivision Regulations Ordinance granted to a particular property owner because of the practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship that would be imposed by the strict application of that provision of the Ordinance. A waiver from a specific provision contained in the Zoning Ordinance requires approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with Article XXIV of the Zoning Ordinance. 
Vested right: The right to initiate or continue the establishment of a use that will be contrary to a restriction or regulation coming into effect when the project associated with the use is completed (sometimes referred to as "grandfathered"). 
WCDC: The Washtenaw County Drain Commission. 
WCHD: The Washtenaw County Health Department. 
WCRC: The Washtenaw County Road Commission. 
Zoning Ordinance: The Charter Township of Ypsilanti Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
ARTICLE III. SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE
 
Sec. 03.01. Process.
The preparation of a subdivision for platting shall be carried out through the following process. Submittals must include all information outlined in Section 03.03. 
03.01.01. Optional Sketch Plan review (Section 03.04), involving Township staff, consultants and Planning Commission for direction to the proprietor, but no formal action is taken. 
03.01.02. Tentative Preliminary Plat review (Section 03.05.01), which involves review of basic street layout and lot arrangement, the review of additional information required under this Ordinance, and a recommendation by the Planning Commission to the Township Board for approval or denial. The Township Board, within ninety (90) days from the date of filing (the initial Planning Commission meeting that the proprietor presented the preliminary plat for consideration), shall tentatively approve and note its approval on the copy of the preliminary plat to be returned to the proprietor, or set forth in writing its reasons for rejection and requirements for tentative approval. 
03.01.03 Final Preliminary Plat review (Section 03.05.02), involves review by applicable outside (State and Washtenaw County) agencies prior to review and action by the Township Board. The Board shall review the final preliminary plat, after the plans have been revised to be in conformance with the requirements of outside agencies. If there have been major changes in the tentative preliminary plat, as determined by the Township Board, in accordance with Section 03.05.02(e), then the application must return to the Planning Commission and Township Board for tentative preliminary review. If there have not been major changes from the tentative preliminary plat, the Township Board shall consider and review the final preliminary plat at its next meeting, or within twenty (20) days of the date of filing of an application that is accepted as complete. The Township Board will then either approve the application if the proprietor has met all the conditions laid down for approval of the final preliminary plat have been met, or deny the application. The Township Board will then instruct the Clerk to promptly notify the proprietor of approval or rejection in writing, and if rejected to give the reasons. 
03.01.04 Final Plat Approval (Section 03.06), involves review and action to approve or deny the final plat by the Township Board at its next regular meeting or within twenty (20) days of the date of filing of an application that is accepted as complete. The Township Board shall either (1) approve the Final Plat if it conforms to all of the provisions of this Ordinance and instruct the Clerk to certify on the plat to the Township Board's approval; or (2) reject the final plat, instruct the Clerk to give reasons in writing as set forth in the minutes of the meeting, and return the plat to the proprietor. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
Sec. 03.02. Initial investigation.
The proprietor may meet informally with the Township Departments concerned to investigate the procedures and standards of the Township with reference to this Subdivision Regulations Ordinance and with the proposals of the Comprehensive Plan as they affect the area in which the proposed subdivision is located. The proprietor should concern himself with the following factors: 
03.02.01 The proprietor shall secure a copy of the Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Regulations, engineering specifications, and other similar ordinances or controls relative to the subdivision and improvement of land so as to make himself aware of the requirements of the Township. 
03.02.02 The area for the proposed subdivision shall be properly zoned for the intended use before preliminary plat application is made. 
03.02.03 An investigation of adequacy of existing schools and the adequacy of public open spaces including parks and playgrounds to serve the proposed subdivision shall be made by the proprietor. 
03.02.04 The relationship of the proposed subdivision with respect to major thoroughfares and plans for widening of thoroughfares shall be investigated by the proprietor. 
03.02.05 Standards for sewage disposal; water supply and drainage of the Township shall be investigated by the proprietor. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
Sec. 03.03. Required plat information.
The following information is required to be provided on each plat submittal to the Township: 
SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS	sketch plan 	tent. prelim. plat 	final prelim. plat 
Proposed name of subdivision. 	X 	X 	X 
Name(s) and address of the proprietor and the owner of record of the land to be subdivided. The proprietor shall indicate interest in the land as to whether it is a land contract interest, or ownership of the property in fee simple. 	X 	X 	X 
Names, address and professional seals of the designer, engineer or land surveyor who designed the subdivision layout. 		X 	X 
Location by Section, Town and Range, or by other legal description. 		X 	X 
Scale of plat, 1" = 100' as minimum acceptable scale. 	X 	X 	X 
Date, revision dates, and north arrow. 	X 	X 	X 
EXISTING SITE INFORMATION			
An overall area map at a scale of not less than 1" = 2,000' showing the relationship of the subdivision to its surroundings such as section lines and/or major streets or collector streets shall be provided. 	X 	X 	X 
Property lines of adjacent tracts within 200 feet of subdivided and unsubdivided land shown in relation to the tract being proposed for subdivision including those of areas across abutting road with those unplatted landowners being designated by name. 		X 	X 
Boundary lines with dimensions for the subdivision. If plat is to be done in phases, the boundaries and dimensions for each phase shall be indicated. All phases shall be numbered in the order in which they are intended to be platted. An estimated time frame for platting of each phase shall also be provided. 		X 	X 
Township boundary lines if in or within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed plat. 		X 	X 
Location, widths, and names of existing or prior platted streets and private streets, and public easements within or adjacent to the tract being proposed for subdivision, including those located across abutting roads. 	X 	X 	X 
Zoning district classification for all land parcels within and adjacent to the plat. 	X 	X 	X 
Existing buildings or other structures in or within one hundred (100) feet of the proposed subdivision plat. 		X 	X 
A written subdivision site report that includes soil boring logs and water table information. Additional borings may be required by the Township Engineer. 		X 	X 
PROPOSED SUBDIVISION			
Layout, numbers, dimensions, and lot areas in square feet, including building setback lines showing dimensions. 	X 	X 	X 
Indication of parcels of land intended to be dedicated or set aside for public use or for the use of property owners in the subdivision. 	X 	X 	X 
An indication of the ownership, and existing and proposed use of any parcels identified as "excepted" on the preliminary plat. If the proprietor has an interest or owns any parcel so identified as "excepted", the preliminary plat shall indicate how this property could be developed in accordance with the requirements of the existing zoning district in which it is located and with an acceptable relationship to the layout of the proposed preliminary plat. 		X 	X 
In the case where the proprietor wishes to subdivide a given area, but wishes to begin with only a portion of the total area, the preliminary plat shall include the proposed general layout for the entire area. The part that is proposed to be subdivided first shall be clearly superimposed upon the overall plan in order to illustrate clearly the method of development which the proprietor intends to follow. Each subsequent plat shall follow the same procedure until the entire area controlled by the proprietor is subdivided. 		X 	X 
Spot elevations of the proposed grading and road work. 			X 
NATURAL FEATURES			
Topography drawn as contours at an interval of not less than two (2) feet for the subject site and a general description of topography within one hundred (100) feet of the plat. Topography shall be based on U.S.C. and G.S. Datum. Existing and proposed topography lines shall be shown in a manner that is easily distinguishable. 		X 	X 
Boundaries of regulated floodplain or wetlands, with documentation and credentials supporting that the boundary was determined by a qualified firm or individual. 	general 	X 	X 
Woodland inventory meeting the requirements of the Township Environment and Natural Features Protection Ordinance. 	general 	X 	X 
Location and elevation of any floodplain areas. 	general 	X 	X 
STREETS			
Traffic Impact Study meeting requirements contained in Traffic Impact Ordinance. 	X 	X 	
Name, location, and right-of-way widths of existing or proposed public or private streets in or within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the proposed plat. 	X 	X 	X 
Method of connection with adjoining street system. 	X 	X 	X 
General layout of proposed streets. 	X 	X 	
Details on street design including curve radii, rights-of-way, cross sections, gradient, street signs, etc. 			X 
Names of proposed streets. 		X 	X 
Street Lighting: The location for any street lights shall be shown. A diagram of a typical street light planned to be installed in the plat shall be provided. 		X 	X 
Location of school bus stops and documentation from the school district. 			X 
SIDEWALKS AND BIKEPATHS			
Locations of proposed sidewalks, bike paths and similar facilities. 		X 	X 
Details on the width, materials, grades, etc. of pedestrian facilities. 			X 
LANDSCAPE PLAN			
A general conceptual landscape plan illustrating buffer zones and green-belts. 	general 		
Location and details of street trees, buffer zones and green-belts including plant lists. 		X 	X 
Entry Features: A detailed drawing to scale of any proposed entrance features including dimensions of boulevards, walls, landscaping signs or lighting. 		X 	X 
PUBLIC RESERVATIONS AND EASEMENTS			
Indication of parcels of land intended to be dedicated or set aside for public use or for the use of property owners in the subdivision. 	general 	X 	X 
Documentation of dedication or reservation. 			X 
Existing or proposed easements in or within one hundred (100) feet of the proposed plat. Information should include the width and purpose for all easements. 		X 	X 
UTILITIES			
General layout of water and sanitary sewer lines. 		X 	
Sewage disposal: Location, size material and slope of sewer lines, or location of septic fields, for sewage disposal by a method approved by the Washtenaw County Health Department or the Michigan Dept. of Public Health (MDPH) and the Township Board. Utility information shall be shown for the plat and for a distance two hundred (200) feet outside of the plat. 			X 
Water system: Location, material and sizes of lines and the location of fire hydrants, or location of wells for proposed water supply by a method approved by the Washtenaw County Health Department or the MDPH and the Township Board. Utility information shall be shown for the plat and for a distance two hundred (200) feet outside of the plat. 			X 
Location, sizes and other information on underground utilities such as electricity present and other proposed utilities. Utility information shall be shown for the plat and for a distance two hundred (200) feet outside of the plat. 			X 
General plans for stormwater, including the location of detention basin and the route of the runoff from the site to the nearest drainage course. 		X 	
Drainage: An indication of storm drainage proposed by methods acceptable to the Township and/or the WCDC. Detailed information shall be provided including location, size, material and slope of storm sewer lines. Stormwater runoff, pipe and detention pond calculations shall be provided to analyze the adequacy of proposed drainage facilities. 			X 
MISCELLANEOUS			
Declaration of Restrictions. 			X 
Proposed location of mail box clusters (if required). 		X 	X 
Details on mail box cluster design and letter from Post Office. 			X 

(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
Sec. 03.04. Sketch plan.
Three copies of a sketch plan may be submitted by the proprietor to the Planning Commission. The purpose of the sketch plan is to provide the proprietor with an opportunity to avail himself of the advice and assistance of the Planning Commission and other Township agencies involved in subdividing, before the preparation of a preliminary plat and its submission for approval, in order to save him time, money and to make the most of his opportunities. Nothing in this Section, however, shall be so construed as to require any pre-application contact and review at this stage shall not constitute any approval of the proposed preliminary plat but shall serve primarily as guidance to the prospective proprietor. Any proprietor may elect to begin subdividing by submitting a preliminary plat in accordance with the provisions of these Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
Sec. 03.05. Preliminary plat.
The procedure for the preparation and review of a preliminary plat requires tentative and final approval as follows: 
03.05.01 Preliminary Plat - Tentative Approval.
(a)	Filing.
(1)	Ten (10) copies of a complete preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, together with written application in triplicate and any other information required to be submitted under the Land Division Act shall be filed with the Community & Economic Development Department. Submittal to the Community & Economic Development Department shall be at least ten (10) days prior to the regular Commission meeting. 
(2)	The preliminary plat shall be prepared in accordance with Section 111 of the Land Division Act and in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance. It shall not be necessary that initial submission be prepared by and sealed by a surveyor, provided that properly sealed copies of the preliminary plat are filed with the Township prior to the grant of tentative approval by the Township. 
(3)	The proprietor shall submit as evidence of title, an abstract of title certified to date with the written opinion of an attorney-at-law thereon, or at the option of the proprietor, a policy of title insurance for examination in order to ascertain as to whether or not the proper parties have signed the plat. 
(4)	The Clerk shall check the proposed plat for completeness. Should any of the data required in the Land Division Act, or in this Ordinance, be omitted, the Clerk shall be directed to inform the proprietor of the data required, and that the application will be delayed until the required data is received. 
(b)	Planning Commission Review - Tentative Approval.
(1)	Submittal to the Community & Economic Development Department shall be at least ten (10) days prior to the regular Commission meeting at which the proprietor is scheduled to appear. 
The Community & Economic Development Department shall place the preliminary plat on the next regular Planning Commission agenda, at which meeting the proprietor will be scheduled to appear. The Planning Commission shall act on the preliminary plat within forty-five (45) days after the date of filing, being the initial Planning Commission meeting that the proprietor presented the preliminary plat for consideration, unless the proprietor agrees to an extension, in writing, of the time required for approval by the Township Board and Planning Commission. 
(2)	The Community & Economic Development Department shall transmit a copy of the preliminary plat to the Township Engineer and Township Planner for their technical review and recommendation and transmit a copy to the School Board having jurisdiction in the area where the plat is located. 
(3)	The Planning Commission shall recommend one of the following actions to the Township Board on the proposed preliminary plat within forty-five (45) days of the date of filing: 
a.	Recommend Approval: Should the Planning Commission find that all requirements have been satisfactorily met, it shall recommend tentative approval of the preliminary plat and the Chairperson shall make a notation to that effect on each copy of the preliminary plat and distribute copies of it as follows: 
1.	Return one (1) copy to the proprietor. 
2.	Retain one (1) copy, which shall become a matter of permanent record in the Planning Commission files. 
3.	Forward one (1) copy to the School Board or School Superintendent of the School District (for information purposes). 
4.	Forward the remaining copies to the Board via the Clerk's office with recommendations for approval as well as a copy of the Planning Commission minutes. 
b.	Recommend Conditional Approval: The recommendation may be a conditional approval, only if the proprietor waives, in writing, the review time requirement set forth in Section 03.07 of this Ordinance. The preliminary plat shall not be forwarded to the Board until revised plans or documentation that demonstrates compliance with said conditions have been submitted by the proprietor. The Community & Economic Development Department shall review the revised plans, with input from other staff and consultants as requested, prior to submission to the Township Board, and endorse all copies of the submitted plan as having met conditions. 
c.	Recommend Denial: Should the Planning Commission recommend denial of the tentative preliminary plat, the reasons shall be recorded in the minutes of that meeting and forwarded to the Board along with a copy of the preliminary plat. 
(c)	Township Board - Tentative Approval.
(1)	The Township Board will not review a preliminary plat until it has received the review and recommendations of the Commission. Following the receipt of such recommendations, the Township Board shall consider the preliminary plat at such meeting that the matter is placed on the regularly scheduled agenda. The Township Board shall take action on the preliminary plat within ninety (90) days of the date of initial filing, being the Planning Commission meeting that the proprietor first presents the preliminary plat for consideration. 
(2)	Should the Township Board tentatively approve the preliminary plat, they shall record their approval on the plat and return one copy to the proprietor. 
(3)	Tentative approval shall not constitute final approval of the preliminary plat. 
(4)	Tentative approval by the Township Board shall confer upon the proprietor for a period of twelve (12) months from date, approval of lot sizes, lot orientation, and street layout. Should the preliminary plat in whole or in part not be submitted for final approval within this time limit, the preliminary plat must again be submitted to the Commission and Township Board for approval unless an extension is applied for by the proprietor, and such request is granted in writing by the Township Board. 
(5)	No installation or construction of improvements shall be made on the basis of tentative approval of the preliminary plat including grading, tree removal or land balancing. 
03.05.02 Preliminary Plat Review by Township Board - Final Approval.
(a)	The proprietor shall file a valid preliminary plat, as tentatively approved by the Township Board, with the Clerk together with a certified list of all authorities required for approval in Sections 112 to 119 of the Land Division Act, including the following, where applicable. The proprietor shall also provide approved copies of plats from each of the required authorities along with any additional required information, application form, and fees: 
(1)	Washtenaw County Road Commission; 
(2)	Washtenaw County Drain Commission; 
(3)	Washtenaw County Health Department; 
(4)	Washtenaw County Plat Board; 
(5)	Michigan Department of Environmental Quality; 
(6)	Michigan Department of Commerce; 
(7)	Michigan Department of Public Health; 
(8)	Michigan Department of Transportation; 
(9)	Public utilities serving the area. 
(b)	The Township Planner and Engineer shall review the preliminary plat for final approval and make a recommendation to the Township Board. 
(c)	The Township Board shall take action on the preliminary plat at their next regular meeting or, within twenty (20) days of the submission of all necessary approved plats. 
(d)	If the preliminary plat conforms substantially to the plat tentatively approved by the Township Board and meets all conditions laid down for tentative approval, the Township shall give final approval to the preliminary plat. 
(e)	If the proprietor makes any major changes to the plat following tentative approval, the Township Board has the authority to require the proprietor to resubmit the plat for tentative approval to allow the Township and the public to respond to the changes. Major changes shall include, but not be limited to, the following changes: 
(1)	Adds lots to the plat; 
(2)	Deletes or adds a road or access point; 
(3)	Alters the basic layout of the street system; 
(4)	Significantly alters the previously approved topography or drainage plan; 
(5)	Eliminates or reduces recreational facilities; 
(6)	Alters the phasing by adding lots or extending streets beyond the maximum length permitted; 
(7)	Results in any lot or infrastructure element not meeting any Township Ordinance; 
(8)	Due to the location of utilities, there is a loss of natural features and landscaping that is not being replaced; or 
(9)	The boundaries of MDEQ regulated wetlands are changed to alter lot layout or road arrangement. 
Major changes made by the proprietor to the preliminary plat following tentative approval shall relieve the Township from its commitment to honor the general terms and conditions of the Tentative Preliminary Plat approval, since such major changes may result in changes to the basic premise on which the tentative approval was given. 
(f)	The Clerk shall promptly notify the proprietor of approval or rejection in writing; if rejected, reasons shall be given and shall be recorded in the minutes pertaining thereto. A copy of the minutes shall be sent to the proprietor. 
(g)	Final approval of the preliminary plat shall confer upon the proprietor for a period of two (2) years from date of approval, the conditional right that the general terms and conditions under which preliminary approval was granted will not be changed. The two (2) year period may be extended by the Township Board, if applied for and granted in writing. In determining whether to grant such extension, the Township Board shall consider whether the proprietor has been diligently carrying on construction of subdivision improvements towards completion and can reasonably be expected to complete such improvements within the extension time period. Written notice of the extension shall be sent by the Township Board to other approving authorities. 
(h)	No installation or construction of any improvements shall be made before the proprietor has met the following conditions: 
(1)	Final approval by Township Board of the preliminary plats. 
(2)	Approval by the Township Engineer of engineering plans which shall include the location of houses, wells and septic tanks or public water and sewer plans, plans for road construction including the top of the back slope of roads, lot grading and runoff pattern, and the location of all utilities. 
(3)	Deposits required under Article V, Improvements, of this Appendix, have been received by the Township. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
Sec. 03.06. Final plat.
The procedure for preparation and review of a final plat shall be as follows: 
03.06.01 Preparation.
(a)	The final plat shall comply with the provisions of the Land Division Act and Section 12 of the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act. 
(b)	The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved and it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the proprietor proposed to record and develop at the time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to this Subdivision Regulations Ordinance. In determining whether the final plat satisfies this criterion, the Township Board shall consider the following: 
(1)	A final plat shall be considered no longer substantially conforming to the final preliminary plat if any of the following revisions have been made: 
a.	An increase in the number of lots; 
b.	Realignment of proposed roads and intersections; 
c.	Change in the basic layout of the subdivision and lots. 
(2)	A final plat shall still be considered substantially conforming to the final preliminary plat if any of the following revisions have been made individually and not in combination with other revisions: 
a.	Decrease in the number of lots without changing the basic layout; 
b.	Revisions to horizontal or vertical alignment of streets to satisfy WCRC standards, provided that such revisions do not affect the overall arrangement of streets; 
c.	Adjustment to lot lines or setbacks due to a more precise wetland or floodplain boundary where such an adjustment has an insignificant impact on lot area, setbacks, or buffer zone requirements; 
d.	Change in location of monuments or lot markers to correct surveying errors; 
e.	Minor relocation of a stormwater detention or retention basin; 
f.	The addition of retaining walls. 
(c)	The proprietor shall submit as evidence of title, an abstract of title certified to date, with the written opinion of an attorney-at-law thereon, or at the option of the proprietor, policy of title insurance for examination in order to ascertain as to whether or not the proper parties have signed the plat. 
(d)	The proprietor shall have a survey that complies with Sections 125 and 126 of the Land Division Act. In instances where the Township Board waives the placing of the required monuments or markers the proprietor must place in escrow monies to insure the placing of monuments and markers within a specified time period not to exceed one (1) year. The amount to be placed in escrow shall be in accordance with Section 125(9) of the Land Division Act. 
(e)	As a condition of final plat approval, the Township Board of a municipality or the Board of County Road Commissioners may require copies of agreements, covenants, or other documents showing the manner in which areas to be reserved for the common use of the residents of the subdivision are to be maintained. 
(f)	The proprietor shall submit the final plat and as-built engineering plans, where required for approval, to obtain final approval signatures on the final plat mylar from the following agencies: 
(1)	Washtenaw County Drain Commission; 
(2)	Washtenaw County Road Commission; 
(3)	Michigan Department of Commerce; 
(4)	Michigan Department of Transportation (if applicable). 
03.06.02 Final plat review.
(a)	One (1) original mylar and six (6) paper prints of the final plat shall be filed by the proprietor with the Community & Economic Development Department and shall deposit such sums of money as the Township Board may require herein or by other ordinances. Such final plat shall have been processed in accord with Act 288 of 1967, Sections 162 through Section 165 prior to submission to the Township for its review. 
(b)	The final plat shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer and Township Planner as to compliance with the approved preliminary plat and plans for utilities and other improvements. 
(c)	The Township Board shall review all recommendations and take action on the final plat at their next regular meeting or, within twenty (20) days of its date of filing in accord with the procedures of Act 288 of 1967, Sections 166 through 167. 
(d)	Upon the approval of the final plat by the Township Board, the subsequent approvals shall follow the procedure set forth in the Land Division Act. The three (3) prints of the final plat shall be forwarded; one (1) to the Clerk, one (1) to the Planning Commission, and one (1) to the Community & Economic Development Department. The original shall be forwarded to the Clerk of the County Plat Board in accord with Act 288 of 1967, Section 168. A copy of the final plat CAD file shall be submitted to the Community and Economic Development Department on a suitable disk format, as determined by the Community and Economic Development Department. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
Sec. 03.07. Extension of review deadlines.
Deadlines for the Township to take action on a preliminary or final plat, as specified in the Land Division Act and reiterated in this Appendix, may be extended by mutual written consent of the proprietor and the Township Clerk. A waiver of the review deadlines may be required to permit concurrent processing of related review applications (i.e. PD rezoning). In the absence of written consent for such a waiver, denial of a plat shall be considered appropriate if the Township has not been given sufficient time within the deadline to evaluate the impact of a proposed plat on the public health, safety and welfare, pursuant to the regulations in this Appendix. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
Sec. 03.08. Coordination of rezoning or planned development with subdivision approval.
03.08.01 Rezoning required. No subdivision plat that requires a rezoning shall be considered prior to approval of the rezoning by the Township Board. 
03.08.02 Planned Development. A subdivision review may be conducted simultaneously with the review process for Planned Developments (PD) under the Zoning Ordinance. The plans required for the PD shall be submitted in a form to satisfy both the requirements of these Subdivision Regulations and the Zoning Ordinance. In this process, following any public hearing required for the PD, the tentative preliminary plat may be processed following the PD Stage I rezoning. No subdivision plan that is being developed under PD shall be considered prior to approval of the PD Stage I rezoning by the Township Board. In selection of development under the PD district, the petitioner shall waive the review and approval deadlines for a subdivision plat specified in the Land Division Act or complete the PD Stage II approval prior to submitting a tentative preliminary plat. 
03.08.03 Issuance of permits. No building permits or certificates of occupancy shall be issued until the Township has granted final approval of the zoning application and the final plat has been properly recorded. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
ARTICLE IV. DESIGN STANDARDS
The subdivision design standards set forth under this Section are development guides for the assistance of the proprietor. All final plans must be reviewed and approved by the Township Board. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
Sec. 04.01. Streets.
Streets shall conform to at least all minimum requirements of the general specifications and typical cross-sections as set forth in the Design Layout Standards Article of this Appendix, and other conditions set forth by the Township Board and Washtenaw County Road Commission. 
04.01.01 Location and Arrangements.
(a)	The proposed subdivision shall conform to the various elements of the Comprehensive Plan and shall be considered in relation to the existing and planned major thoroughfares and collector streets, and such part shall be platted in the location and the width indicated on such plan. 
(b)	The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of existing streets from adjoining areas into new subdivisions, unless otherwise approved by the Township Board, following a recommendation by the Planning Commission, due to documented environmentally sensitive features, unusual lot configuration or unique site conditions. Where adjoining vacant areas are zoned or planned for development similar to the proposed subdivision, streets shall be extended to the boundary line of the tract to make provision for the future street connections. The proprietor shall demonstrate that the proposed stub street is in a reasonable location for extension into the adjacent lands, in consideration of such factors as grades, water bodies, wetlands and lot configuration. A temporary cul-de-sac shall be provided unless the length of the stub street only abuts one (1) lot on either side. A sign shall be placed at the end of the stub street or cul-de-sac with a sign face on both sides stating "Future Street Extension." Stub roads for future road extensions shall be improved to the parcel line. 
(c)	Streets shall be aligned to maximize the preservation of natural features and existing grades to the extent feasible. Streets should follow natural topography to minimize grading. 
(d)	The proposed subdivision street layout shall discourage use by through traffic, except where a continuation of streets to adjoining properties is deemed desirable by the Township. In determining the need for such connections, the Township shall consider the need for adequate access and response time for emergency vehicles, the impacts such connections may have on reducing congestion along arterials, the projected traffic volumes and the compatibility with adjacent developments. 
(e)	Should a proposed subdivision border on or contain an existing or proposed major thoroughfare or collector, the Planning Commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with an approved screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear property line having a minimum width of twenty-five (25) feet, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation and reduction of traffic hazards. Vehicular driveway access shall be to a minor street. 
(f)	Should a proposed subdivision border on or contain a railroad, expressway, or other limited access highway right-of-way, the Planning Commission may require the location of a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the development of an appropriate use of the intervening land as for parks in residential districts. Such distances shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for approach grades to future grade separation. 
(g)	Half streets shall be prohibited, except where absolutely essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations, and where the parcel is adjacent to another platted and dedicated half street or when a contemporaneous development proposal includes the required adjacent half street. Wherever there exists, adjacent to the tract to be subdivided, a dedication or platted and recorded half street; the other half shall be platted. 
(h)	Where a subdivision incorporates existing public streets or private roads that are not in conformance with current standards, such facilities shall be reconstructed as necessary to improve the road to the extent required by the WCRC for public roads. 
04.01.02 Right-of-Way Widths: Street right-of-way widths shall conform to at least the following minimum requirements: 
	Street type 	Right-of-way widths 
a. 	Major Thoroughfare 	120;ft; or in conformance with the Washtenaw County Road Commission 
b. 	Collector Streets(Secondary Thoroughfares) 	86;ft; 
c. 	Industrial Service Streets 	66;ft; 
d. 	Industrial Collector Streets 	86;ft; 
e. 	Multiple-Family Residential Streets where Platted 	66;ft; 
f. 	Minor (Single-Family Residential) Streets 	66;ft; 
g. 	Marginal Access Streets 	60;ft; 
h. 	Turn-around (loop) Streets 	120;ft; 
i. 	Alleys 	30;ft; 
j. 	Cul-de-sac Streets—Turn-Arounds 	75;ft; radius 
	(1) Industrial 	75;ft; radius 
	(2) Residential and others 	75;ft; radius 

04.01.03 Cul-de-sacs. The length of cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) feet measured from the centerline of the street to the center point of the cul-de-sac, unless a longer street is necessitated by topography or other natural features, existing conditions or other circumstances as may be approved by the Township Board, based upon recommendation of the Planning Commission, and the WCRC. In all cases, however, at least two means of access shall be provided to serve a cul-de-sac having more than twenty (20) single-family lots or uses which would result in more than two hundred (200) trips per average weekday, based on the most recent edition of Trip Generation, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. In no case shall a dead end street be permitted. A temporary cul-de-sac may be utilized for a stub street where future access to an adjacent site is planned. 
04.01.04 Street Geometrics. Standards for maximum and minimum street grades, vertical and horizontal street curves and sight distances shall be established by the Township Engineer and the Washtenaw County Road Commission. Wherever feasible the natural features of the land shall be preserved by forming curvilinear streets. 
04.01.05 Street Grades. For adequate drainage, the minimum street grade shall not be less than one-half percent for roads with curb and gutter and one (1) percent for roads with open ditches. The maximum street grade shall be six (6) percent for both roads with curb and gutter and with open ditches. In extraordinary circumstances a grade more extreme may be permitted providing a more efficient use of the land can be achieved, and upon approval of the Washtenaw County Road Commission. 
04.01.06 Curbs and Gutters. All roads shall be constructed with curb and gutters, in accordance with details and specifications prescribed by the Washtenaw County Road Commission. 
04.01.07 Street Intersections. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible to ninety (90) degrees. Curved streets, intersecting with major thoroughfares and collector thoroughfares, shall do so with a tangent section of centerline sixty-five (65) feet in length measured from the right-of-way line of the major or collector thoroughfare. 
04.01.08 Location of entrances along Major Thoroughfares for large subdivisions. For streets which will potentially have average daily traffic volumes of over two thousand (2,000) trips during an average day or two hundred (200) trips during a peak hour, major entrances should be limited to the half mile or quarter mile points along major thoroughfares where there is potential for traffic signalization in the future. Deviations from this standard shall be permitted if needed to provide adequate sight distance or if a modification is supported by a traffic impact study provided by the proprietor. 
04.01.09 Straightaways. Long, generally straight roadways that encourage high vehicular speeds through subdivisions should be avoided. 
04.01.10 Spacing of intersections along Major Thoroughfares. Streets intersecting along major thoroughfares shall be spaced at least three hundred (300) feet from the intersection of another platted street on the same side of the street, and spaced at least six hundred sixty (660) feet where possible. In addition, streets crossing major thoroughfares shall cross in direct alignment. Where direct alignment is not possible, streets on opposite sides of a major thoroughfare shall be offset no less than two hundred fifty (250) feet to each other, unless the Planning Commission and Township Board determine that a lesser offset is justified because of numerous existing streets or the difficulty of providing adequate site distance with a different alignment. 
04.01.11 Street Jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall be avoided. 
04.01.12 Grading and Centerline Gradients. Per plans and profiles approved by the Township Engineer and Washtenaw County Road Commission. 
04.01.13 Acceleration-Deceleration Lanes. Streets that intersect with major or secondary thoroughfares shall be provided with paved acceleration and deceleration lanes. Left turn passing lanes shall be provided if warranted based upon WCRC standards. Such lanes shall be provided in keeping with the standards approved by the Township Engineer and Washtenaw County Road Commission for this type of improvement. 
04.01.14 Street names. Street names shall be sufficiently distinct from other street names in the area to avoid confusion, particularly for emergency service providers. Proposed street names shall be accepted by the Township and approved by the WCRC as a part of the preliminary plat approval process. Any proposed roadway that is an extension of, or in a direct line with, an existing street shall carry the name of the street that is in existence at the time the proposal is made. 
04.01.15 Signs. The developer shall be responsible for placement of street name signs at all street intersections in accordance with the requirements of the WCRC. Where roads are proposed to be dedicated to the county, the WCRC may install the signs at the developer's expense. The developer shall also be responsible for placement of pavement markings and regulatory street signs (such as no parking signs, stop or yield signs, speed limit signs, and warning signs) as requested by the Township, the WCRC or the MDOT. All regulatory signs shall be in conformance with the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, most current edition. 
04.01.16 Phasing. Each phase of the plat shall be designed to meet the street requirements above, regardless of whether future phases are constructed. 
04.01.17 Street Pavement Width Standards. All newly constructed streets shall comply with the standards listed below. The Township Board may allow a reduction in these standards subject to approval by the Planning Commission. 
	Street type 	Pavement width 
(measured from back-to-back of curb) 
a. 	Major Thoroughfare 	In conformance with the standards and specifications established by the Washtenaw County Road Commission. This width is generally established as 30 feet. 
		Curb and Gutter(1)
b. 	Collector Streets 	32;ft; 
c. 	Industrial Streets 	
	(1) Minor 	32;ft; 
	(2) Collector 	32;ft; 
d. 	Multiple-Family Residential Streets when dedicated 	32;ft; 
e. 	Multi-Family Residential Streets when private 	32;ft; 
f. 	Minor Residential Streets 	30;ft; 
g. 	Marginal Access Streets 	30;ft; 
h. 	Turn-Around (Loop) Streets 	Not less than 80;ft; diameter at terminating loop = 36;ft; wide pavement. 
i. 	Alley 	20;ft; 
j. 	Cul-de-sac Streets—Turn-arounds 	
	(1) Industrial 	54;ft; radius with curb and gutter 
	(2) Residential and Others 	54;ft; radius with curb and gutter 
	(3) Temporary gravel 	55;ft; radius 

(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
Sec. 04.02. Blocks.
Blocks within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards: 
04.02.01 Length. Blocks or the length of any street constructed for any phase of a subdivision shall be no more than one thousand three hundred fifty (1,350) feet, except in subdivisions developed with lots of greater than one hundred (100) foot lot width the Township Board may allow block lengths up to one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet. The Township Board, upon recommendation from the Planning Commission, may approve a plat which varies from these dimensions if there is documented evidence that significant natural features will be preserved or stub streets to connect to vacant land are being provided which will result in a conforming condition in the future, and the WCRC approves the layout. 
04.02.02 Width. Widths of blocks shall be determined by the condition of the layout and shall be suited to the intended layout. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
Sec. 04.03. Lots.
Lots within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards: 
04.03.01 General lot arrangement.
(a)	Through lots (lots with frontage on two parallel streets) are prohibited, except in the case of a reverse frontage lot that abuts a major thoroughfare where access to such major thoroughfare is prohibited. 
(b)	Lots facing a three-way intersection shall be aligned to prevent oncoming headlight glare into the living area of the building envelope. 
(c)	Blocks shall be so designed as to provide two (2) tiers of back-to-back lots, except where lots back onto a major thoroughfare, railroad, natural feature or subdivision boundary. 
(d)	Corner lots shall have access to the lesser traveled roadway. 
(e)	No more than fifty (50) percent of the perimeter of a lot shall front along a public street right-of-way or private road access easement. 
(f)	If the plat extends into an adjacent community, boundaries for individual lots shall be within one (1) community to the extent feasible. In no case shall a building envelope result in a situation where a home crosses a community or school district boundary. 
(g)	If the subdivision includes any outlots or excepted parcels, an illustration shall be provided to demonstrate that the remaining land can be used or subdivided in conformance with Township standards. 
(h)	A minimum of forty percent (40%) of residential units shall utilize side-entry garages, rear-entry detached garages accessed from a common alley, or recessed garages where the front of the garage is set back a minimum of five feet (5') from the front building line of the dwelling. 
04.03.02 Sizes and Shapes.
(a)	The lot size, width, depth and shape in any subdivision proposed for residential uses shall be appropriate for the location and the type of development contemplated. 
(b)	Lot areas and widths shall conform to at least the minimum requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for the district in which the subdivision is proposed. 
(c)	Building setback lines shall conform to at least the minimum requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(d)	Areas of the subdivision plat that contain ponds, lakes, creeks or similar bodies of water shall be recorded as acreage, but shall not be platted as subdivision lots nor calculated as a portion of the minimum lot area as required by the Zoning Ordinance. 
(e)	A maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of the minimum required lot area may be wetlands regulated by the MDEQ. This requirement may be modified by the Township Board, upon a recommendation from the Planning Commission, if the proprietor successfully demonstrates that a building envelope can easily be accommodated on the lot without intruding into the required water features setback, and that provisions have been made to help ensure the long term protection of the wetland. These protection measures could include a physical barrier, conservation easement, deed restriction, or similar technique. 
(f)	Corner lots in residential subdivisions shall be platted at least ten (10) feet wider than the minimum width permitted by the Zoning Ordinance. 
(g)	Excessive lot depth in relation to width shall be avoided. A depth-to-width ratio of 3 to 1 shall normally be considered a maximum. 
(h)	Lots shall be of sufficient size and proportion to accommodate at least the minimum required building setbacks listed in Section 2000 of the Zoning Ordinance, Schedule of Regulations, for the district in which the subdivision is located. 
(i)	Lots intended for purposes other than residential use shall be specifically designed for such purposes, and shall have adequate provision for off-street parking and loading, setbacks and other requirements in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance. 
(j)	Lots that abut an active rail line shall have minimum depth of two hundred fifty (250) feet to provide a minimum seventy-five (75) foot setback from the railroad right-of-way line. 
04.03.03 Arrangement.
(a)	Every lot shall front on, and have direct access to, a public street approved by WCRC or private road approved by the Township, with vehicular access restricted only to a minor street. In addition, the driveways for all corner lots shall access the most interior, or less traveled, street within the subdivision. 
(b)	Side lot lines shall generally be at right angles or radial to the street centerlines. This requirement shall not apply where such lot lines would create irregularly shaped lots which would unreasonably limit construction, or where adjustments to the standard lot configuration would protect regulated wetlands or preserve other natural features, such as topography. "Dogleg" side lot lines that create irregularly shaped lots shall be avoided. 
(c)	Residential lots abutting major thoroughfares or collector streets, shall be platted so that driveways shall access the interior road network. 
(d)	Lots shall have a front-to-front relationship across all streets where possible. 
(e)	Where lots border upon bodies of water the front yard may be designed as the waterfront side of such lot provided the lot has sufficient depth to provide adequate setback on the street side to maintain a setback for all structures equal to the front setback on the street side as well as on the waterfront side. The Planning Commission shall review and approve any deviation from minimum requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 2001-274, 7-17-01)
 
Sec. 04.04. Sidewalks, Pedestrian Through-Block Connectors and Bikepaths.
04.04.01 Requirement. Sidewalks or bikepaths shall be required for any subdivision plat under the following circumstances: 
(a)	Sidewalks. Five (5) foot sidewalks shall be provided on one or both sides of all streets or roads internal to the subdivision. 
(b)	Very Low Density. The Township Board, based upon a recommendation by the Planning Commission, may eliminate the sidewalk requirement for very low density development where all lots within the subdivision are greater than one (1) acre in area. Another type of paved pedestrian trail system shall be provided by the developer. 
(c)	Bikepaths. Ten (10) foot wide bikepaths shall be provided along county primary roads where designated on the nonmotorized pathway plan contained in the Comprehensive Plan. 
(d)	Through-block Connectors. Pedestrian through-block connectors may be required in the middle of any block over 1,000 feet in length to obtain satisfactory pedestrian circulation within the subdivision, to provide access to parks or open space, to provide links with an adjacent subdivision, or to provide access to an activity center. Where such pedestrian through-block connectors are required, an easement at least twenty (20) feet wide shall be provided. The Township may require placement of a fence along the easement to ensure the location is visible and to protect the adjacent property owners. 
(e)	Other Locations. The Planning Commission may require a pedestrian pathway in other locations in order to meet the intent of this Section. 
(f)	Performance Guarantee. A performance guarantee, in lieu of sidewalk/pathway construction, may be required by the Planning Commission in instances where significant site constraints such as water features or significant grade changes to adjacent undeveloped property or when utility and other infrastructure improvements are planned for the site in the near future. Under these circumstances, the sidewalk/pathway shall be constructed once the site constraint can be eliminated. 
04.04.02 Construction Standards. The following construction standards shall apply to all pedestrian facilities: 
(a)	All sidewalks shall be a minimum of five (5) feet wide concrete and constructed to the specifications set by the Township Engineer. 
(b)	All bikepaths shall be at least ten (10) feet wide asphalt and constructed in accordance with the specifications set by the Township Engineer. 
(c)	All other pathways located within open space areas or are designated pedestrian through-block connectors shall be at least five (5) feet wide asphalt and constructed in accordance with the specifications set by the Township Engineer. The Township Board may approve stone paths or wooden boardwalks in areas with sensitive environmental features. 
(d)	Sidewalks and bike paths shall be installed by the developer within the dedicated street right-of-way or private road access easements. Special easements shall be established where grades or other factors prevent placement within the right-of-way or access easement. 
(e)	Any yard that abuts a pedestrian easement shall provide the required minimum building setback, as applicable, from the easement. 
(f)	Grades shall be clearly illustrated on the plans to insure proper connection to sidewalks and bikepaths on adjacent lands. 
(g)	Crosswalk pavement markings and signs may be required by the Township. Crosswalks shall be in accordance with the requirements of the WCRC and the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, current edition. 
(h)	An inclined approach shall be required where sidewalks and bikepaths intersect curbs for barrier free access. The inclined approach shall comply with the grades established by MDOT. 
(i)	Required sidewalks may be installed along the residential lot's frontage following construction of the dwelling unit. However, a final certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until the sidewalk is installed along that individual lot's frontage. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
Sec. 04.05. Landscaping.
The selection, size, spacing and planting of all landscaping within a subdivision shall comply with the following standards: 
04.05.01 General standards.
(a)	Tree species should be selected for tolerance of the harsh roadside conditions in southeast Michigan, for compliance with sight distance requirements, to ensure maintenance of accessibility to fire hydrants, to provide a minimum overhead clearance of fifteen (15) feet over any roadway and eight (8) feet over a sidewalk or bike path, and to avoid interference with overhead or underground utility lines. 
(b)	Plantings within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant shall be no taller than six (6) inches. 
(c)	The development and planting of required landscaping shall be the responsibility of the proprietor; not the individual lot owner. 
(d)	The Township Board, upon recommendation from the Planning Commission, may approve fewer trees if the proprietor provides evidence that existing healthy trees over 2.5 d.b.h. or natural habitat areas will be preserved during and after construction. 
(e)	The landscape plan shall be approved by the Township Board, upon recommendation of the Planning Commission, as part of the Final Preliminary Plat Process in consideration of the above and compatibility with the visual character of the surrounding area. 
(f)	All landscaping within the county road right-of-way shall require approval from the WCRC. 
04.05.02 Street trees.
(a)	The minimum size of all street trees shall be two and one-half inches (2.5") d.b.h. 
(b)	One (1) canopy tree shall be planted for each fifty (50) linear feet along both sides of all streets. Street trees shall be planted between the sidewalk and curb and within any median boulevards. Where tree location in the public right-of-way is not possible due to conflicts with overhead or underground utility lines or restrictions of the WCRC, street trees may be located on private property just beyond the front lot line. 
(c)	Street trees shall be at least fifty (50) feet from the intersection of two (2) street right-of-way lines or access easements. Street trees shall be placed to avoid any future driveway locations. 
(d)	Street trees shall be at least five (5) feet from the edge of any paved surface and shall not interfere with sight distance required by the WCRC. 
04.05.03 Landscaping in Common Park Areas.
(a)	Within parks, a mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees shall be planted at the rate of one (1) canopy tree for every three thousand (3,000) square feet of ground area, rounded upward. 
(b)	The park shall be planted with grass or other suitable ground cover. 
04.05.04 Landscape Greenbelt.
When a subdivision borders a major thoroughfare, and wherever a rear yard abuts a public street or private road, an easement for construction of a twenty-five (25) foot wide landscape greenbelt shall be provided, in addition to the required rear yard setback, measured from the interior setback line. This buffer zone shall be planted with a minimum of one (1) canopy tree for each forty (40) feet, one (1) ornamental tree for each one hundred (100) feet, eight (8) shrubs for each forty (40) feet and one (1) evergreen tree for each thirty (30) feet of greenbelt length. Existing natural features shall be retained wherever possible to promote a natural appearance and to protect the existing ecosystem within the greenbelt. Where a freeform berm is used as part of the landscape greenbelt, the maximum slope of the berm facing the primary road shall be 6:1 and the maximum slope of the berm facing the inside of the lot shall be 3:1. The construction of the greenbelt and its plantings shall be the responsibility of the developer and not the individual lot owner(s). 
04.05.05 Landscaping in Cul-de-Sacs.
(a)	A minimum of one (1) canopy tree for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of ground area, rounded upward, shall be planted within each cul-de-sac or island (e.g., if the island is two thousand three hundred five (2,305) s.f., three (3) canopy trees would be required). 
(b)	The lowest branch of any canopy tree within the island shall be a minimum eight (8) feet above the grade of the island and fifteen (15) feet above the grade of the roadway. 
(c)	The island must either be mounded to a height of between one (1) foot, six (6) inches and two (2) feet, six (6) inches and planted with grass or ground cover or have four (4) low shrubs planted for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of ground area. The shrubs shall be maintained at a maximum height of two (2) feet, six (6) inches. 
04.05.06 Subdivision entrances. Subdivision entrances may include landscaping, lighting, identification signs, wrought iron fences or other architectural features. All such features shall comply with the Zoning Ordinance. A detail of the entranceway shall be submitted with the tentative preliminary plat. The lighting for entryway signs must be ground-mounted with no more than two (2) one hundred twenty-five (125) watt bulbs directed toward each face of a sign. In no case shall high pressure sodium or other nonstandard bulbs be utilized. Any features proposed to be placed within the county road right-of-way must meet WCRC design and sight distance standards. 
04.05.07 Detention/Retention Pond. Stormwater detention ponds should be designed with shallow side-slopes to not require fencing. In instances where a stormwater detention or retention pond is constructed with side slopes that require security fencing, following the standards of the WCDC, a minimum of one (1) evergreen tree shall be planted every thirty (30) feet around the perimeter of the detention or retention pond. This requirement shall apply in addition to any greenbelt requirements above. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
Sec. 04.06. Open space.
04.06.01 Required Park Area. All residential subdivisions shall provide an active recreational area, which shall contain a common park area equal in size to one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet for each lot in the subdivision. The required park area shall be exclusive of required setbacks, buffers, greenbelts, individual lots, public rights-of-way, private road easements and stormwater management areas. Said recreational park area shall be well drained, graded, seeded or sodded, safe from hazard, accessible to all dwellings, and the location shall be approved by the Township Board, based upon a recommendation by the Planning Commission. Reservation of the recreational area shall be achieved through deed restrictions or dedication to a subdivision homeowner's association. Nothing herein shall prevent the dedication of such open space to a public entity or conservation organization, subject to Township Board approval. 
04.06.02 Open Space Design. All open space areas within subdivisions shall achieve open space that is of useable size as well as the best layout to provide a functional open space system. In order to accomplish this, the design of required private park areas and all other open space areas shall follow the guidelines listed below: 
(a)	Common upland open space areas shall be provided ample road frontage for high visibility and easy access. Such open space shall be centrally located within the subdivision. 
(b)	Subdivisions that front on major roadways which possess a natural, or rural, character, shall provide a wider greenbelt to preserve the existing character along the roadway. 
(c)	Where significant natural features are being preserved such as wetlands and creeks, every attempt shall be made to preserve views to the area. In particular, the terminus of key roadway intersections and entrances should be utilized as a viewshed and focal point for the open space. 
(d)	Small pockets of useable parkland are also appropriate provided there is a feature that connects the areas creating one cohesive open space system. 
(e)	Connections to nearby community facilities and other open space areas should be considered in the design. 
(f)	Utility corridors should be considered to create open space corridors throughout the community. 
04.06.03 Open Space Access. Where open space access points are provided between lots, they should be a minimum of twenty (20) feet wide and be clearly identified and delineated with physical elements such as fencing, pathways and signs. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
Sec. 04.07. Street lighting.
Street lighting shall be provided and reviewed in accordance with the following procedures: 
04.07.01 Design Standards.
(a)	Street lights shall be provided along both sides of all streets and at all street intersections. They shall be spaced every four hundred (400) feet in between each intersection, or as otherwise determined by the Township Board. 
(b)	Street lights shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height. 
04.07.02 Process.
(a)	At the time the tentative preliminary plat is filed for review by the Planning Commission, it shall contain diagrams showing the location of street lights and the wattage of the proposed street lights along with an indication upon said preliminary plat of the area to be illuminated by each street light. 
(b)	The said preliminary plat shall be submitted by the proprietor to the Detroit Edison for comments and recommendations. 
(c)	The said lighting plan as displayed on the preliminary plat and final plat shall be accompanied by a letter from the de- veloper's or owner's engineer setting forth all data and technical specifications thereof. 
(d)	The proposed lighting plan shall be sufficient to insure that it is equal to minimum requirements for street lighting as recommended by Detroit Edison with the purpose of deterring crime and insuring safety to the extent reasonably possible. Street lights shall be of an ornamental style acceptable to the Township and Detroit Edison. 
(e)	No final plat shall be approved by The Charter Township of Ypsilanti until the street lighting is acceptably provided for. 
(f)	The proprietor may petition the Township Board to establish the subdivision as a special assessment district for purpose of funding street lighting. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
Sec. 04.08. Utilities.
Utility improvements shall be provided by the proprietor in accordance with the standards and requirements established in this Section and any other such standards and requirements which may from time to time be established by the Township Engineer or by the Township Board. 
04.08.01 Requirements for Underground Wiring. The proprietor shall make arrangements for all distribution lines for telephone, electric and cable television service to be placed underground entirely throughout a subdivided area. Such conduits or cables shall be placed within twelve (12) foot wide minimum easements provided to such service companies by the developer. Such easements shall run along the rear of the lots in accordance with Section 04.09. Above ground equipment shall be located within the rear yard easements. Telephone and electrical facilities shall be planned so as not to conflict with other underground utilities. The proposed location of all underground wiring shall be submitted to the Township Engineer for approval. Installation shall not proceed until such approval has been granted. All telephone and electrical facilities shall be constructed in accordance with standards of construction approved by the Michigan Public Service Commission. All drainage and underground utility installations that traverse privately owned property shall be protected by easements granted by the proprietor. 
04.08.02 Storm Drainage System.
(a)	An adequate storm drainage system including necessary storm sewers, catch basins, manholes, culverts, bridges and other appurtenances shall be required in all subdivisions. Paved spillways shall be required when deemed necessary by the Township Engineer. 
(b)	Adequate provision shall be made for proper drainage of stormwater runoff from residential rear yards. 
(c)	Ditch bottoms having greater than a three (3) percent slope shall be sodded. Ditch bottoms having greater than a five (5) percent slope shall not be permitted. 
(d)	A detention basin is required for all subdivisions, unless the property is located adjacent to an existing water body and the petitioner submits a hydraulic study prepared by a registered engineer which shows the runoff from the development will not adversely affect any of the downstream properties. A sedimentation basin shall be provided for all developments that do not require detention. 
(e)	Where County drains are involved, an approved preliminary plat with noted approval on the plat, or a letter stating reasons for rejection from the County Drain Commission shall be submitted by the proprietor. 
(f)	No detention or retention pond shall be placed within a residential lot. Detention and retention ponds in residential subdivisions shall be placed in outlots, so dedicated with appropriate easements for drainage purposes. 
(g)	Detention ponds shall be designed with a shallow side-slope and depth that does not require security fencing. 
04.08.03 Sewage System.
When a proposed subdivision is located within, adjacent to or reasonably near the service area of public sanitary sewer system, or proposed service area, sanitary sewers and other required appurtenances thereto shall be installed in such manner as to serve all lots meeting the requirements of the Township Engineer and YCUA. Where septic tank systems are employed, they must meet the standards of the Washtenaw County Health Department. 
04.08.04 Water Supply.
When a proposed subdivision is located within, adjacent to or reasonably near the service area of a public water supply system, water mains, fire hydrants; required water system appurtenances shall be constructed in such a manner as to adequately serve all lots shown on the subdivision plat, both for domestic use and fire protection. In the event of the nonexistence or non-availability of a public water supply system, a subdivision water supply system equal to the above shall be installed by the proprietor unless proof is available making such a system not feasible as determined by the Township Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
Sec. 04.09. Easements.
04.09.01 Utility line easements for electricity, telephone, cable, and other similar utilities shall be located only along the rear lot lines as necessary for utility lines. Easements may be permitted along appropriate side lot lines only where necessary in order to link service lines. In instances where extreme topographic features or vegetation exists, easements may be located along additional side lot lines and select front lot lines to thus conserve natural features. Easements shall give access to every lot, park or public grounds. Such easements shall be a total of not less than 12 feet wide, 6 feet from each parcel. 
04.09.02 Utility easements for public water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage and gas shall be provided adjacent to the road right-of-way where geometrics require that the mains, sewers or drains must be extended into the lot setback area to stay out from under the paved road areas due to roadway horizontal curvature. 
04.09.03 Recommendations on the proposed layout of telephone, cable and electric company easements should be sought from all of the utility companies on the area. It shall be the responsibility of the proprietor to submit copies of the preliminary plat to all appropriate public utility agencies. 
04.09.04 Easements three (3) feet in width shall be provided where needed along side lot lines so as to provide for street light dropouts. Prior to the approval of the final plat for a proposed subdivision, a statement shall be obtained from the appropriate public utility indicating that easements have been provided along specific lots. A notation shall be made on the final plat indicating: "The side lot lines between lots (indicating lot numbers) are subject to street light dropout rights granted to the (name of utility company)." 
04.09.05 Drainage easements when required by Washtenaw County Road Commission or the Washtenaw County Drain Commission shall be shown. These easements shall be of a width approved by that agency. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
Sec. 04.10. Natural features.
The natural features and character of lands must be preserved wherever possible. Due regard must be shown for all natural features such as large trees, natural groves, water courses, vistas, wildlife habitats, and similar irreplaceable assets that will add attractiveness and value to the property, if preserved. The preservation of drainage and natural stream channels must be considered by the proprietor and the dedication and provision of adequate barriers, where appropriate, shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
Sec. 04.11. Floodplains.
Any areas of land within the proposed subdivision which lie either wholly or in part within the floodplain of a river, stream, creek or lake, or any other areas which are subject to flooding or inundation by stormwater shall require specific compliance with the Land Division Act and its review by the Water Resources Commission of the MDEQ. The Township Engineer will give particular attention to projected floodplain when considering the adequacy of land for building sites. There shall be no building within a 100-year floodplain. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
ARTICLE V. IMPROVEMENTS
 
Sec. 05.01. Applicability.
The improvements set forth under this Section are to be considered as the minimum acceptable standard. All those improvements for which standards are not specifically set forth shall have said standards set by the Township Board. All improvements must meet the approval of the Township Board. 
05.01.01 All improvements shall be constructed by the proprietor, and approved by the Township before the final plat is approved, or prior to the undertaking of any improvements the proprietor shall deposit with the Clerk, cash, a certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit, whichever the proprietor selects, and is acceptable to the Township Board, to ensure faithful completion of all improvements within the time specified. The amount of the deposit shall be set by the Township based in an estimate by the Engineer. The Township Board shall release funds for the payment of work as it is completed and approved by the Township. 
05.01.02 Prior to the acceptance by the Township of improvements, a two-year maintenance bond in an amount set by the Township Board shall be posted by the proprietor. 
05.01.03 Improvements shall be provided by the proprietor in accordance with the standards and requirements established in this Article V and/or any other such standards and requirements which may from time to time be established by ordinance or published rules of the Township. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
Sec. 05.02. Improvements.
If the proprietor does form or cause to be formed a special district or districts to finance or construct required improvements, such action does not release the developer from his/her obligations to complete such improvements. The proprietor shall dedicate these improvements to the Township, County or other applicable governmental unit, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the dedicated property and public improvements. These improvements shall be completed in accordance with the approved preliminary plat, the approvals of other authorities, the regulations in this Appendix, particularly Article IV, and the requirements of other applicable Ordinances, laws and regulations, and shall be subject to inspection by the Township Engineer and other authorities having jurisdiction over such improvements. 
05.02.01 Monuments shall be set in accordance with Michigan Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, and the rules of the Michigan Department of Treasury. If any monument or lot marker is removed during construction the responsible party shall secure the services of a registered land surveyor to replace the monument or lot marker. 
05.02.02 Streets (including curbs and gutters, where applicable), intersection improvements (acceleration/deceleration lanes or tapers and passing lanes) in accordance with the standards and receipt of permits from the WCRC or MDOT, street signs and street lights (where applicable). 
05.02.03 Utilities including storm drainage, water supply system, sanitary sewage disposal and any franchised utilities. 
05.02.04 Sidewalks, bicycle paths, trail systems and crosswalks (where applicable), except as provided for in Section 05.03 below. 
05.02.05 Landscaping, including street trees, entranceway features and any required buffer landscaping, except as provided for in Section 05.03 below. 
05.02.06 Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures. 
05.02.07 Mailbox clusters if required by the U. S. Postal Service. 
05.02.08 Street lighting in accordance with the lighting plan approved by the Township. 
05.02.09 If the proprietor proposes any improvements or places restrictions on any of the land contained in the subdivision that exceed the requirements in this Appendix or the Zoning Ordinance, such improvements and restrictions shall be indicated on the plat and recorded in the subdivision restrictive covenants in a form to be approved by the Township Attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
Sec. 05.03. Installation of street trees and sidewalks.
Street trees located within the front yard of lots and sidewalks located along the frontage of lots shall be installed prior to a occupancy permit being issued for each home, or within six (6) months of issuance of an occupancy permit where a performance bond is posted with the Township guaranteeing that the trees and sidewalk, where required or provided, shall be installed. The subdivision deed restrictions should state that occupancy permits for homes shall not be granted until the required trees and sidewalk are installed. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
Sec. 05.04. Performance guarantee.
The proprietor shall be required to deposit with the Community & Economic Development Department or an escrow agent; cash, surety bond, or certified check, or the equivalent approved by the Township Board, whichever the proprietor elects, to insure construction of all improvements, except where such deposits are required by the Washtenaw County Road Commission or Washtenaw County Drain Commission. The amount of deposit or bond shall be set by the Township Board based on an estimate prepared by the developer's Engineer and approved by the Township Engineer. The deposit or bond shall guarantee the completion of the required improvements within a period of time specified by the Township Board from the date of the approval of the final plat. The Township Board or escrow agent with approval of the Board shall rebate to the proprietor as the work progresses, amounts of any cash deposits equal to the ratio of the work completed to the entire project. 
Prior to the acceptance by the Township of improvements, a two-year maintenance bond in an amount set by the Township Board shall be posted by the proprietor. This two-year maintenance bond is to be sent to the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority for the maintenance of public water and sanitary sewer lines installed within the project. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
Sec. 05.05. Maintenance of private improvements by subdivision association.
It shall be the responsibility of the subdivision association to maintain the commonly owned improvements and land that is not dedicated to a public agency in accordance with the approved subdivision plat. The subdivision covenants and deed restrictions shall contain provisions establishing a subdivision association and describing the responsibilities of the association and individual lot owners with regard to maintenance of the property on a continuing basis in accordance with the approved subdivision plat. The subdivision covenants and deed restrictions shall further establish the means of permanent financing for required maintenance and improvement activities which are the responsibility of the subdivision association. Failure to maintain improvements and land in accordance with the approved subdivision plat shall be deemed in violation of the provisions of this Appendix. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
ARTICLE VI. COMPLIANCE STANDARDS
The approvals required under the provisions of these regulations shall be obtained prior to the installation of any subdivision or project improvements within the Township, in public streets, public alleys, public rights-of-way, and public easements, and/or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the Township. All subdivision or project improvements within the Township installed in public streets, public alleys, public rights-of-way, or public easements, and/or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the Township shall comply with all of the provisions and requirements of this Appendix. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
ARTICLE VII. INTERPRETATION
The provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion and preservation of public health, safety and general welfare of the Township. These regulations are not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any manner interfere with existing regulations or laws of the Township, nor to conflict with any statutes of the State of Michigan or Washtenaw County, except that these regulations shall prevail in cases where these regulations impose a greater restriction than is provided by existing statutes, laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
ARTICLE VIII. REVIEW FEES
Preliminary and final plat review fees, planning fees, engineering fees, attorney fees, inspection fees, water and sewer connection charges and other applicable development charges shall be paid by the proprietor as may be provided for by ordinance of the Township. The Township Board shall establish a schedule of fees by resolution, which shall be subject to amendment. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
ARTICLE IX. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Any person, persons, firm or corporation or anyone acting in behalf of said person, persons, firm or corporation. violating any of the provisions of these regulations shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and the costs of prosecution or in default of the payment thereof, by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the Court. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
ARTICLE X. SEVERABILITY
If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or part of these Subdivision Regulations is for any reason held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of these Regulations; and the application of those provisions to any persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
ARTICLE XI. PARTITIONING OF LAND IN EXISTING RECORDED PLATS
 
Sec. 11.01. Additional divisions.
Upon the filing of a petition, by the owner or owners of all interest therein, with the Township Board, platted lots, outlots, or parcels of land in existing recorded plats may be partitioned or divided upon resolution of the Township Board into not more than four (4) parts, each of which shall, in regard to width, depth and area, conform to the terms and provisions of the Charter Township of Ypsilanti Zoning Ordinance, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
Sec. 11.02. Public water and sewer.
Lots, outlots or parcels of land in existing recorded plats, not served by public sewer and public water systems, shall not be further partitioned or divided if the resulting lots, outlots or parcels are less than the minimum width and area provided under the Land Division Act of 1967, being Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of 1967. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
Sec. 11.03. Split-combinations.
Nothing herein shall prevent the Township Board from approving the division of any such lot, outlot or parcel of land in a case where the owner of such divided parcel owns land immediately adjacent thereto or in a case where there is presented to the Township Board an executed agreement to sell and convey such divided parcel to the adjoining owner and where the combined width, and area of the divided parcel and the adjacent parcel shall, as a single parcel, conform to the terms and provisions of this Ordinance and other ordinances of the Charter Township of Ypsilanti. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
ARTICLE XII. REPEAL
All ordinances and amendments thereto enacted or adopted by the Township Board inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed, as of the effective date of this Ordinance. The repeal of the above Ordinance and its amendments does not affect or impair any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time enforced, prosecuted or inflicted. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
ARTICLE XIII. VARIANCE
 
Sec. 13.01. Variances from these regulations.
13.01.01 Applicable Variances. Variances or waivers from requirements of these regulations may be considered by the Township Board for the following: 
(a)	Planned Development. A variance from specific provisions of these regulations may be granted in the case of a platted subdivision within a PD upon finding that the proposed development meets the spirit and intent of the Zoning Ordinance, provides adequate public and open space, and includes provisions for efficient circulation, light and air, and other needs. 
(b)	Variances or waivers from public improvement or utility requirements. The Township Board may grant a variance or waiver from required public improvements if, in its best judgment, said installations would be impractical. 
13.01.02 Process. The process for a variance request from these regulations shall be as follows: 
(a)	Applications for any variance shall be made in writing to the Community & Economic Development Department by the developer prior to approval of the final preliminary plat. The application shall state fully and clearly all facts relied upon by the proprietor. The application shall include any required fee, and be supplemented with maps, plans, and other additional data, which may aid the Planning Commission in the analysis of the requested variance. In the case of a requested variance for a Planned Development, the plans submitted for such development shall include such covenants, restrictions, or other legal provisions necessary to guarantee the full achievement of the plan. 
(b)	The request shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall first conduct a public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be posted in a newspaper of daily record and sent to landowners within three hundred (300) feet of the parcels or lots for which the variance is sought. 
(c)	Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall provide a recommendation to the Township Board, in accordance with the standards below. 
(d)	The Township Board shall make a decision on the request. In making its decision, the Township Board may establish requirements, time constraints or conditions that will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives and requirements of these regulations. The Township Board shall state the reasons for its finding or decisions as part of its official records. 
(e)	The Township Board shall have the final authority on variances, waivers or modifications of the standards of these regulations, except Washtenaw County must also approve any variances from County standards. Appeals of the Township Board decisions shall be to a court of law. 
13.01.03 Variance Standards. The decision on a variance request shall be based on a finding that practical difficulties result from strict compliance with specific provisions or requirements of the regulations. In making its finding, the Township Board shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. No variance or waiver shall be recommended unless the Township Board finds that: 
(a)	There are special circumstances or conditions affecting said property such that the strict application of the provisions of these regulations would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land. 
(b)	The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner. 
(c)	The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which said property is situated. 
(d)	The variance or waiver will not violate the provisions of the Land Division Act (Michigan Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended) nor create a violation of the Township Zoning Ordinance. 
(e)	The variance or waiver will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations and the Township Comprehensive Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
Sec. 13.02. Variances from the zoning ordinance.
13.02.01 Applicable Variances. Variances or waivers from requirements of the Zoning Ordinance may be considered by the Zoning Board of Appeals where in the case of a particular proposed subdivision, it can be shown that strict compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance would result in extraordinary hardship to the proprietor because of unusual topography or other physical conditions which are not self-initiated or that these conditions would result in inhibiting the achievement of the objectives of these regulations, a variance may be granted. 
13.02.02 Process. The process for a variance request from the Zoning Ordinance shall be according to Article XXIV, Board of Zoning Appeals, of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)
 
ARTICLE XIV. EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance is an ordinance necessary for the health and safety of the people of the Charter Township of Ypsilanti and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage. 
(Ord. No. 2000-243, 3-7-00)

