CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 1; ARTICLE I
1 of 7
CHAPTER 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE I: In General
Section 1-1. How Code designated and cited.
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated
the "Anoka, Minnesota City Code" and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as
the "Code."
Section 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction.
The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to this Code and to all ordinances
and resolutions unless the context requires otherwise:
Charter. The term "charter" or "city charter" means the charter of the City of Anoka, as
amended.
City. The term "city" means the City of Anoka, Minnesota.
City Council, Council. The term "city council" or "council" means the City Council of the City
of Anoka, Minnesota.
Code. The term "Code" means the Anoka, Minnesota City Code, as designated in section 1-1.
Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events,
which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or
"either . . . or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, except that when appropriate
from the context, the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable:
(1) "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply.
(2) "Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly
or in any combination.
(3) "Either . . . or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events
apply singly but not in combination.
County. The term "county" means Anoka County, Minnesota.
Delegation of authority. A provision that authorizes or requires a city officer or city employee
to perform an act or make a decision that authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a
decision through subordinates.
Following. The term "following" means next after.
Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders.
Generally. When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general. All provisions
shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the city council may be effectuated. Words and
phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but
technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and
appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings.
Includes. The term "includes" does not limit a term to a specified example.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 1; ARTICLE I
2 of 7
Joint authority. Words giving a joint authority to three or more persons give such authority to a
majority of such persons.
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory.
May not. The term "may not" states a prohibition.
Minn. Stats. The abbreviation "Minn. Stats." or “MS” mean the Minnesota Statutes, as
amended.
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month.
Must. The term "must" shall be construed as being mandatory.
Number. Words in the singular include the plural. Words in the plural include the singular.
Oath. A solemn affirmation is the equivalent to an oath and a person shall be deemed to have
sworn if such person makes such an affirmation.
Officers, departments, etc. References to officers, departments, board, commissions or
employees are to city officers, city departments, city boards, city commissions and city
employees.
Official time. References to a specific time of day are to Central Standard Time or central
daylight time, as appropriate.
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant
in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of
such property.
Person. The term "person" means any human being, any governmental or political subdivision
or public agency, any public or private corporation, any partnership, any firm, association or
other organization, any limited liability company, any receiver, trustee, assignee, agent, or other
legal representative of any of the foregoing or any other legal entity. Whenever the term
"person" is used in any provision prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to a
corporation, partnership or limited liability company means the officers or partners thereof, as
the case may be.
Personal property. The term "personal property" means any property other than real property.
Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before.
Premises. The term "premises," as applied to real property, includes land and structures.
Property. The term "property" includes real property, personal property and mixed property.
Real property, real estate, land, lands. The terms "real property," "real estate," and "land"
include lands, buildings, tenements and hereditaments and all rights and interests therein except
chattel interests.
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory.
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curb line, or the
lateral lines of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent property line, intended for the
use of pedestrians. If there is no public area between the lateral lines of the roadway and the
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 1; ARTICLE I
3 of 7
abutting property line, then the area immediately abutting the street line shall be construed as the
sidewalk.
Signature or subscription by mark. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark
when the signer or subscriber cannot write. In such situations, such person's name shall be
written near the mark by a witness who writes his own name near such person's name.
State. The term "state" means the State of Minnesota.
Street. The term "street" means any alley, avenue, boulevard, highway, road, lane, viaduct,
bridge and the approach thereto, and any other public thoroughfare in the city. "Street" also
means the entire width thereof between abutting property lines. "Street" includes a sidewalk or
footpath.
Tenant, occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," as applied to a building or land, includes:
(1) Any person holding either alone or with others a written or oral lease of such building
or land.
(2) Any person who either alone or with others occupies such building or land.
Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses. The future tense includes the
present tense.
Writing. The term "writing" includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension
by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is authorized or
required, it shall be made in writing in the English language.
Year. The term, "year" means a calendar year.
Section 1-3. Computation of time.
(a) When the term "successive weeks" is used in any ordinance providing for the
publication of notices, the word "weeks" shall be construed as calendar weeks. The
publication upon any day of such weeks shall be sufficient publication for that week,
but at least five days shall elapse between each publication. At least the number of
weeks specified in "successive weeks" shall elapse between the first publication and the
day for the happening of the event for which the publication is made.
(b) When in any ordinance the lapse of a number of months before or after a certain day is
required, such number of months shall be computed by counting the months from such
day, excluding the calendar month in which such day occurs, and including the day of
the month in which the last month so counted having the same numerical order as the
day of the month from which the computation is made, unless there be not so many
days in the last month so counted, in which case the period computed shall expire with
the last day of the month so counted.
(c) Where the performance or doing of any act, duty, matter, payment or thing is ordered
or directed, and the period of time or duration for the performance or doing thereof is
prescribed and fixed by law or ordinance, the time, except as otherwise provided in
subsections (a) and (b) of this section, shall be computed so as to exclude the first and
include the last day of the prescribed or fixed period or duration of time. When the last
day of the period falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, that day shall be omitted
from the computation.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 1; ARTICLE I
4 of 7
(d) When an application, payment, return, claim, statement other document is to be
delivered to or filed with a department, agency or instrumentality of the city on or
before a prescribed date and the prescribed date falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal
holiday, it is timely delivered or filed if it is delivered or filed on the next succeeding
day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday.
Section 1-4. Catchlines of sections; history notes references.
(a) The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended
as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not titles of such
sections, or of any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so
deemed when any such section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted.
(b) The history or source notes appearing in parenthesis after sections in this Code have no
legal effect and only indicate legislative history. Editor’s notes, cross references and
state law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that
otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the
code and have no legal effect.
(c) Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or
sections of this Code.
Section 1-5. Effect of repeal of ordinances.
(a) Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of an ordinance does not revive any
repealed ordinance.
(b) The repeal or amendment of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or penalty
incurred before the repeal took effect, nor does such repeal or amendment affect any
suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the amendment or repeal.
Section 1-6. Amendments to Code effect of new ordinances; amendatory language.
(a) All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect
this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of the Code and
printed for inclusion in the Code. Portions of this Code repealed by subsequent
ordinances may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected
thereby.
(b) Amendments to provisions of this Code may be made with the following language:
"Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Anoka,
Minnesota City Code is hereby amended to read as follows: . . . "
(c) If a new section, subdivision, division, article or chapter is to be added to the Code, the
following language may be used: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as
appropriate) of the Anoka, Minnesota City Code is hereby created to read as follows: .
. . "
(d) All provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specially by section,
subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the
repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance.
Section 1-7. Supplementation of Code.
(a) Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed
by the city. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 1; ARTICLE I
5 of 7
general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all
changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered
that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that
have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that
when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption
of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed
shall be included from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the
supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts or
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody
them into a unified code. For example, the person may:
(1) Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units.
(2) Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles,
divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in the Code and make
changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines,
headings and titles already in the Code.
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and
sections to be added to the code.
(4) Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers
assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections.
(5) Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this
article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section" or "sections
________ to ________" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of
the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in
the Code).
(6) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning
of the ordinances inserted in the Code.
Section 1-8. General penalty; continuing violations.
(a) In this section "violation of this Code" means any of the following:
(1) Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a
violation, a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or
regulation authorized by ordinance.
(2) Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by
rule or regulation authorized by ordinance.
(3) Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared
unlawful, an offense, a violation, a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor by
ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance.
(4) Counseling, aiding or abetting a violation of this Code as defined above.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 1; ARTICLE I
6 of 7
(b) In this section "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or
city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the
failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section.
(c) Petty Misdemeanors. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person
convicted of a violation of this Code that is declared to be a petty offense or petty
misdemeanor, shall be subject to the penalties set forth in MS 609.02, as amended.
Any subsequent violations originally declared as a petty offense or petty misdemeanor,
may be declared as a misdemeanor.
(d) General Misdemeanors. In any other case, unless another penalty is expressly
provided in this Code, any person violating any provision of this Code, or any rule or
regulation adopted in pursuance thereof, or any other provisions of any Code adopted
in this Code by reference, including any provision declaring an act or omission to be a
misdemeanor, shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties set forth in MS
609.02, as amended.
(e) Separate Violations. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, with respect to
violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the
violation continues is a separate offense. Except as otherwise provided by law or
ordinance, as to violations that are not continuous with respect to time, each act is a
separate offense.
(f) The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license,
permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions.
(g) Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance
and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty
does not prevent injunctive relief.
Section 1-9. Severability.
(a) The sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code and
all provisions adopted by reference in this Code are severable so that if any section,
subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause and phrase of this Code or of any provision
adopted by reference in this Code is declared unconstitutional or invalid by a valid
judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect the
validity of any other section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause and phrase of this
Code or of any provision adopted by reference in this Code, for the council declares
that it is its intent that it would have enacted this Code and all provisions adopted by
reference in this Code without such invalid or unconstitutional provisions. If any
provision of this Code is declared to be inapplicable to specific property by a valid
judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not restrict the
applicability of such provision to other property.
Section 1-10. Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances.
(a) The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation
previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject mater, shall be construed as
restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
Section 1-11. Code does not affect prior offenses or rights.
(a) Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act
committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right
established before the effective date of this Code.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 1; ARTICLE I
7 of 7
(b) The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a
structure or premises in violation of any city ordinance on the effective date of this
Code.
Section 1-12. Certain ordinances not affected by Code.
(a) Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any
ordinance or portion of an ordinance listed below. Such ordinances continue in full
force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code.
(b) Amending the city charter.
(c) Annexing property into the city.
(d) De-annexing property or excluding property from the city.
(e) Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code.
(f) Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds
or other instruments of indebtedness.
(g) Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement.
(h) Making or approving any appropriation or budget.
(i) Granting any right or franchise.
(j) Vacating any easement or parkland.
(k) Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan.
(l) Or imposing any special assessment.
(m) Dedicating, establishing naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening,
repairing or vacating any street.
(n) Establishing the grade or any street or sidewalk.
(o) Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision.
(p) Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code.
(q) Establishing traffic regulations for specific locations not codified in this Code.
(r) Rezoning specific property.
(s) That is temporary, although general in effect.
(t) That is special, although permanent in effect.
(u) The purpose of which has been accomplished.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 1: ARTICLE II.
CHAPTER 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article II. Administrative Citations and Penalties.
Section 1-20. Purpose.
Based on past experience, the City Council finds that there is a need for alternative methods of
enforcing the City Code. While criminal fines and penalties have been the most frequent
enforcement mechanism, there are certain negative consequences for both the City and the
accused. The delay inherent in that system does not ensure prompt resolution, citizens resent being
labeled as criminals for violations of administrative regulations, and the higher burden of proof
and the potential of incarceration do not appear appropriate for most administrative violations. The
City Council finds that the use of administrative citations and the imposition of civil penalties is a
legitimate and necessary alternative method of enforcement. This method of enforcement is in
addition to any other legal remedy that may be pursued for City Code violations.
Section 1-21. Definitions.
(a) Code Compliance Officer. Any employee of the City of Anoka as authorized in Chapter
2, Article III, Section 2-61 of the City Code; the Property Maintenance Coordinator; or
such other individual as may be designated by the City Manager to carry out the duties of
a Code Enforcement Officer.
(b) Code Offense. A violation of any section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of the
Anoka City Code, subject to a civil penalty as determined according to a schedule
adopted from time to time by the Anoka City Council and payable directly to the City.
Each day the violation exists constitutes a separate Code Offense.
(c) Owner. An individual, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, trust or any other legal entity holding an equitable or legal ownership interest
in land, buildings, structures, dwelling unit(s) or other property.
(d) Person. A natural person of either sex, a firm, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, any other association of people, and includes the manager or agent of that
person or organization.
Section 1-22. Administrative Citation Procedure.
(a) Administrative Notice. A Code Compliance Officer may issue, either in person or by
United States first class mail, an Administrative Notice to a person suspected or known to
have committed a Code Offense and/or to be the owner of property upon which a Code
Offense is being committed.
(1) The Administrative Notice shall identify the Code Offense, the location upon
which the Code Offense occurred or is occurring, and the corrective action
necessary to become Code compliant.
(2) The Administrative Notice may also set forth a prescribed period of time within
which the alleged violator and/or property owner has to correct or abate the
Code Offense.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 1: ARTICLE II.
(3) If the alleged violator and/or owner of property upon which a Code Offense is
being committed is unable to correct or abate the Code Offense within the
prescribed time, that person may request, in writing, an extension of no more
than thirty (30) additional days from the Code Compliance Officer.
(4) Any extension granted by the Code Compliance Officer shall be in writing and
shall specifically state the date of expiration.
(5) If the Code Offense is not corrected or abated, as outlined in the Administrative
Notice, within the prescribed time or any extension thereto, the Code
Compliance Officer may issue a citation, as provided below.
(b) Citation. A Code Compliance Officer is authorized to issue a citation upon the belief that
a Code Offense has occurred, or is currently being committed, whether or not an
Administrative Notice has first been issued in regard to the Code Offense.
(1) The citation shall be given to the person responsible for the violation and/or to
the owner of the property upon which the violation has occurred, either by
personal service or by United States first class mail.
(2) Said citation shall state the nature of the Code Offense, the time and date said
Code Offense occurred, the civil penalty applicable to that Code Offense as set
forth in a schedule of civil penalties as adopted by the City Council from time to
time, the manner for paying the civil penalty or requesting a hearing before an
Administrative Hearing Officer to contest the citation, and the date by which
said Code Offense must be corrected.
(c) Responding to a Citation/Payment. Once a citation is issued, the alleged violator and/or
the owner of the property upon which the violation has occurred shall, within fifteen
(15) days of the time of issuance of the citation, either pay the civil penalty set forth in
the citation and bring the property into compliance, request a hearing in writing according
to the procedure set forth in this Section, or request to be charged with a criminal
violation through the District Court System.
(1) The civil penalty may be paid in person at City Hall or by United States first
class mail, postage prepaid and postmarked within said prescribed fifteen (15)
days.
(2) Payment of the civil penalty shall be deemed to be an admission of the Code
Offense.
(3) In addition to payment of a civil penalty, the alleged violator and/or owner the
property must request verification of the property’s compliance with the City
Code from the Code Compliance Officer before the property may be deemed
code compliant.
(4) Failure to respond within the required time may result in the City issuing a
criminal charge against the alleged violator in District Court.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 1: ARTICLE II.
Section 1-23. Administrative Hearing.
(a) Requesting a Hearing. Any person contesting a citation issued pursuant to this Article
may, within fifteen (15) days of the time of issuance of the citation, request a hearing
before a Hearing Officer.
(1) Any request for a hearing before a Hearing Officer shall be made in writing on a
form provided by the City for such a request and either delivered personally to
the City at City Hall or mailed to the City by United States first class mail,
postage prepaid and postmarked within said prescribed fifteen (15) days.
(2) The hearing shall be held at City Hall within thirty (30) days of receipt of a
timely submitted request for a hearing.
(3) Failure to attend the hearing constitutes a waiver of the violator’s rights to an
Administrative Hearing and an admission of the violation. A Hearing Officer
may waive this result upon good cause shown. A determination of good cause
shall be made by the Hearing Officer, but specifically does not include
forgetfulness or intentional delay.
(4) A hearing request filing fee shall be paid simultaneously with the filing of the
notice of appeal. The hearing request fee will be in the amount adopted by
ordinance by the City Council.
(5) In cases where a violation was found to have occurred by the Hearing
Officer, in addition to any fine or other conditions imposed by the Hearing
Officer, the offender shall be responsible for payment of the costs of the
hearing, including the Hearing Officer’s fees.
(b) Hearing Officer.
(1) The City Council will periodically approve a list of lawyers from which the City
Manager will randomly select a Hearing Officer to hear and determine a matter
for which a hearing is requested.
(2) The accused will have the right to request, in writing and no later than five (5)
days before the date of the hearing, that the assigned Hearing Officer be
removed from the case without cause. Any subsequent request for the same case
must be directed to the assigned Hearing Officer who will decide whether he or
she can fairly and objectively review the case.
(3) The Code Compliance Officer may remove a Hearing Officer only by requesting
that the assigned Hearing Officer find that he or she cannot fairly and
objectively review the case. If such a finding is made, the Hearing Officer shall
remove himself or herself from the case, and the City Manager will assign
another Hearing Officer.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 1: ARTICLE II.
(4) The Hearing Officer must not be a City employee.
(5) The City Manager must establish a procedure for evaluating the competency of
the Hearing Officers, including comments from alleged violators and City staff.
These reports must be provided to the City Council.
(c) Issuance of a Subpoena.
(1) Upon the Hearing Officer’s own initiative, or upon written request of an
interested party demonstrating the need and submitted to the City clerk at least
fifteen (15) working days before the scheduled hearing, the Hearing Officer
may issue a subpoena for the attendance of a witness or the production of books,
papers, records or other documents that are material to the matter being heard.
(2) The party requesting the subpoena is responsible for serving the subpoena in the
manner provided for civil actions and for paying the fees and expenses of the
witness served with the subpoena.
(3) A person served with a subpoena may file an objection with the Hearing Officer
promptly, but no later than the time specified in the subpoena for compliance.
(4) The Hearing Officer may cancel or modify the subpoena if, in his or her opinion,
it is deemed to be unreasonable or oppressive.
(5) Alternatively, the party requesting the subpoena may seek an order from District
Court compelling the witness’ attendance at the hearing.
(d) The hearing.
(1) Notice of the hearing must be served in person or by mail on the alleged violator
and/or owner of the property at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date,
unless a shorter time period is accepted by all parties.
(2) At the hearing, the parties will have the opportunity to present testimony and
question any witnesses, but strict rules of evidentiary procedure will not apply.
(3) The Hearing Officer must tape record the hearing and receive testimony and
exhibits.
(4) The Hearing Officer must receive and give weight to the evidence presented,
including reliable hearsay evidence that possesses probative value commonly
accepted by reasonable and prudent people in the conduct of their affairs.
(e) Authority of Hearing Officer.
(1) The Hearing Officer has the authority to determine whether a violation has
occurred, or is occurring, and, upon his or her findings, may:
A. dismiss the citation;
B. impose the scheduled fine amount;
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 1: ARTICLE II.
C. reduce, stay or waive a scheduled fine either unconditionally or upon
compliance with appropriate conditions;
D. order that the City be allowed to remedy the violation and assess the
costs associated therewith against the property; or
E. impose any combination of the foregoing provisions that the Hearing
Officer deems to be reasonable.
(2) When imposing a penalty, the Hearing Officer may consider any or all of the
following factors:
A. the duration of the violation;
B. the frequency of reoccurrence of the violation;
C. the seriousness of the violation;
D. the history of the violation;
E. the violator’s conduct after issuance of the notice of hearing;
F. the good faith effort by the violator to comply;
G. the economic impact of the penalty on the violator;
H. the impact of the violation upon the community; and
I. any other factors the Hearing Officer deems appropriate to achieve a
just result.
(3) The Hearing Officer may exercise discretion to impose a fine for more than one
day of a continuing violation, but only upon a finding that:
A. the violation causes a serious threat of harm to the public health, safety
and welfare; or that
B. the accused intentionally and unreasonably refused to comply with the
Code requirement.
f. Hearing Officer’s decision.
(1) The Hearing Officer’s decision must be in writing.
(2) The decision of the Hearing Officer is final without any further right of
administrative appeal.
(3) The Hearing Officer’s decision relative to any of the matters set forth in Section
1-24 below may be appealed to the City Council by submitting a request in
writing to the City clerk within ten (10) days after issuance of the Hearing
Officer’s decision.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 1: ARTICLE II.
(4) Failure of the accused to attend the hearing constitutes a waiver of the accused’s
rights to an Administrative Hearing and an admission of the violation. A
Hearing Officer may waive this result upon good cause shown. Examples of
“good cause” are: death or incapacitating illness of the accused; a court order
requiring the accused to appear for another hearing at the same time; and lack of
proper service of the Administrative Citation or Notice of the hearing. “Good
cause” does not include: forgetfulness or intentional delay.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 1: ARTICLE II.
Section 1-24. Administrative Review.
(a) Appeal of Hearing Officer’s Decision. The Hearing Officer’s decision in any of the
following matters may be appealed by a party to the City Council for administrative
review:
(1) An alleged failure to obtain a permit, license, or other approval from the City
Council as required by City Ordinance;
(2) An alleged violation of a permit, license, or other approval, or the conditions
attached to the permit, license, or approval, that was granted by the City
Council; and
(3) An alleged violation of regulations governing a person or entity who has
received a license granted by the City Council.
(b) Appeal to the City Council. To appeal to the City Council, the party seeking the appeal
must submit a request in writing to the City clerk within ten (10) days after the Hearing
Officer's decision. The appeal must be accompanied by a fee as established by the City
Council.
(c) Hearing by the City Council. The appeal will be heard by the City Council after notice
served in person or by registered mail at least ten (10) days in advance of the hearing.
The parties to the hearing will have an opportunity to present oral or written arguments
regarding the Hearing Officer’s decision.
(d) City Council Decision. The City Council must consider the record, the Hearing Officer’s
decision, and any additional arguments before making a determination. The City Council
is not bound by the Hearing Officer’s decision, but may adopt all or part of the Hearing
Officer’s decision. The City Council’s decision must be in writing.
(e) Finding of Violation and Imposition of Penalty. If the City Council makes a finding of
a violation, it may impose a civil penalty not exceeding $1000.00 per day per violation,
and may consider any or all of the factors contained in 1-23(e)(2). The City Council may
also reduce, stay or waive a scheduled fine either unconditionally or upon compliance
with appropriate conditions.
(f) Additional Penalties. In addition to imposing a civil penalty, the City Council may
suspend or revoke a city-issued license, permit, or other approval associated with the
violation, if the procedure for suspension or revocation, as found elsewhere in the City
Code, has been followed. Any hearing required in a suspension or revocation process
located elsewhere in the City Code will be satisfied by the hearing before the Hearing
Officer, with the right of appeal to the City Council.
Section 1-25. Judicial Review. An aggrieved party may obtain judicial review of the decision of the Hearing
Officer or the City Council by proceeding under a writ of certiorari in District Court.
Section 1-26. Recovery of Civil Penalties.
(a) If a civil penalty is not paid within the time specified, it will constitute:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 1: ARTICLE II.
(1) A lien on the real property upon which the violation occurred if the property or
improvements on the property were the subject of the violation and the property
owner was found responsible for the violation; or
(2) A personal obligation of the violator in all other situations.
(b) A lien may be assessed against the property and collected in the same manner as taxes.
(c) A personal obligation may be collected by appropriate legal means.
(d) A late payment fee of ten (10) percent of the total fine imposed, or any part thereof that
remains unpaid, may be assessed for each thirty (30) day period that the total fine amount
remains unpaid after the due date.
(e) Failure to pay a fine is grounds for suspending or revoking a license related to the
violation and/or the property upon which the violation occurred.
Section 1-27. Criminal Penalties.
(a) The following are misdemeanors, punishable in accordance with state law:
(1) Failure to pay a fine imposed by a Hearing Officer within thirty (30) days after it
was imposed, or such other time as may be established by the Hearing Officer,
unless the matter is appealed pursuant to Section 1-24, or judicial review is
sought pursuant to Section 1-25.
(2) Failure to pay a fine imposed by the City Council within thirty (30) days after it
was imposed, or such other time as may be established by the City Council.
(b) If the final adjudication in the Administrative Hearing is a finding of no violation, the
City may not pursue a criminal violation in District Court based on the same set of facts.
This does not preclude the City from pursuing a criminal conviction for a violation of the
same provision based on a different set of facts or upon a finding of a violation. A
different date of the same violation will constitute a different set of facts.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 1: ARTICLE III.
CHAPTER 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article III. Opting-Out of the Requirements of Minn. Statutes Section 462.3593.
Section 1-1. Opt-out of Minn. Statutes, Section 462.3593.
Pursuant to authority granted by Minn. Statutes, Section 462.3593, subdivision 9, the City of
Anoka opts-out of the requirements of Minn. Stat. § 462.3593, which defines and regulates
Temporary Family Health Care Dwellings.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2; ARTICLE III
1 of 1
CHAPTER 2. ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE III: Officers and Employees
Section 2-61. Issuance of citations.
(a) Except as otherwise provided by law, only a peace officer and/or part-time peace
officer may:
(1) Issue a citation requiring the person receiving the citation to appear in court;
or
(2) Take a person into custody as permitted by Minn. Stats. § 629.34.
(b) The following City officials may issue citations in lieu of arrest or continued detention
for violations of this Code:
(1) Peace officers and part-time peace officers;
(2) Community service officers;
(3) Park rangers;
(4) Reserve officers;
(5) The Property Maintenance Coordinator or any employee designated by the
City Manager to carry out the duties of a Code Enforcement Officer for
Chapters 20, 38, 48, 54, 70 and 74..
(6) The Zoning Administrator or any employee designated by the City Manager,
but only for violations of Chapters 20, 38, 54 and 74 of this Code;
(7) The Fire Marshal only for violations of Chapter 34 of this Code; and
(8) The Building Official, but only for violations of Chapter 18 of this Code or for
violations of the State Building Code.
Section 2-62 thru 2-90. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2; ARTICLE IV
1 of 3
CHAPTER 2. ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE IV: Administrative Code and Departments
Section 2-91. Administrative Code.
(a) There is hereby established for the City an administrative code for the purpose of
dividing the administrative service of the City into departments, and for the purpose of
broadly defining the functions of each such department as outlined in the personnel
policy manual, administrative procedures manual, and position classification and
compensation manual adopted by the City Council. These manuals shall comprise the
administrative code for the City and may be amended from time to time by resolution of
the City Council.
(b) With the exception of the City Attorney, all department directors are appointed by, and
are responsible to, the City Manager for duties and functions outlined in the
administrative code (position classification and compensation manual). The overall
operation of the City shall be divided into departments and divisions with the department
directors and division heads thereof. The following departments, divisions, and positions
are hereby created:
(1) Department of Administration. The Department of Administration shall be
under the supervision and control of the City Manager and shall be responsible
for the administration, supervision, and related administrative functions of the
following divisions:
a. City Clerk;
b. Licensing;
c. General Municipal Administrative Services.
(2) Department of Finance. The Department of Finance shall be under the
supervision and control of the Finance Director and shall be responsible for the
administration, supervision, and related financing functions of the following
divisions:
a. Finance;
b. Utility billing;
c. Data processing;
d. Purchasing;
e. City assessor's office;
f. Special assessments;
g. Payroll.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2; ARTICLE IV
2 of 3
(3) Department of Public Works. The Department of Public Works shall be under
the supervision and control of the Public Works Director and shall be
responsible for the administration, supervision and related public works
functions of the following divisions:
a. Engineering;
b. Building maintenance;
c. Sanitary and storm sewers;
d. Streets and alleys;
e. Water.
(4) Police Department. The Police Department shall be under the supervision and
control of the Police Chief and shall be responsible for the administration,
supervision and related police activities of the following divisions:
a. Law enforcement division;
b. Civil defense division.
(5) Department of Human Resources. The Department of Human Resources shall be
under the supervision and control of the Human Resources Director and shall be
responsible for the administration, supervision and related personnel activities of
the following divisions:
a. Labor relations;
b. Employee relations;
c. Employee safety;
(6) Department of Community Development. The Department of Community
Development shall be under the supervision and control of the Community
Development Director and shall be responsible for the administration,
supervision and related community development activities of the following
divisions:
a. Economic development;
b. Housing and redevelopment;
c. Recycling.
d. Rental Assistance.
(7) Department of Planning. The Department of Planning shall be under the
supervision and control of the Planning Director and shall be responsible for the
administration, supervision and related activities of the following divisions:.
a. Planning and Zoning;
b. Building Permits and Property Maintenance.
c. Code Enforcement.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2; ARTICLE IV
3 of 3
d. Heritage Preservation.
(8) Department of Electric Utility. The Department of Electric Utility shall be under
the supervision and control of the Electric Utility Director and shall be
responsible for the administration, supervision, and related municipal utility
activities of the following division: Electric utility.
(9) Department of Golf Course & Banquet Center. The Department of Golf Course
and Banquet Center shall be under the supervision and control of the Golf
Course Manager, and shall be responsible for the administration, and
supervision of related golf course and banquet center activities.
(10) Department of Liquor Operations. The Department of Liquor Operations shall
be under the supervision and control of the Liquor Store Manager, and shall be
responsible for the administration, and supervision of the City’s Liquor Store(s).
(11) Department of Parks and Recreation. The Department of Parks and Recreation
shall be under the supervision and control of the Director of Parks, Recreation,
and Maintenance, and shall be responsible for the administration, supervision
and related parks and recreation activities of the following divisions:
a. Organized Recreation;
b. Park development, construction and maintenance;
c. Cemeteries;
d. Shade trees, Beautification;
e. Aquatic Center.
Section 2-92 thru 2-120. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2; ARTICLE V
1 of 1
CHAPTER 2. ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE V: Finance
Section 2-121. Self-Insurance Fund.
(a) A self-insurance revolving fund is hereby established for the City.
(b) The City establishes the fund to provide self-insurance against liability of the City and its
officers, employees, agents and servants under Minn. Stats. §§ 340A.603, 340A.801 and
any other laws for damages resulting from its torts, including torts for which the City has
immunity, and those torts of its officers, employees, agents and servants. The
establishment of the fund, the allocation of funds to it or the expenditure of funds, or any
other act in conjunction with the establishing or operation of the fund shall not waive any
immunity granted to a political subdivision, nor shall it waive any statutory limitation on
liability afforded a political subdivision.
(c) The fund shall contain such sums as the Council shall from time to time appropriate.
(d) The City Council may authorize expenditures or transfers from the fund established for
any purpose it deems appropriate, including but not limited to the following purposes:
(1) Payment of losses;
(2) Costs of defense and investigation;
(3) Premiums and deductible amounts when commercial insurance is purchased for
a risk;
(4) Debt service and debt service related expenses for bonds issued pursuant to
Minn. Stats. § 471.982;
(5) Costs of loss control activities;
(6) Any other costs customarily borne by commercial insurers under conventional
insurance policies.
Section 2-122 thru 2-150. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2; ARTICLE VI; DIVISION 2
CHAPTER 2. ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE VI. Boards and Commissions
DIVISION 2. Economic Development Commission
Section 2-166. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words and their derivations shall have the
following meanings:
Commission shall mean the Economic Development Commission of the City of Anoka.
Chairman shall mean the Chairperson of the Economic Development Commission as
provided for hereinunder.
Planning Commission means the Planning Commission of the City of Anoka.
Section 2-167. Establishment of Commission.
An Economic Development Commission is hereby established to be advisory to the City
Council of the City of Anoka. Established in 1982.
Section 2-168. Composition, Qualifications, Appointments, Terms Oath of Office, Attendance,
Resignations, and Vacancies.
(a) Composition. The Commission shall consist of nine (9) members appointed by a
majority vote of the City Council. A quorum shall be five (5) members.
Members serve without compensation.
(b) Qualifications. The qualifications of the members of the Commission shall be
those who, in the judgment of the Council, are representative of the community
and are qualified by training and experience and interest useful for the
fulfillment of the Commission’s responsibility in economic development. At
least five (5) members shall be residents of the City of Anoka.
(c) Appointments. Appointments to the Commission shall be as established in the
current policy, as may be amended from time to time; Policy Establishing
Procedures for Appointments to Boards and Commissions.
(d) Terms. Appointees shall hold office until their successors are appointed and
have qualified.
(1) Full Terms. Member shall be appointed to serve a three-year (3 yr)
term, commencing on January 1st and expiring at midnight on
December 31st of the third year.
(2) Partial Terms. Members appointed to fill a vacancy/partial term, shall
begin serving upon being appointed and Oath of Office, and shall serve
the remaining balance of the term of their predecessor.
(e) Oath of Office. Every appointed member shall, before entering upon the
discharge of his duties, for each term appointed, take an oath that he will
faithfully discharge the duties of his office.
1 of 4
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2; ARTICLE VI; DIVISION 2
(f) Attendance. Members are expected to be interested in Economic Development
matters as related to the general welfare of the community and are expected to
prepare for and attend meetings of the Commission when held.
(g) Resignations. Resignations from the Commission should be submitted to the
City in written form for acceptance by the City Council. After City Council
acceptance, resignations will be acted upon as established in the current policy,
as may be amended from time to time; Policy Establishing Procedures for
Appointments to Boards and Commissions.
(h) Vacancies. Vacancies in the Commission will be acted upon as established in
the current policy, as may be amended from time to time; Policy Establishing
Procedures for Appointments to Boards and Commissions.
Section 2-169. Removal of Members.
A member may be removed from the Commission, when it is determined by a majority of
the City Council that removal of an individual would be in the best interest of the City.
Section 2-170. Officers, Meetings, Reports and Expenditures.
(a) Officers. The Commission shall elect a chairman from among its appointed
members and may create and fill such other offices as it may determine.
(b) Meetings.
(1) Regular Meetings. The Commission shall hold at least one regular
meeting each month. It shall adopt rules for the transaction of business
and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions and findings,
which shall be of public record.
(2) Special Meetings. The Chairman or any three (3) member sof the
Commission shall have the authority to call special meetings of the
Commission. Written notices of special meetings shall be given to all
members at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time of the
meeting unless the time and place for the special meeting is set at a
regular meeting.
(c) Reports. Upon request by the City Council, the Commission shall render
annually a full report of its work to the City Council.
(d) Expenditures. Expenditures of the Commission shall be within amounts
appropriated for the purpose by the City Council.
Section 2-171. Staff.
The Commission shall receive the staff services of the Community Development
Department and other personnel as recommended by the City Manager within the means
provided for by appropriations made therefore by the City Council.
Section 2-172. Duties.
The Commission is an agency of the City Council with responsibilities to:
2 of 4
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2; ARTICLE VI; DIVISION 2
(a) Promote the development and use of planned residential, commercial, industrial,
and business sites in the City.
(b) Provide information to realtors and lending institutions serving residential,
industrial, and commercial or business clients.
(c) Cooperate with site selection committees and industrial, commercial or business
leaders seeking a location for new expanded plant facilities.
(d) Cooperate with civic betterment agencies interested in promoting the potential
of the City’s labor force and industrial, commercial, and business areas.
(e) Cooperate and coordinate the layout, preparation and distribution of unsolicited
industrial, commercial or business information from the City of Anoka to outstate
prospects with the State of Minnesota Department of Employment and
Economic Development (DEED).
Section 2-173. Powers.
The Commission shall the following powers:
(a) To appoint subcommittees of a size and nature it may deem necessary and may
enlist the aid of persons and/or organizations who are not members of the
Commission. The Commission shall have no power to make contracts, levy
taxes, borrow money or condemn property, but shall have the full power and
responsibility to investigate the necessity and recommend the taking of these
actions and any other actions related to the industrial and commercial
development by the City Council and all other officers of the City responsible to
formulate the terms of and the procedure for taking such action.
(b) To confer with and advise the City Council and Planning Commission on all
matters concerning the industrial, business, and commercial development of the
City.
(c) To publicize, with the consent of the City Council, the industrial and
commercial advantages and opportunities of the City within the City provided
by any appropriations made therefore by the City Council.
(d) To collect data and information as to the type of industries and commerce best
suited to the City.
(e) To periodically survey the overall conditions of the City from the standpoint of
determining whether the City has a community climate for economic
development and to determine the general receptiveness of the City to particular
types of industry, commerce or business.
(f) To provide the City Council with information as to the general advantages and
disadvantages of industrial and commercial development in the community.
(g) To cooperate with all industries and businesses in the City in the solution of any
community problems which they may have, and to encourage the expansion,
development and management of such industries and businesses so as to
promote the general welfare of the City.
3 of 4
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2; ARTICLE VI; DIVISION 2
(h) To cooperate with all community groups and civic organizations within the City
and to furnish them with such aid and advice as deemed appropriate.
(i) To aid the City Council and Planning Commission in the proper zoning and
orderly development of areas suitable for industrial and commercial
development.
(j) To develop, compile, coordinate and publicize, with available funds,
information such as, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Existing industrial and commercial concerns within the City, their
addresses, types of business, number of employees, and whether each
serves local, regional or national markets.
(2) Available industrial and commercial sites including number of acres,
approximate price, existing zoning, and proximity to major and minor
arterial roads.
(3) Available buildings for industrial and commercial operations, including
type of building, number of square feet, existing zoning, and proximity
to major and minor arterial roads.
(4) Transportation facilities, including motor carriers, air transportation and
highway facilities.
(5) Electric power available.
(6) Funds available for industrial and commercial use.
(7) Sewage disposal facilities.
(8) Water supply facilities.
(9) Community facilities such as fire, police and education.
(10) Recreational facilities.
(11) Wage of rates of unskilled, semi-skilled and white-collar workers.
(12) Availability of labor.
(13) General community attitude toward industrial and commercial
expansion, development and attraction.
(14) Experience and programs of surrounding suburban communities in
regard to industrial and commercial expansion, development and
attraction.
(k) To recommend to the City Council and Planning Commission policies and
particular actions in regard to industrial and commercial expansion,
development and attraction.
Sections 2-174 through 2-190. Reserved.
4 of 4
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER2; ARTICLE VI; DIVISION 3
CHAPTER 2. ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE VI: Boards and Commissions
DIVISION 3. Human Rights Commission
Section 2-191. Definitions.
For the purposes of this division, the following words and their derivations shall have
the following meanings:
Commission shall mean the Human Rights Commission of the City of Anoka.
Chairman shall mean the Chairperson of the Human Rights Commission as provided
for hereinunder.
Section 2-192. Re-Establishment and Purpose of Human Rights Commission.
It is declared that it is the public policy of the City of Anoka to fulfill its responsibilities
as a partner of the State Department of Human Rights in securing for all citizens equal
opportunity in housing, employment, public accommodations, public services and
education, and to fully implement those goals set forth in Minnesota Statutes;
Minnesota Human Rights Act, to educate and advise the community on human rights
and social justice issues and to assist the Minnesota Department of Human Rights in
implementing State laws against discrimination. Re-established in 2003.
Section 2-193. Composition, Qualifications, Appointments, Terms, Oath of Office, Attendance,
Resignations and Vacancies.
(a) Composition. Effective January 1, 2008, the Commission shall consist of five
(5) members, with staggered terms, determined and appointed by a majority of
the City Council. A quorum shall be three (3) members. Members serve
without compensation.
(b) Qualifications. The qualifications of the members of the Commission shall be
those who, in the judgment of the Council, are sincere in the securing for all
citizens, equal opportunity in housing, employment, public accommodations,
public services and education and display an interest in Human Rights and
Social Justice issues.
(c) Appointments. Appointments to the Commission shall be as established in the
current policy, as amended from time to time; Policy Establishing Procedures
for Appointments to Boards and Commissions.
(d) Terms. Appointees shall hold office until their successors are appointed and
have qualified.
(1) Full Terms. Members shall be appointed to serve a three-year (3 yr)
term, commencing on January 1st and expiring at midnight on
December 31st of the third year.
(2) Partial Terms. Members appointed to fill a vacancy/partial term shall
begin serving upon being appointed and take an Oath of Office, and
shall serve the remaining balance of their predecessor’s term.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER2; ARTICLE VI; DIVISION 3
(e) Oath of Office. Every appointed member shall, before entering upon the
discharge of his duties, for each term appointed, take an oath that he will
faithfully discharge the duties of his office.
(f) Attendance. Members are expected to be interested in Human Rights matters
as related to the general welfare of the community and are expected to prepare
for and attend meetings of the Commission when held.
(g) Resignations. Resignations from the Commission should be submitted to the
City in written form for acceptance by the City Council. After City Council
acceptance, resignations will be acted upon as established in the current policy,
as may be amended from time to time; Policy Establishing Procedures for
Appointments to Boards and Commissions.
(h) Vacancies. Vacancies in the Commission will be acted upon as established in
the current policy, as may be amended from time to time; Policy Establishing
Procedures for Appointments to Boards and Commissions.
Section 2-194. Removal of Members.
A member may be removed from the Commission, when it is determined, by a majority
of the City Council, that removal of an individual would be in the best interest of the
City.
Section 2-195. Officers, Meetings, Reports and Expenditures.
(a) Officers. The Commission shall elect a chairman from among its appointed
members and may create and fill such other offices as it may determine.
(b) Meetings. The Commission shall meets on an as needed basis to respond to
Human Rights occurrences or to prepare for or implement an event, program
or project sponsored by the Human Rights Commission, or to attend to
necessary business. Meeting necessity shall be determined by City staff after
consulting with the Chairperson of the Human Rights Commission.
(c) Reports. Upon request by the City Council, the Commission shall render
annually a full report of its work to the City Council.
(d) Expenditures. Expenditures of the Commission shall be within amounts
appropriated for the purpose of the City Council.
Section 2-196. Staff.
The Commission shall receive the staff services of the City Clerk’s office and other
personnel as recommended by the City Manager within the means provided for by
appropriations made therefore by the City Council.
Section 2-197. Duties.
The Commission is an agency of the City Council with responsibilities to:
(a) Adopt Bylaws and Rules of Conduct for its affairs, including the election of
commission officers, assumptions of duties, and definition of responsibilities of
officers and commission members;
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER2; ARTICLE VI; DIVISION 3
(b) Engage in discussions and communicate with the State Department of Human
Rights for the purpose of delineating cooperative regulatory and enforcement
procedures;
(c) Enlist the cooperation of agencies, organizations and individuals in the
community in an active program directed to create equal opportunity and
eliminate discrimination and inequalities;
(d) Formulate a Human Rights Relations Program for the City to provide
increased effectiveness and direction to the work of all individuals and
agencies addressing themselves to planning, policy-making and educational
programming in the area of civil and human rights;
(e) Promote the acceptance of cultural diversity in Anoka;
(f) Promote the elimination of hate, prejudice and discrimination against persons
or groups based on race, gender, religion, or other status of the person or
group;
(g) Educate the community on issues of discrimination and cultural diversity;
(h) Advise the City Council and City Administration on human rights issues;
(i) Promote the goals and objectives of the Minnesota Human Rights Act.
Sections 2-199 through 2-215. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2; ARTICLE VI; DIVISION 4
1 of 4
CHAPTER 2. ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE VI: Boards and Commissions
DIVISION 4: Heritage Preservation Commission
----------
*State law reference — Heritage Preservation Commissions, Minn. Stats. § 471.193
----------
Section 2-216. Declaration of public policy and purpose.
(a) The City Council hereby declares as a matter of public policy that the
preservation, protection, perpetuation and use of areas, places, buildings,
structures, lands, districts and other objects having a special historical, cultural
or aesthetic interest or value is a public necessity, and is required in the interest
of public health, prosperity, safety and welfare of the people of the City. The
purposes of this division is to:
(1) Safeguard the heritage of the City by preserving sites and structures
which reflect elements of the City's cultural, social, economic, political,
engineering or architectural history;
(2) Protect and enhance the City attractions to residents, tourists and
visitors, and serve as a support and stimulus to business and industry;
(3) Enhance the economic viability of heritage preservation landmarks and
districts through the protection and promotion of their unique character;
(4) Enhance the visual and aesthetic character, diversity and interest of the
City;
(5) Foster civic pride in the beauty and notable accomplishments of the
past; and
(6) Promote the use and preservation of historic landmarks and districts for
the educational and general welfare of the people of the City.
Section 2-217. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and their derivations shall have the
meanings as set forth in the subdivision which follow:
Commission means the Heritage Preservation Commission of the City of Anoka.
Chairman means the Chairman of the Heritage Preservation Commission as provided for
hereinunder.
Section 2-218. Established.
Pursuant to Minn. Stats. 471.193, a Heritage Preservation Commission is hereby
established to be advisory to the City Council of the City of Anoka. Established in 1998.
Section 2-219. Composition, Qualifications, Appointments, Terms, Oath of Office, Attendance,
Resignations, and Vacancies.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2; ARTICLE VI; DIVISION 4
2 of 4
(a) Composition. The Commission shall consist of seven (7) members, appointed
by a majority vote of the City Council. A quorum shall be four (4) members.
Members serve without compensation.
(b) Qualifications. The qualifications of the members of the Commission shall be
residency of the City of Anoka, and those whom have demonstrated an interest
in the historical, cultural or architectural development of the City and at least
two of the members shall be preservation related professions, if available in the
community. Per Minnesota Statute, the Commission much include a member
from the Anoka County Historical Society, if available.
(c) Appointments. Appointments to the Commission shall be as established in the
current policy; as may be amended from time to time; Policy Establishing
Procedures for Appointments to Boards and Commissions.
(d) Terms. Appointees shall hold office until their successors are appointed and
have qualified.
(1) Full Terms. Members shall be appointed to serve a three-year (3 yr)
term, commencing on January 1st, and expiring at midnight on
December 31st of the third year.
(2) Partial Terms. Members appointed to fill a vacancy/partial term, shall
begin serving upon being appointed and Oath of Office, and shall serve
the remaining balance of the term of their predecessor.
(e) Oath of Office. Every appointed member shall, before entering upon the
discharge of his duties, for each term appointed, take an oath that he will
faithfully discharge the duties of his office.
(f) Attendance. Members are expected to be interested in Heritage Preservation
matters as related to the general welfare of the community and are expected to
prepare for and attend meetings of the Commission when held.
(g) Resignations. Resignations from the Commission should be submitted to the
City in written form for acceptance by the City Council. After City Council
acceptance, resignations will be acted upon as established in the current policy,
as may be amended from time to time; Policy Establishing Procedures for
Appointments to Boards and Commissions.
(h) Vacancies. Vacancies in the Commission will be acted upon as established in
the current policy, and may be amended from time to time; Policy Establishing
Procedures for Appointments to Boards and Commissions.
Section 2-220. Removal of Members.
A member may be removed from the Commission, when it is determined by a majority
vote of the City Council that removal of an individual would be in the best interest of the
City.
Section 2-221. Officers, Meetings, Reports and Expenditures.
(a) Officers. The Commission shall select from among its members such officers as
it may deem necessary. The Commission shall have the power to designate and
appoint from its members various committees with powers and duties equivalent
to and not inconsistent with the powers and duties of the Commission. The
commission shall make such rules and regulations as it may deem advisable and
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2; ARTICLE VI; DIVISION 4
3 of 4
necessary for the conduct of its affairs, for the purpose of carrying out the intent
of this ordinance, which are not inconsistent with the laws of the City of Anoka
and the State of Minnesota.
(b) Meetings. The Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month.
It shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its
resolutions, transactions and findings, which shall be of public record.
(c) Reports.
(1) Report to the City Council. The Commission shall make an annual
report to the City Council, containing a statement of its activities.
(2) Communication with the State Historic Preservation Officer. Pursuant
to Minnesota Statutes, proposed site designations and design guidelines
must be sent to the State Historic Preservation Officer at the Minnesota
Historical Society. Annually, by October 31st, the Commission shall
submit an annual report to the State Historic Preservation Officer,
which summarizes the Commission’s activities, including designations,
reviews, and other activities during the previous twelve (12) months.
Section 2-222. Staff.
The City shall provide the Heritage Preservation Commission with staff to perform the duties
prescribed under this division.
Section 2-223. Responsibilities.
The Heritage Preservation Commission shall have the responsibility of recommending to the City
Council the adoption of ordinances designating areas, places, building structures, works of art or
other objects having special historical, cultural or architectural interest for the community as
heritage preservation landmarks or districts.
Section 2-224. Powers and duties.
(a) The Heritage Preservation Commission shall make such rules and regulations as it may
deem advisable and necessary for the conduct of its affairs, for the purpose of carrying
out the intent of this ordinance, which are not inconsistent with the laws of the City and
the state. The heritage preservation commission shall make an annual report to the City
Council, containing a statement of its activities.
(b) The Heritage Preservation Commission shall conduct a continuing survey of all areas,
places, buildings, structures or similar objects in the City which the commission, on the
basis of information available or presented to it, has reason to believe are or will be
eligible for designation as heritage preservation landmarks or districts.
(c) The Heritage Preservation Commission shall work for the continuing education of the
citizens of the City with respect to the historic and architectural heritage of the City. It
shall keep current and public an official list of designated heritage preservation
landmarks and districts.
(d) Upon City Council approval, the Heritage Preservation Commission may retain the
services, on a permanent or part-time basis, of technical experts and other persons as may
be required to perform the commission's duties.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2; ARTICLE VI; DIVISION 4
4 of 4
(e) The Heritage Preservation Commission shall have authority to solicit gifts and
contributions to be made to the City and to assist in the preparation of applications for
grant funds to be made to the City for the purpose of heritage preservation.
(f) The Heritage Preservation Commission may recommend to the City Council, after review
and comment by the City Planning Commission, that certain properties eligible for
designation as heritage preservation landmarks or districts be acquired by gifts, by
negotiation or other legal means.
Section 2-225--2-240. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2; ARTICLE VI; DIVISION 5
1 of 2
CHAPTER 2. ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE VI: Boards and Commissions
DIVISION 5: Park and Recreation Advisory Board
Section 2-241. Purpose created, composition, appointment, terms of office.
It is the purpose of the City Council to provide a high quality of life for the residents of the City by
protecting the natural resources, safeguarding historic sites, and developing and maintaining park
and recreational facilities for public enjoyment. For such purpose, there is hereby created and
established in and for the City a board to be known and designated as the park and recreation
advisory board.
Section 2-242. Members.
(a) The Park and Recreation Advisory Board shall consist of nine members appointed by a
majority of the City Council. Terms of office shall be three years, or until qualified
successors have been appointed.
(b) Vacancies on the Park and Recreation Advisory Board shall be reported to the City
Council and filled by like appointment for the unexpired term. Members of the Park and
Recreation Advisory Board shall receive no compensation for their services.
Section 2-243. Officers; bylaws.
The Park and Recreation Advisory Board shall organize itself and elect one of its members as
chairman. The chairman of the Park and Recreation Advisory Board shall be responsible for
calling and presiding at all meetings. The Park and Recreation Advisory Board shall also elect one
of its members as vice-chairman, who shall perform the duties of the chairman in the absence of or
incapacity of the chairman. The Park and Recreation Advisory Board shall also adopt its own
bylaws for the conduct of its business.
Section 2-244. Powers and duties.
(a) The Park and Recreation Advisory Board shall advise and assist the City Council in
matters relating to the natural resources and historic facilities of the City including all
park and recreation programs of the City or community schools, all playgrounds,
playfields, parks, golf courses, swimming pools, and other recreation facilities. The Park
and Recreation Advisory Board shall have no power to incur debt for which the City or
any department thereof shall be liable and it shall have no power or authority to make any
improvement, alterations, or changes in any of the parks or City facilities without the
consent of the City Council. The Park and Recreation Advisory Board will perform the
following functions:
(1) To develop and maintain a comprehensive plan for the City park system which
categorizes park and recreation areas and facilities. To make recommendations
for the development and maintenance of these areas and facilities based on such
plan.
(2) To review proposed plot plans for new subdivisions and recommend to the City
Council the park land dedication or cash in lieu of dedication which should be
accepted and any proposed park and recreation areas or facilities which should
be developed in the subdivision.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2; ARTICLE VI; DIVISION 5
2 of 2
(3) Propose to the City Council rules and regulations for the use of any parks or
recreational facilities. Review all requests for the special use of such facilities
and make recommendations to the City Council regarding such requests.
(4) Consider proper names for park and recreation areas and facilities and make
recommendations to the City Council for such titles.
(5) To conduct studies and investigations as specifically directed or delegated by the
City Council. To represent the City Council at appropriate meetings, hearings,
and the other events when so directed.
Section 2-245 thru 2-260. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2; ARTICLE VI; DIVISION 6
1 of 2
CHAPTER 2. ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE VI: Boards and Commissions
DIVISION 6: Planning Commission
Section 2-261. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and their derivations shall have the meanings
as set forth in the subdivisions that follow:
(a) Commission. Is the Planning Commission of the City of Anoka.
(b) Chairman. The Chairman of the Planning Commission as provided for hereinunder.
Section 2-262. Established.
A Planning Commission is hereby established to be advisory to the City Council of the City of
Anoka. Established in 1960.
Section 2-263. Composition, Qualifications, Appointments, Terms, Oath of Office, Attendance,
Resignations, and Vacancies.
(a) Composition. The Commissions shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by a
majority vote of the City Council. A quorum shall be four (4) members. Members
serve without compensation.
(b) Qualifications. The qualifications of the members of the Commission shall be
residency of the City of Anoka.
(c) Appointments. Appointments to the Commissions shall be as established in the current
policy, as may be amended from time to time; Policy Establishing Procedures for
Appointments to Boards and Commission.
(d) Terms. Appointees shall hold office until their successors are appointed and have
qualified.
(1) Full Terms. Members shall be appointed to serve a four-year (4) term,
commencing January 1st and expiring at midnight on December 31st of the
fourth year.
(2) Partial Terms. Members appointed to fill a vacancy/partial term, shall begin
serving upon being appointed and Oath of Office, and shall serve the
remaining balance of the term of their predecessor.
(e) Oath of Office. Every appointed member shall, before entering upon the discharge of
duties, for each term appointed, take an oath of that he will faithfully discharge the
duties of office.
(f) Attendance. Members are expected to be interested in Planning & Zoning matters as
related to the general welfare of the community and are expected to prepare for and
attend meetings of the Commission when held.
(g) Resignations. Resignations from the Commission should be submitted to the City in
written form for acceptance by the City Council. After City Council acceptance,
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 2; ARTICLE VI; DIVISION 6
2 of 2
resignations will be acted upon as established in the current policy, as may be amended
from time to time; Policy Establishing Procedures for Appointments to Boards and
Commissions.
Section 2-264. Removal of Members.
A member may be removed from the Commission when it is determined by a two-thirds (2/3’s)
vote of the City Council, that removal of an individual would be in the best interest of the City.
Section 2-265. Officers, Meetings and Expenditures.
(a) Officers. The Commission shall elect a chairman from among its appointed members
for a term of one (1) year; and the Commission may create and fill such other offices as
it may determine. The City Council shall appoint a secretary of the Commission.
(b) Meetings. The Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month. It
shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its
resolutions, transactions and findings, which shall be of public record. The
Commission may hold one regular work meeting each month. At the work meetings,
no official actions shall be taken and quorum of the membership is not necessary to
conduct the meeting. Rules of attendance do not apply to work meetings.
(c) Reports. On or before January first of each year, the Commission shall submit to the
City Council a report of its work during the preceding year.
(d) Expenditures. Expenditures of the Commission shall be wihtin amounts appropriated
for the purpose by the City Council.
Section 2-266. Staff.
The Commission shall receive the staff services of the Community Development Department and
other personnel as recommended by the City Manager within the means provided for by
appropriations made therefore by the City Council.
CHAPTER 6. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
ARTICLE I. LIQUOR LICENSING IN GENERAL
Section 6-1. State Law Adopted.
The provision of Minnesota Statutes Chapter 340A, commonly known as the Liquor Act, are
adopted and made part of this Chapter as if set out in full. Whenever there is an inconsistency
between the provisions of Minnesota Statutes Chapter 340A and the provisions of this Chapter, the
more restrictive provision shall govern, where allowed by State Law.
Section 6-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Commissioner. Means the State Commissioner of Public Safety.
Bonafide Club. Means an incorporated organization organized under the laws of the state for civic,
fraternal, social, or business purposes, for intellectual improvement, or for the promotion of sports,
or a congressionally chartered veterans organization, which: (i) has more than fifty (50) members;
(ii) has owned or rented a building or space in a building for more than one (1) year that is suitable
and adequate for the accommodation of its members; (iii) is directed by a board of directors,
executive committee, or other similar body chosen by the members at a meeting called for that
purpose. No member, officer, agent, or employee shall receive any profit, directly or indirectly,
from the distribution or sale of beverages to the members of the club, or their guests, beyond a
reasonable salary or wages fixed and voted each year by the governing body.
Brewer. Means a person who manufactures malt liquor for sale and who holds a Brewers
License issued by the State of Minnesota.
Brewery Taproom. Means the premises on which malt liquor is produced by a Brewer and is sold
for consumption on the premises and not sold to other bars, restaurants or wholesalers, unless
permitted by State Law and issued a license by the Minnesota Department of Public Safety,
Alcohol & Gambling Enforcement Division. An establishment licensed under
Minn. Stat. § 340A.301, subd. 6(d) may sell “growlers” off-sale with appropriate City license.
Brewpub. Means the premises, operated in conjunction with a bar or restaurant, where malt
liquor is produced by a Brewer and is sold for consumption on the premises and not sold to other
bars, restaurants or wholesalers, unless permitted by State Law and issued a license by the
Minnesota Department of Public Safety, Alcohol & Gambling Enforcement Division.
Club. Means an incorporated organization organized under the laws of the state for civic,
fraternal, social, or business purposes, for intellectual improvement, or for the promotion of sports,
or a congressionally chartered veterans organization, which: (i) has more than fifty (50) members;
(ii) has owned or rented a building or space in a building for more than one (1) year that is suitable
and adequate for the accommodation of its members; (iii) is directed by a board of directors,
executive committee, or other similar body chosen by the members at a meeting called for that
purpose. No member, officer, agent, or employee shall receive any profit, directly or indirectly,
from the distribution or sale of beverages to the members of the club, or their guests, beyond a
reasonable salary or wages fixed and voted each year by the governing body.
Cocktail Room. Means the premises on which distilled spirits are produced by a micro distillery
and sold for consumption on the premises and not sold to other bars, restaurants or wholesalers,
unless permitted by State Law and issued a license by the Minnesota Department of Public Safety,
Alcohol & Gambling Enforcement Division.
Distilled Spirits. Means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, spirits of wine, whiskey, rum,
brandy, gin, and other distilled spirits, including all dilutions and mixtures thereof, for industrial
use.
Growler. Means a 64-ounce container of malt liquor brewed and sold to an individual on the site
of a licensed Brewery Taproom for consumption off the licensed premises as prescribed for in MS
340A.301.
Hotel. Means any establishment having a resident proprietor or manager, where in consideration
of payment therefore, food and lodging are regularly furnished to transients, which maintains for
the use of its guests not less than ten guest rooms with bedding and other usual, suitable and
necessary furnishings in each room, which is provided at the main entrance with a suitable lobby,
desk and office for the registration of its guests on the ground floor, which employs an adequate
staff to provide suitable and usual service and which maintains under the same management and
control as the rest of the establishment and has, as an integral part therefore, a restaurant.
Liquor. Means 3.2 Malt Liquor, Intoxicating Liquor, Strong Beer/Malt Liquor, Wine.
Intoxicating liquor. Means ethyl alcohol and includes distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous and
malt beverages containing in excess of 3.2 percent of alcohol by weight.
3.2 Malt Liquor. Means any potable malt beverage with an alcoholic content of more than onehalf
percent (½%) by volume and not more than three point two percent (3.2%) by weight.
Micro Distillery. Means a distillery producing premium, distilled spirits in total quantity not to
exceed 40,000 proof gallons in a calendar year.
Off-sale. Means the sale of liquor in the original package in retail stores for consumption off or
away from the premises where sold.
On-sale. Means the sale of liquor by the glass, or by the drink for consumption on the premises
only.
On-sale wine license. Means a license authorizing the sale of wine not to exceed 14 percent
alcohol by volume, for consumption on the licensed premises only, in conjunction with the sale of
food unless otherwise permitted by State Law.
Original Package. Means the bottle or container in which the liquor is placed at the place of
manufacture.
Principal part of the business. Means more than 35 percent (35%) of gross sales.
Restaurant. Means any establishment under the control of a single proprietor or manager, having
appropriate facilities to serve meals, for seating not less than twenty-five (25) guests at one time in
one or more dining rooms having a net dining area of at least 1,500 square feet, and where in
consideration of payment therefore, meals are regularly served at tables to the general public and
which employs an adequate staff for the usual and suitable service to its guests and the principal
part of the business of which is the serving of foods. The term "restaurant," when used in connection
with “on-sale wine or on-sale 3.2 malt liquor licenses, shall mean an establishment under the
control of a single proprietor or manager, having appropriate facilities for serving meals and
seating not fewer than 25 guests at one time, and where, in consideration of payment thereof, meals
are regularly served at table to the general public and which employs an adequate staff to provide
the usual and suitable service to its guests.
Sale, sell, and sold. Means all barters and all manners of furnishing intoxicating liquor including
such furnishing in violation or evasion of law.
Section 6-3. Non-applicability.
(a) This chapter does not apply to:
(1) Medicines intended for therapeutic purposes and not intended as a beverage;
(2) Industrial alcohol designed for mechanical, chemical, scientific, pharmaceutical,
or industrial purposes; or
(3) Non-potable compounds or preparations containing alcohol.
Section 6-4. License Required.
(a) No person, except wholesalers or manufacturers, to the extent authorized under a State
license, shall directly or indirectly deal in, sell or keep for sale any liquor for sale without
first having obtained the proper license from the City.
(b) No person shall mix or prepare intoxicating liquor for "on-sale" consumption in any
public place not licensed in accordance with this Code and the laws of the State.
Section 6-5. Responsibility of Licensee
Every Licensee under this chapter is responsible for the conduct in the licensed establishment and
any sale of alcoholic beverage by an employee authorized to sell alcoholic beverages in the
establishment is the act of the licensee.
State law reference ---Adoption by references, Minn. Stat. §471.62
The following regulations govern all licenses issued under this Chapter:
(a) The licensee shall act in a responsible manner toward the conduct of every person(s) on the
premises.
(b) The licensee shall not dispense liquor to be consumed off the premises on which it was
purchased or received, unless specifically authorized by appropriate licensure through this
chapter.
(c) At all times during the operating hours of the establishment, the licensee shall have appointed
an individual to serve as the manager or person in charge of the operation of the
establishment.
(d) The licensee shall require all their employees who are engaged in the selling or serving of
alcoholic beverages, or serving as security personnel in the establishment, to abstain from the
use of alcohol while working.
(e) Applicable to On-Sale License Holders: Between 11:00 p.m. and closing, on Fridays,
Saturdays, Sundays, Thanksgiving Eve and Day, July 3rd and July 4th and New Years Eve and
Day no licensee, responsible party or employee or agent of a licensee shall:
(1) Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons any drink or drinks
containing liquor at a price less than the price charged for such drinks prior to 11:00 p.m.
(2) Sell, or offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons multiple drinks
containing liquor for a single price.
(3) Give away a drink or drinks containing liquor at no cost.
(4) Increase the volume of liquor contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the
price charged for such drink.
(f) Between 1:00 a.m. and closing, the performance of live music, DJ’s, or other live
entertainment, is prohibited
Section 6-6. Restrictions involving sale, etc., to minors, etc.
(a) No person shall give, sell, procure or purchase liquor to or for any person to whom the
sale of liquor is forbidden by law; nor shall a licensee, or his/her agent or employee,
permit such person to be furnished or consume any such liquors on the licensed premises.
(b) No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall misrepresent his/her age for the
purpose of obtaining liquor nor shall he/she enter upon any premises licensed for the
retail sale of intoxicating liquor for the purpose of purchasing or having served or
delivered to him/her for consuming any such intoxicating liquor; nor shall any such
person purchase, attempt to purchase, consume or have another purchase for him/her any
intoxicating liquor.
(c) No person under eighteen (18) years of age may serve or sell liquor in a retail liquor
establishment.
(d) It is unlawful for any person to induce a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to
purchase or procure any liquor, or to lend or knowingly permit the use of the person's
driver's license, permit, state identification card, or other form of identification by a
person under the age of twenty-one (21) years for the purpose of purchasing or
attempting to purchase liquor.
(e) Any person who may appear to the licensee, his/her employees or agents, to be under the
age of twenty-one (21) years shall, upon demand of the licensee, his/her employee or
agent, produce and permit to be examined, documentation on the proof of age. Proof of
age for purchasing or consuming liquor shall be established by one of the following:
(1) A valid driver's license or identification card issued by Minnesota, another State,
or a province of Canada, and including the photograph and date of birth of the
licensed person;
(2) A valid military identification card issued by the United States Department of
Defense;
(3) A valid passport issued by the United States; or
(4) In the case of a foreign national, by a valid passport.
(f) In a prosecution under subsection (e) of this section, it is a defense for the defendant to
prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the defendant reasonably and in good faith
relied upon representations of proof of age authorized in subsection (e) of this section in
selling, bartering, furnishing, or giving the liquor.
Section 6-7. Other restrictions on purchase or consumption.
No person shall give, sell, procure or purchase liquor for any person to whom the sale of liquor is
forbidden by law.
Section 6-8. Effective area of license.
No license issued under this Chapter shall be effective beyond the building space and attached
courtyards, patios or gardens as approved by the City and as shown in the license application for
such license.
Section 6-9. Enlargement, alteration, or extension of premises.
Proposed enlargement, alteration or extension of premises previously licensed shall be reported to
the City Clerk at or before the time of application is made for a building permit for any such
change and the licensee shall also give such other information as is required by this Chapter
Section 6-10. Display of license.
Every license issued under this article shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the licensed
premises at all times.
Section 6-11. Persons eligible.
(a) No license under this Chapter may be issued to:
(1) A person under twenty-one (21) years of age;
(2) A person who has had an intoxicating liquor, 3.2 percent malt liquor, Brewery
Taproom or Wine license revoked within five (5) years of the license
application, or to any person who at the time of the violation owns any interest,
whether as a holder of more than five percent (5%) of the capital stock of a
corporation licensee, as a partner or otherwise, in the premises or in the business
conducted thereon, or to a corporation, partnership, association, enterprise,
business, or firm in which any such person is in any manner interested;
(3) A person not of good moral character and repute;
(4) A person who has a direct or indirect interest in a manufacturer, brewer, or
wholesaler;
(5) Who, if an individual, is an illegal alien;
(6) A person who would be ineligible under law or ordinance for such a license;
(7) Who directly or indirectly holds an interest in any other establishment in the
City to which a license of the same class has been issued under this Chapter.
The term "interest" as used in this Chapter includes any pecuniary interest in the
ownership, operation, management or profits of a retail liquor establishment, but
does not include bona fide loans, bona fide fixed sum rental agreements, bona
fide open accounts or other obligations held with or without security arising out
of the ordinary and regular course of business of selling or leasing merchandise,
fixtures, or supplies to such establishment; or an interest of ten percent (10%) or
less in any corporation holding a license. A person who receives money from
time to time directly or indirectly from a licensee, in the absence of a bona fide
consideration therefore and excluding bona fide gifts or donations, shall be
deemed to have a pecuniary interest in such retail license. In determining "bona
fide" the reasonable value of the goods or things received as consideration for
any payment by the licensee and all other facts reasonably tending to prove or
disprove the existence of any purposeful scheme or arrangement to evade the
prohibitions of this section shall be considered;
(8) Who, if a corporation, does not have a manager who is eligible pursuant to the
provisions of this Chapter.
(9) Who is the spouse of a person ineligible for a license under this Chapter, who in
the judgment of the City Council is not the real party in interest or beneficial
owner of the business operated or to be operated under the license.
(10) No license shall be granted, or renewed, for operation on any premises, to an
applicant who owes taxes, assessments, or other financial claims to the City
which are delinquent and unpaid. In the event an action has been commenced
pursuant to the provisions of Minn. Stat. § Chpt 278 challenging the amount or
validity of taxes, the City Council may, upon written request by the licensee,
waive strict compliance with these provisions; however, no waiver may be
granted for taxes, or any portion therefore, which remain unpaid for a period
exceeding one (1) year after becoming due.
(b) In addition, no retail license shall be issued to, and the City Council shall refuse to renew
the license of, a person who, within five (5) years of the license application, has been
convicted of a felony or a willful violation of a federal or state law or local ordinance
governing the manufacture, sale, distribution, or possession for sale or distribution of an
alcoholic beverage.
(c) Licenses in connection with premises of another. An intoxicating liquor license may not
be issued to a person in connection with the premises of another to whom a license could
not be issued under the provisions of this article. This subsection does not prevent the
granting of a license to a proper lessee because the person has leased the premises of a
minor, a noncitizen who is not a resident alien, or a person who has been convicted of a
crime other than a violation of Minn. Stat. § 340A.
Section 6-12. Premises ineligible for license.
(a) Existence of any of the following conditions render any premises ineligible for receipt of
a license under this Chapter:
(1) No license shall be granted, or renewed, for operation on any premises, to an
applicant who owes taxes, assessments or other financial claims to the City which
are delinquent and unpaid. In the event an action has been commenced pursuant
to the provisions of Minn. Stat. § Chp. 278 challenging the amount or validity of
taxes, the City Council may, upon written request by the licensee, waive strict
compliance with this provision; however, no waiver may be granted for taxes or
any portion thereof, which remain unpaid for a period exceeding one (1) year
after becoming due.
(2) No license shall be granted for a foreign corporation.
(3) No license shall be granted for any place which has a common entrance or exit
between any two establishments; except that a public concourse or public lobby
shall not be construed as a common entrance or exit.
(4) No on-sale intoxicating liquor license shall be granted for a restaurant which does
not comply in all respects with the definition of a restaurant as contained in this
Chapter, nor to any restaurant which does not have a total market value,
including land, building and equipment, of at least $250,000.00, as appraised by
the City Assessor and based upon current valuations. Brewery taprooms are
exempt from this requirement.
(5) No on-sale license shall be granted for a hotel which does not comply in all
respects with the definition of a hotel as contained in this Chapter, nor to any
hotel which does not have a total market value, including land, building and
equipment, of at least $1,000,000.00 as appraised by the City Assessor.
(6) No "on-sale" license shall be granted to restaurants, hotels, brewery
taprooms, brewpubs or cocktail rooms, unless they are located in a location
that is properly zoned for the business.
Section 6-13. Applicability of other laws.
Every license required by this Chapter shall be granted subject to the provisions of this Chapter
and of any other applicable ordinance or law.
Section 6-14. Off-sale license prohibited.
The number of off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses that shall be issued by the City shall be zero.
Section 6-15. Fees; transferability.
(a) The following provides provisional control as to license fees and related subjects:
(1) Annual license fees for liquor licenses shall be determined by the City Council
after notice and hearing on any proposed increase. Notice of a proposed increase
must be mailed to all affected licensees at least thirty (30) days before the date
set for the hearing.
(2) The annual license fee shall be paid in full on or before December 15, or at the
time of submittal of application for a new license, by cash or certified funds. All
fees shall be paid into the general fund of the City. All licenses shall expire on
December 31 of each year. Upon rejection of any application for a license, or
upon withdrawal of application before approval of the issuance by the City
Council, the license fee shall be refunded to the applicant. Once issued, refunds
shall be made only under the conditions specified by Minn. Stats. § 340A.408
and upon request of the Licensee.
(3) The fee for a license granted after the commencement of the license year shall
be prorated on a daily basis, except that there shall be no prorating of fees on
investigations, renewals or transfers.
(4) A license may be granted for a premise where the building is not ready for
occupancy, contingent upon the license being issued to the premise within
ninety (90) days of the initial license approved by the City Council. If said
license is not issued within the ninety (90) days, the applicant(s) must re-apply
for a license as a new application and pay the applicable new application fee(s).
No refunds shall be administered to an applicant when a license has been
approved by the City but not issued because the building is not ready for
occupancy and has not met the City’s requirements to obtain a Certificate of
Occupancy.
(5) No transfer of a license shall be permitted from place to place or person to
person without complying with the requirements of an original application
except as provided for by this Chapter.
(6) At the time of each original application for a license, the applicant shall pay in
full an investigating fee. Investigation fees shall be determined by the City. No
investigation fees shall be pro-rated or refunded.
(7) At any time that an additional investigation is required because of a change of
ownership or control of a corporation or because of an enlargement, alteration of
extension of premises previously licensed, the licensee shall pay an additional
investigating fee in the same amount as the original investigation fee.
(8) Where a new application is filed as a result of incorporation by an existing
licensee and the ownership control and interest in the license are unchanged, no
additional license fee will be required.
Section 6-16. Liability insurance/Proof of Financial Responsibility.
(a) No license required by this Chapter may be issued, maintained, or renewed unless the
applicant demonstrates proof of financial responsibility for liability that might be
imposed under Minn. Stats. § 340A.801. The City shall, pursuant to Minn. Stats. §
340A.409, if applicable, submit to the Commissioner the applicant's proof of financial
responsibility.
(b) The minimum requirement for proof of financial responsibility shall be a certificate that
there is in effect for the license period a liquor liability insurance policy providing at least
$300,000 of coverage, single limit or which may be satisfied in the manner provided in
Minn. Stat. § 340A.409.
(c) A liquor liability insurance policy required by this chapter must provide that the policy
may not be canceled for:
(1) Any cause, except for nonpayment of premium, by either the insured or the
insurer unless the canceling party has first given thirty (30) days' notice in
writing to the City of intent to cancel the policy; and
(2) Nonpayment of premium unless the canceling party has first given ten (10) days
notice in writing to the City of intent to cancel the policy.
Section 6-17. Council Discretion to Grant, Deny, Renew or Not Renew a License.
(a) The City Council in its sole discretion may either grant or deny the application for any license
or grant or deny a request for the transfer, modification or renewal of any license issued
under this Chapter. No applicant has a right to a license under this Ordinance.
(b) The City Council may take into consideration any nuisance call or calls relating to the
premises when considering the application, transfer, modification, or renewal of any license.
For the purpose of this section, “nuisance call” shall be defined as follows: Any activity,
conduct, or condition occurring on or related to the premises, which results in a call or report
to the Anoka Police Department or any other law enforcement agency, including, but not
limited to, called and reports related to the following:
(1) Any conduct, activity or condition alleged to constitute disorderly conduct, pursuant
to Minn. Stat. § 609.72.
(2) Any conduct, activity or condition alleged to constitute a public nuisance, pursuant to
Minn. Stat. § 609.224
(3) Any conduct, activity or condition alleged to constitute an assault pursuant to
Minn. Stat. § 609.224
(4) Any conduct, activity or condition alleged to constitute a violation of Minnesota
Statutes relating to prostitution, controlled substances, use of firearms, criminal sexual
conduct, and gambling.
(5) Any conduct, activity or condition alleged to constitute a violation of the Anoka City
Code.
(c) Any violation of any provision of the Anoka City Code, or nuisance call, regardless whether
or not a criminal charge has been brought or a criminal conviction has been obtained, may be
used by the Council, at its discretion, when considering the granting, denying, suspension
revocation, transfer, modification or renewal of a license.
Section 6-18. License Renewal.
(a) Applications for the renewal of an existing license shall be made by December 1st of each
calendar year and shall be made in such form as the City may require.
(b) License Holders of an On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor or Wine License, must submit at the
time of submittal of an application to renew their license, a statement made and signed by
a Certified Public Accountant that shows the total gross sales and the total food sales of
the business for the 12-month period immediately preceding the date for filing renewal
applications, which verifies that a minimum of 35% of the total gross sales is derived
from the sale of food for On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License Holders and On- Sale
Wine License holders, unless precluded from this requirement by State Law.
Section 6-19. Suspension or Revocation.
The City Council may suspend or revoke any liquor license for a violation of Minn. Stat. §
340A.415 and shall revoke such license for any willful violation, which under the laws of the State
is grounds for mandatory revocation, and shall revoke for failure to keep the insurance required by
this chapter. The City Council may revoke or suspend any license or impose a civil fine for any
violation of this chapter or State law relating to alcoholic beverages. The procedure to be
followed shall be as set forth in Minn. Stat. § 340A.415.
Section 6-20. Responsibility for conduct at place of business.
Every licensee under this chapter shall be responsible for the conduct at his/her place of business
and for the conditions of sobriety and order in the place of business and on the premises.
Section 6-21. Inspection of premises.
All premises where any license under this Chapter is granted shall be open to inspection by a
licensed police officer or other properly designated officer or employee of the City at any time
during which the place so licensed is open to the public for business.
Section 6-22. Inspection of records.
The business records of the licensee, including federal and state tax returns shall be available for
inspection by the City Manager, or other duly authorized representative of the City at all
reasonable times.
Section 6-23. Changes in business organization.
Changes in the corporate or association officers, corporate charter, articles of incorporation,
bylaws or partnership agreement, as the case may be, shall be submitted to the City Clerk within
thirty (30) days after such changes are made.
Section 6-24. Off-sale prohibition.
No licensee under this article shall sell liquor off-sale unless provided for by proper licensure
within this Chapter.
Section 6-25. Age of employment.
No person under eighteen (18) years shall be employed in any rooms in which liquors are sold at
retail, unless permitted by State Law
Section 6-26. Gambling & Gambling Devices prohibited.
No licensee under this Chapter or any of his/her employees shall keep, possess or operate or
permit the keeping, possession or operation of any slot machine, dice or any gambling device or
apparatus on the licensed premises, or in any room adjoining the licensed premises.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, lottery tickets may be purchased and sold within
the licensed premises as authorized by the Director of the lottery under Minn. Stat. § 349A.
Section 6-27. Display of liquor.
No licensed liquor establishment shall display liquor to the public during hours when the sale of
liquor is prohibited by this article.
Section 6-28. Ownership of equipment and fixtures.
No equipment or fixture in any licensed place shall be owned in whole or in part by any
manufacturer or distiller of intoxicating liquor except such as shall be expressly permitted by state
law. In the case of a corporation, the licensee shall notify the City Clerk when a person not listed
in the application acquires an interest which, together with that of his spouse, parent, brother,
sister or child, exceeds five percent, and shall give all information about such person as is required
of a person pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
Section 6-29. Sale of ethyl alcohol or similar products.
The retail sale for beverage purposes of ethyl alcohol or neutral spirits, or substitutes thereof,
possessing the taste, aroma and characteristics generally attributed to ethyl alcohol or neutral
spirits, as such, is hereby, prohibited. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the sale
of other products obtained by the use of ethyl alcohol or neutral spirits as defined in U.S. Treasury
Department, Bureau of Internal Revenue, Regulations 125, Article 11, Standards of Identity for
Distilled Spirits.
Section 6-30. Restaurants, hotels, and brewpubs.
A restaurant, hotel or brewpub which holds an On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor or On-Sale 3.2 Malt
Liquor License shall be conducted in such a manner that the principal part of the business is the
serving of food. The principal part of the business for a license year must be the serving of food,
which means that not less than 35% of the total gross sales in a consecutive 12-month period prior to
submittal of the license is attributed to the sale of food (for renewal licenses only).
Section 6-31. Notice Posting.
Premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages shall display the notice required under
Minn. Stat. § 340A.410, subd 4b.
Section 6-32. Original packaging and composition.
No licensee shall sell, offer for sale or keep for sale, liquors in any original package, which has
been refilled or partly refilled. No licensee shall directly or through any other person delete or in
any manner tamper with the contents of any original package so as to change its composition or
alcoholic content while in the original package. Possession on the premises by the licensee of any
intoxicating liquor in the original package differing in the composition or alcoholic content in the
liquor when received from the manufacturer or wholesaler from whom it was purchased shall be
prima facie evidence that the contents of the original package has been diluted, changed or
tampered with.
Section 6-33. Service in guest rooms and with meals at hotels.
No sale of liquor shall be made to or in guest rooms of hotels, unless the rules of such hotels
provide for the service of food in guest rooms; nor unless the sale of such liquor is made in the
manner "on-sale" are required to be made; nor unless such sale accompanies and is incident to the
regular service of meals to guests therein; nor unless the rules of such hotel and the description,
location and number of such guest rooms are fully set out in the application for a license.
Section 6-34. Prohibition for places of public gathering for entertainment or amusement.
No license issued under this Chapter shall give permission to sell liquor or wine in any theatre,
recreation hall or center, dance hall, ballpark or other place of public gathering for the purpose of
entertainment or amusement, and no such liquor shall be consumed thereon, unless provided for
by law and issued a license by the City.
Section 6-35. Interests of manufacturers, affiliates and subdiaries.
No license holder or manufacturer of liquor nor any affiliate or subsidiary company of such
manufacturer shall sell liquor except as allowed by law. An affiliate or subsidiary company shall
be one in which such manufacturer or its stockholders own a majority of the stock.
State Law reference: Interests of Brewers in retail Minn. Stat. §340A.301; prohibited transactions between brewers,
wholesalers and retailers MS 340A.508.
Section 6-36 thru 6-49. Reserved.
CHAPTER 6. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
ARTICLE II. On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor & Wine Licenses
Section 6-50. Classifications.
Licenses addressed within this Article shall be of three kinds: On-Sale Intoxicating, which
includes On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor Club License as defined by State Law, Temporary
On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor and Wine.
(a) On-sale licenses within this article shall be granted only to businesses or organizations
listed in Section 6-51 of this Article and shall permit the sale of such liquor for
consumption on the premises only.
(b) On-sale licenses within this Article may be granted to Theatres as authorized in
Minnesota Statutes 340A.404 (b).
(c) Temporary on-sale licenses may be issued as set forth in this Chapter to permit the sale of
liquor for consumption on a specific premises for a specific time period described in the
license, subject to such special terms and conditions as the City may prescribe or as
required by State Law.
(1) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter or any other ordinance to
the contrary, the City may issue a "temporary-on-sale" license to itself for the
dispensing of 3.2 percent malt liquor at City parks.
Section 6-51. Businesses and organizations allowed a license.
(a) On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses shall be issued only to:
(1) Hotels;
(2) Restaurants and brewpubs; whose principal part of business is the sale of food.
(3) Bowling centers;
(4) Clubs or congressionally chartered veterans organizations with the approval of the
Commissioner, provided that the organization has been in existence for at least
three (3) years and liquor sales will only be to members and bona fide guests.
(5) Theatres, as authorized in Minnesota Statutes 340A.404 (b).
(6) Brewery Taprooms (see Article IV).
(7) Cocktail Rooms (see Article IV).
Section 6-52. Application.
(a) Application for a license under this Article shall be made on the State Liquor Control
Division Form provided for such licenses and shall be accompanied by an application
provided by the City which provides necessary information as determined by the City and
State Law.
(b) Every application for a license shall be verified and filed with the City Clerk.
Section 6-53. Procedure for issuance.
The following procedure shall be followed in processing applications for licenses under this
Article:
(a) All applications shall be referred to such City departments as the City deems necessary
for the verification, investigation and inspection of premises and facts as set forth in the
application.
(b) After receipt of the reports and recommendations by the City staff the City Council shall
conduct a public hearing. Prior to such hearing the City Clerk shall publish in the official
newspaper a notice of public hearing setting forth the day, time and place when the
hearing will be held, the name of the applicant, the premises where the business is to be
conducted and such information as the City may determine. Such notice shall be
published at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. At the hearing opportunity shall be
given to any person to be heard for or against the granting of a license. After the hearing
the City Council may either grant or deny the license. If the license is granted, the City
Council may withhold its issuance until the applicant has qualified in all respects for the
license. If the premises to be licensed are not complete at the time that the hearing is
conducted, the City Council may grant the license but shall withhold its issuance until
the premises have been completed in accordance with the requirements of this Code and
other ordinances of the City and in accordance with the representations made by the
applicant.
(c) Each license shall be issued to the applicant only. Each license shall be issued only for
the premises described in the application.
(d) The City Clerk shall, within ten (10) days after the issuance of any license under this
article, submit to the Commissioner the full Licensee information as required by the
Commissioner, along with the effective and expiration date of the license. The City
Clerk shall also submit to the Commissioner proof that Liquor Liability/Proof of
Financial Responsibility is in place for the licensed period.
Section 6-54. Bonds.
(a) At the time of filing an application for a license under this Article, the applicant shall
file with the City Clerk one of the following:
(1) A bond in the amount of $5,000 with corporate surety;
(2) A one-time cash security deposit in the form of a cashier's check in the
amount of $5,000; or
(3) A letter of credit in the amount of $5,000.
(b) The surety bond or letter of credit required by this Article shall be subject to the
approval of the City.
(c) The surety on such bonds shall be a surety company duly licensed to do business in the
State and the letters of credit shall be a bank duly licensed to do business in the State.
The bond or letter of credit shall be approved as to form and execution by the City. All
surety bonds and letters of credit, when approved by the proper City officers, shall be
deposited with the City Clerk.
(d) All such bonds, cash security deposits, and letters of credit shall be conditioned
as follows:
(1) The licensee will obey the laws relating to the licensed business.
(2) That the licensee will pay to the City when due all taxes, license fees,
penalties and other charges provided by law.
(3) That in the event of violation of any law relating to the business for which the
license has been granted for the sale of liquor, the bond, cash security deposit
or letter of credit shall be forfeited to the City.
(e) All such bonds and letters of credit shall run concurrent with the period of the license, and
shall provide that no cancellation for any cause can be made either by the bonding
company, the applicant or the bank, without such person first giving thirty (30) days'
written notice to the City, addressed to the City Clerk, of intention to cancel the bond or
letter of credit.
Section 6-55. Hours of operation & Security.
(a) No “on-sale” of intoxicating liquor shall be made during the times when such sale is
prohibited by State law.
(b) No “on-sale” of intoxicating liquor shall be made:
(1) Between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of Monday through
Saturday, except as provided within this Article.
(2) After 1:00 a.m. on Sundays, except as provided by this Article.
(c) On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor Licensees shall evacuate the premises by.1:30 a.m. every
day, except as provided for in this Article.
(d) Sunday Sales; On-Sale.
(1) It is unlawful for any establishment, directly or indirectly, to sell or serve
intoxicating liquors on Sundays without first having obtained a Special Sunday
License from the State of Minnesota and the City of Anoka for a period of one
(1) year for a fee to be determined by City Council. A special license may be
revoked by the governing body for cause. Application for the special license
shall be made to the City in the same manner as applications for other licenses to
sell intoxicating liquor are made.
(2) Establishments to which a Sunday On-Sale License has been issued to or
hereafter may be issued to, which are hotels, restaurants, brewpubs or clubs as
defined by Minn. Stat. § 340.07 and the Anoka City Code, and which have
facilities for serving not less than thirty (30) guests at one time, may serve
intoxicating liquors during the times as prescribed by State law and in connection
with the serving of food provided that the licensed establishment is in
compliance with the Minnesota Clean Indoor Air Act.
Section 6-56. Wine licenses.
(a) The City may issue an On-Sale Wine License with the approval of the Commissioner to a
restaurant having facilities for seating at least 25 guests at one time. A wine license
permits the sale of wine of up to 24 percent (24%) alcohol by volume for consumption
with the sale of food. A wine license authorizes the sale of wine on all days of the week
unless the City Council authority restricts the license's authorization to the sale of wine on
all days except Sundays.
(b) The City Council may by ordinance authorize the holder of an On-Sale Wine License
issued pursuant to this Chapter, who is also licensed to sell 3.2 percent malt liquors at onsale,
and whose gross receipts are at least 35 percent (35%) attributable to the sale of
food, to sell Strong Beer on-sale without an additional license, unless otherwise permitted
by State Law.
(c) The City may issue an On-Sale Wine License with the approval of the Commissioner to a
licensed bed and breakfast facility. A license under this section authorizes a bed and
breakfast facility to furnish wine only to registered guests of the facility.
Section 6-57. Temporary On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor Licenses.
Temporary licenses for the on-sale of intoxicating liquor shall be issued on the following terms
and conditions, as well as those set forth in this Article:
(a) A club or charitable, religious or other nonprofit organization in existence for a least three
(3) years may apply for and be granted a temporary license for the on-sale of intoxicating
liquor in connection with a social event within the City. The license shall be issued for
not more than four (4) consecutive days, which may authorize sales on premises other
than those owned or permanently occupied by the holder of an on-sale liquor license.
(b) Applicant must have been in existence and actively engaged in programs in the City
intended to further and promote the purposes for which organized for a period of at least
eighteen (18) consecutive months prior to the date of application for such license.
(c) Application for a license under this section shall be made on the State Liquor Control
Division form provided for such licenses and shall be accompanied by application and
license fees in the amounts determined by the City Council and proof of financial
responsibility in the amount of $300,000.00 single limit coverage. All applications must
be submitted to the City Clerk at least thirty (30) days in advance of the days for which
such license is requested. Upon review of the application, the City Council shall approve
or disapprove the license in its discretion after considering input from any person heard
for or against the granting of the license, based upon consideration of the health, safety
and general welfare of the citizens of the City.
(d) Licenses issued under this section are subject to all laws and ordinances governing the
sale of liquor except Minn. Stats. § 340A.409 and those laws and ordinances which by
their nature are not applicable. Licenses under this section are not valid unless approved
by the Commissioner.
Section 6-58. License renewal.
(a) At the time of submittal of an application for a renewal of an On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor
or Wine license, that has been in effect for a full twelve (12) preceding months, the
applicant shall file with the City Clerk a statement made and signed by a Certified Public
Accountant that shows the total gross sales and the total food sales of the restaurant for
the 12-month period immediately preceding the date for filing renewal applications,
which verifies that a minimum of 35% of the total gross sales is derived from the sale of
food. Licensees that hold a “Club” license as defined by Minnesota Statutes are exempt
from this requirement. Licensees that have obtained special legislation from the State of
Minnesota are exempt from this requirement.
Section 6-59. Suspension or revocation.
The City Council may suspend or revoke an On-Sale Intoxicating, Wine or Temporary On-Sale
Intoxicating Liquor License for the violation of Minn. Stats. § 340A and shall revoke such license
for any willful violation which, under the laws of the State, is grounds for mandatory revocation,
and shall revoke for failure to keep the insurance required by this chapter. The City Council may
revoke or suspend any license or impose a civil fine for any violation of this chapter or State law
relating to alcoholic beverages. The procedure to be followed shall be as set forth in Minn. Stats. §
340A.415.
Sections 6-60 thru 6-79. Reserved.

Page 1 of 2
CHAPTER 6. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
ARTICLE III. 3.2 PercentMalt Liquor
Section 6-80. Classifications.
3.2 percent malt liquor licenses shall be of three (3) kinds: on-sale, off-sale, and
temporary on-sale.
(a) On-sale 3.2 malt liquor licenses shall be granted only to cafes, restaurants and hotels
where food is prepared and served for consumption on the premises and in bona fide
clubs, and shall permit the sale of such liquor for consumption on the premises only.
(b) Off-sale licenses shall be granted to permit the sale at wholesale or retail of such liquor in
the original packages for removal from and consumption off the premise only.
(c) Temporary on-sale licenses may be issued as set forth in this Article to permit the sale of
such liquor for consumption on a specific premises for a specific time period described in
the license, subject to such special terms and conditions as the City may prescribe or as
required by State Law.
(1) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article or any other ordinance to the
contrary, the City may issue a "temporary-on-sale" license to itself for the
dispensing of 3.2 percent malt liquor at City parks.
Section 6-81. Application.
(a) Application for a license under this Article shall be made on the State Liquor Control
Division Form provided for such licenses and shall be accompanied by an application
provided by the City which provides necessary information as determined by the City and
State Law.
(b) Every application for a license shall be verified and filed with the City Clerk.
Section 6-82. Procedure for Issuance.
The following procedure shall be followed in processing applications for licenses issued under this
Article:
(a) All applications shall be referred to such City departments as the City deems necessary
for the verification, investigation and inspection of premises and facts as set forth in the
application.
(b) Upon successful completion of verification, investigation and necessary inspections, all
new licenses shall be submitted to the City Council for approval.
(c) The City Clerk shall, within ten (10) days after the issuance of any license under this
article, submit to the Commissioner the full Licensee information as required by the
Commissioner, along with the effective and expiration date of the license. The City
Clerk shall also submit to the Commissioner proof that Liquor Liability/Proof of
Financial Responsibility is in place for the licensed period.
Section 6-83. Temporary On-Sale 3.2 Malt Liquor Licenses.
Temporary licenses for the on-sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor shall be issued on the following
terms and conditions, as well as those set forth in this Article:
(a) A club or charitable, religious or other nonprofit organization in existence for a least three
(3) years may apply for and be granted a temporary license for the on-sale of 3.2 malt
Page 2 of 2
liquor in connection with a social event within the City. The license shall be issued for not
more than four (4) consecutive days, which may authorize sales on premises other than
those owned or permanently occupied by the holder of an on-sale liquor license.
(b) Applicant must have been in existence and actively engaged in programs in the City
intended to further and promote the purposes for which organized for a period of at least
eighteen (18) consecutive months prior to the date of application for such license.
(c) Application for a license under this section shall be made on the State Liquor Control
Division form provided for such licenses and shall be accompanied by application and
license fees in the amounts determined by the City Council and proof of financial
responsibility in the amount of $300,000.00 single limit coverage. All applications must
be submitted to the City Clerk at least thirty (30) days in advance of the days for which
such license is requested. Upon review of the application, the City Council shall approve
or disapprove the license in its discretion after considering input from any person heard
for or against the granting of the license, based upon consideration of the health, safety
and general welfare of the citizens of the City.
(d) Licenses issued under this section are subject to all laws and ordinances governing the
sale of liquor except Minn. Stats. § 340A.409 and those laws and ordinances which by
their nature are not applicable. Licenses under this section are not valid unless approved
by the Commissioner.
Section 6-84. Suspension or revocation.
The City Council may suspend or revoke an On-Sale 3.2% Malt Liquor, Off-Sale 3.2% Malt Liquor or
Temporary On-Sale 3.2% Malt Liquor License for the violation of Minn. Stats. § 340A and shall
revoke such license for any willful violation which, under the laws of the State, is grounds for
mandatory revocation, and shall revoke for failure to keep the insurance required by this chapter.
The City Council may revoke or suspend any license or impose a civil fine for any violation of this
chapter or State law relating to alcoholic beverages. The procedure to be followed shall be as set
forth in Minn. Stats. §
340A.415.
Sections 6.85 thru 6.89. Reserved.
Page 1 of 2
CHAPTER 6. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
ARTICLE IV. Brewery/Taproom License and Micro Distillery Cocktail Room License
Section 6-90. Classification(s).
A Brewer licensed under Minn. Stat. § Section 340A.301 may be issued an On-Sale Brewery
Taproom License for the “on-sale” of malt liquor produced on the licensed premises which may
also be sold to other bars, restaurants and off-sale liquor stores if permitted by State Law and issued
a license by the Minnesota Department of Public Safety, Alcohol & Gambling Enforcement
Division, and a Micro Distillery licensed under Minn. Stat. § 340A.301 may be issued an On-Sale
Cocktail Room License for the “on-sale” of distilled spirits produced on the licensed premises,
which may also be sold to other bars, restaurants and off-sale liquor stores if permitted by State Law
and issued a license by the Minnesota Department of Public Safety, Alcohol & Gambling
Enforcement Division, subject to the following conditions:
(a) The on-sale of malt liquor and distilled spirits may only be made during the days and
hours that “on-sale” of liquor may be made, as prescribed by State Law or within this
Chapter.
(b) A Brewer may only hold one (1) Brewery Taproom License within the City.
(c) A Mirco Distiller may hold only one (1) Micro Distillery Cocktail Room License within the
City.
(d) The only beveraged alcohol that may be sold or consumed on the premises of a licensed
Brewery Taproom or Cocktail Room will be the malt liquor or distilled spirits produced by
the Brewer or Micro Distiller upon the Brewery Taproom or Cocktail Room Premises.
(e) The holder of a Brewery Taproom License is permitted by this Article to sell Growlers,
as defined in Article I of this Chapter, during the times prescribed by State Law..
A Brewery Taproom License may not be issued to a Brewer if the Brewer seeking the license, or
any person having an economic interest in the Brewer seeking the license or exercising control
over the Brewer seeking the license, is a Brewer that brews or produces more than 250,000
barrels of malt liquor annually or a winery that produces more than 250,000 gallons of wine
annually, as defined and prescribed by Minn. Stat. § 340.301.
A Cocktail Room License may not be issued to a Micro Distillery if the Micro Distiller seeking
the license, or any person having an economic interest in the Micro Distillery seeking the license
or exercising control over the Micro Distillery seeking the license, is a Micro Distiller that
produces more than 40,000 proof gallons of premium, distilled spirits in a calendar year.
Section 6-91. Application.
(a) Application for a license under this Article shall be made on the application provided by
the City which provides necessary information as determined by the City and State Law.
(b) Every application for a license shall be verified and filed with the City Clerk.
Section 6-92. Procedure for Issuance.
The following procedure shall be followed in processing applications for licenses issued under this
Article:
(a) All applications shall be referred to such City departments as the City deems necessary
for the verification, investigation and inspection of premises and facts as set forth in the
Page 2 of 2
application.
(b) Upon successful completion of verification, investigation and necessary inspections, all
new licenses shall be submitted to the City Council for approval.
(c) Licenses issued under this article are subject to all laws and ordinances governing the sale
of liquor except Minn. Stats. § 340A.409 and those laws and ordinances which by their
nature are not applicable.
Section 6-93. Suspension or revocation.
The City Council may suspend or revoke a Brewery Taproom License or Cocktail Room License for
any violation of Minn. Stats. § 340A and shall revoke such license for any willful violation which,
under the laws of the State, is grounds for mandatory revocation, and shall revoke for failure to
keep the insurance required by this chapter. The City Council may revoke or suspend any license
or impose a civil fine for any violation of this chapter or State law relating to alcoholic beverages.
The procedure to be followed shall be as set forth in Minn. Stats. § 340A.415.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10; ARTICLE I
1 of 4
CHAPTER 10. ANIMALS
ARTICLE I. In General
----------
State law references--General authority relative to animals, Minn. Stats. §§ 410.33, 412.221, subd. 21;
animal health, Minn. Stats. ch. 35; stray animals and companion animals, Minn. Stats. ch. 346; dogs and cats, Minn.
Stats. ch. 347; cruelty to animals, Minn. Stats. § 343.20 et seq.
----------
Section 10-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms and definitions apply:
Animal. “Animal” shall mean any mammal, reptile, amphibian, fish, bird, or other
member commonly accepted as part of the animal kingdom. Animals shall be classified
as follows:
Domestic Animal. Animals commonly accepted as domesticated household pets. Unless
otherwise defined, such animals shall include dogs, cats, caged birds, gerbils, hamsters,
guinea pigs, domesticated rabbits, fish, non-poisonous, non-venomous and nonconstricting
reptiles or amphibians, and other similar animals.
Farm Animal. Animals commonly associated with a farm or performing work in an
agricultural setting. Unless otherwise defined, such animals shall include members of the
equestrian family (horses, mules), bovine family (cows, bulls), sheep, poultry (chickens,
turkeys), fowl (ducks, geese), swine (including Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs), goats, and
other animals associated with a farm.
Non Domestic Animal. Means those animals commonly considered to be naturally wild
and not naturally trained or domesticated, or which are commonly considered inherently
dangerous to the health, safety, and welfare of people. Unless otherwise defined, such
animals shall include:
(a) Any member of the large cat family (family felidae) including lions, tigers,
cougars, bobcats, leopards, and jaguars, but excluding commonly accepted
domesticated house cats.
(b) Any naturally wild member of the canine family (family canidae) including
wolves, foxes, coyotes, dingoes, and jackals, but excluding commonly accepted
domesticated dogs.
(c) Any crossbreeds such as the crossbreed between a wolf and a dog, unless the
crossbreed is commonly accepted as a domesticated house pet.
(d) Any member or relative of the rodent family including any skunk (whether or
not descented), raccoon, squirrel, or ferret, but excluding those members
otherwise defined or commonly accepted as domesticated pets.
(e) Any poisonous, venomous, constricting, or inherently dangerous member of the
reptile or amphibian families including rattlesnakes, boa constrictors, pit vipers,
crocodiles and alligators.
(f) Any other animal which is not explicitly listed above but which can be
reasonably defined by the terms of this subpart, including by not limited to
bears, deer, monkeys, and game fish.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10; ARTICLE I
2 of 4
Section 10-2. Animals Prohibited.
Unless otherwise noted in this chapter, no person shall keep, harbor, or maintain care
custody, or control, over any non-domesticated or farm animal with the City limits.
Section 10-3. Running at large; disposal of feces; barking dogs.
(a) Any domestic animal within the City shall not be permitted by the owner to run
at large within the City. For purposes of this section the term "at large" means
any animal not restrained by chain or leash not exceeding eight feet, except:
(1) Police dogs;
(2) Animals restrained in a vehicle, fenced-in area, or building;
(3) Animals on the premises of the owner and under the control of the
owner or a member of his family.
(b) Feces of any domestic animal shall be properly disposed of by the owner and
shall be promptly removed from any public property or any private property not
owned by the owner of the animal.
(c) No person shall own, keep, harbor, or be in physical control of a dog or cat that
is a nuisance. No person shall permit a dog or cat to be a nuisance. It shall be a
nuisance for any animal when unprovoked to: bite, attack or endanger the safety
of humans or domestic animals; to run at large; to habitually or frequently bark
or cry; to frequent school grounds, parks or public beaches when unrestrained;
to chase vehicles; to molest or annoy any person if such person is not on the
property of the owner or custodian of the animal; to molest, defile, or destroy
any property, public or private; or to leave excrement on any property, public or
private.
(d) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the ownership or use of seeing
eye dogs by blind persons, dogs when used in police activities by the city, or
tracking dogs when used by or with the permission of the city.
(e) It is a petty misdemeanor to violate the provisions of this section. It is a
misdemeanor to violate the provisions of this section more than once within any
12-month period.
State law reference--Livestock at large, Minn. Stats. § 346.16 et seq.
Section 10-4. Rabies quarantine.
(a) Whenever a domestic animal such as a dog, cat or other domestic animal
capable of transmitting rabies, bites a person causing a puncture, laceration,
abrasion or similar type wound or break in the skin or any time the saliva of
such animal comes into contact with a puncture, laceration, abrasion or similar
type wound or break in the skin of a person, the animal shall be placed under
quarantine for a ten day period from the date of the bite or saliva exposure.
(b) An animal under quarantine may be kept on the premises of the owner under the
following conditions:
(1) The animal must be kept confined in a building or other suitable
structure or enclosure from which the animal cannot escape, and which
prohibits contact with other animals or persons other than immediate
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10; ARTICLE I
3 of 4
family members. An outside kennel or fenced yard is not a suitable
structure or enclosure for quarantine purposes.
(2) The animal may not be removed or released from the building or
structure except the animal may be taken to a veterinary hospital to
receive emergency veterinary care or the animal may be taken outside
(limited to the premises of the owner) to urinate and defecate, provided
the animal is securely leashed and under the immediate supervision of a
responsible person. When outside the animal shall not be allowed to
come into contact with any animals or persons other than immediate
family members. When an animal has finished, it shall be immediately
returned to the building where it is being confined for the quarantine
period.
(3) The animal may not be vaccinated against rabies virus during the
quarantine period.
(4) The animal must be made available to the city police department or
state health department for inspection at reasonable times during the
quarantine period.
(5) The animal may not be authorized or otherwise killed except upon
order of the state health department or the city police department.
(6) If the animal becomes sick or dies during the quarantine period, the city
police department shall be notified immediately. The carcass of any
animal that dies during the quarantine period shall be immediately
turned over to the city police department or state health department.
(c) If the owner fails to comply with any of the above conditions, the animal shall
be immediately impounded for the duration of the quarantine period at the city
dog pound at the expense of the owner. The owner of an animal may impound
the animal at the city dog pound for the quarantine period if he chooses, at his
own expense.
State law reference--Rabies control, Minn. Stats. § 35.255 et seq.
Sections 10-5 thru 10-30. Reserved.
Section 10-31. Interference with officers.
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to break open the pound or attempt to do
so or to take or let out any animal from the pound or to take or attempt to take from any
officer any animal taken up by him in compliance with this article or in any manner to
interfere with or hinder such officer in the discharge of his duties under this article.
Section 10-32 thru 10-50. Reserved.
Section 10-51. City pound; pound keeper.
A city pound is hereby established for the purpose of enforcing this chapter. The Chief of
Police shall be pound keeper.
Section 10-52. Impoundment.
The police officers of the city shall impound any animal prohibited by section 10-1, any
animal running at large, or any animal not licensed as required by law.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10; ARTICLE I
4 of 4
Section 10-53. Release.
Upon impounding any animal, reasonable effort shall be made to notify the owner and
the owner may obtain the animal from the pound by payment of the impounding fee as
set from time to time by the city council. If a dog or cat has not been licensed, it may be
released to its owner on condition that the owner furnishes proof of obtaining a license
within five days after release. Failure to furnish such proof within five days shall
constitute a violation of this Code.
Section 10-54. Disposition of unclaimed animals.
Any animal which is not claimed within five days impoundment may be sold or
painlessly killed and disposed of at the direction of the pound keeper.
State law reference--Notification of owners of impounded animals,
Minn. Stats. § 346.55.
Section 10-55. Destruction of animals.
The pound master and all police officers of this city are authorized to kill any animal
subject to impoundment that cannot be safely taken up and impounded.
Sections 10-56 thru 10-80. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10; ARTICLE II
1 of 4
CHAPTER 10. ANIMALS
ARTICLE II. Dogs and Cats
----------
*State law reference--Dogs and cats, Minn. Stats. ch. 347.
----------
Section 10-81. Restriction on number; exception.
(a) No dog or cat shall be kept within the city limits unless a license therefore shall
first be secured. No person shall keep more than three cats, or a mixture of dogs
and cats, not to exceed three pets in total, at one residence within the city, except
that a fresh litter of pups or kittens may be kept for a period of three months.
Annual licenses shall be issued by the city clerk upon payment of the fee
determined by council resolution.
(b) Police dogs owned by and working for the City of Anoka Police Department
shall be exempt from the license fees. All health records regarding such police
dogs shall be maintained by the police department.
Section 10-82. Inoculation against rabies.
The owner of any dog or cat shall have the dog or cat inoculated against rabies from time
to time so as to maintain continuous protection against rabies and shall possess proof of
such inoculation and period of effectiveness from a licensed veterinarian. All inoculations
shall be effective for at least one year.
State law reference--Rabies control, Minn. Stats. § 35.255 et seq.
Sections 10-83 thru 10-100. Reserved.
Section 10-101. License Required; exemption for police dogs.
(a) No dog or cat shall be kept within the city limits unless a license therefore shall
first be secured. Annual licenses shall be issued by the city clerk upon payment
of the fee determined by the council.
(b) Police dogs owned by and working for the city police department shall be
exempt from the license fees. All health records regarding such police dogs shall
be maintained by the police department.
Section 10-102. Inoculation certificate prerequisite to issuance.
No license shall be issued for any dog or cat unless a certificate signed by a licensed
veterinarian is filed with the application showing that the animal described in the
application has been inoculated against rabies and that the inoculation is effective for at
least one year from the date of application.
Section 10-103. Expiration date.
Licenses shall expire on January 1 next following their issuance.
Section 10-104. Fees.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10; ARTICLE II
2 of 4
It shall be the duty of every owner of a dog or cat to pay the license fee imposed in this
code to the city clerk on or before January 1 in each year, or immediately upon acquiring
ownership or possession of any unlicensed dog or cat or within five days after bringing
any unlicensed dog or cat into the city.
Section 10-105. Issuance of tags.
Upon the payment of the license fee, the clerk shall execute a receipt in duplicate. The
clerk shall deliver the original receipt to the person who pays the fee, and retain the
duplicate in the clerk's office. The clerk shall also procure a sufficient number of suitable
tags, the shape of which shall be different for each license year, and shall deliver one
appropriate tag to the person paying the license fee.
Section 10-106. Affixing tags.
The owner shall cause the dog or cat tag to be affixed by a permanent fastening to the
collar of the dog or cat so licensed, in such manner that the tag may be easily seen by the
officers of the city. The owner shall see that the tag is constantly worn by such dog or cat,
and any dog or cat found within the city without tag shall be deemed to be unlicensed.
Section 10-107. Duplicate tags.
In case any dog or cat tag is lost a duplicate may be issued by the clerk upon the
presenting of a receipt showing the payment of the license fee for the current year. A fee
established by the city council shall be paid for each such duplicate tag.
Section 10-108. Counterfeiting, unauthorized removing, etc., of dog or cat tags.
It shall be unlawful to counterfeit or attempt to counterfeit the tags provided for in this
division.
Section 10-109. Tags not transferable.
Dog and cat tags are not transferable, and no refunds shall be made on any dog or cat
license.
Section 10-110 Dangerous Dogs.
The provisions of Minnesota Statutes Sections 347.50 through 347.56 are hereby adopted
and incorporated by reference.
Section 10-111. Designation of dangerous dogs.
The Chief of Police or a designee may declare an animal a "dangerous dog" as defined in
Minnesota Statutes Section 347.50, subd. 2. The Chief of Police or designee shall notify
the animal's owner in writing of the designation and provide information to the owner
pertaining to the regulation of dangerous dogs. The owner of a "dangerous dog" must
comply with all provisions of Minnesota Statutes Section 347.50 through 347.56.
Section 10-112. Regulation of potentially dangerous dogs.
(a) The Chief of Police or designee may declare an animal to be a "potentially
dangerous dog" if one of the following criteria is met:
(1) The animal, without provocation, attacks or bites a person or a
domestic animal on public or private property;
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10; ARTICLE II
3 of 4
(2) The animal, without provocation, chases or approaches a person,
including a person on a bicycle, upon the street, sidewalk or any public
or private property, other than the dog owner’s property in an apparent
attitude of attack or in a menacing fashion;
(3) The animal has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack
unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threaten the safety of any
person or domestic animal; or
(4) The animal is owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of
fighting or is trained for fighting.
(b) The Chief of Police or designee shall notify the animal's owner in writing of the
designation and provide information pertaining to the regulation of potentially
dangerous dogs and shall provide the owner a copy of Minnesota Statutes
Section 347.50 through 347.56 and this Code Section.
(c) The owner of a potentially dangerous dog must have a microchip implanted in
the dog for identification pursuant to Minnesota Statutes § 347.515.
(d) Proof in the form of a receipt of the implanted microchip must be provided to
the Chief of Police or designee within 14 days of notification. The name of the
microchip manufacturer and identification number must also be provided.
(e) The owner of the potentially dangerous dog shall keep the dog, while on the
owner's property, in a proper enclosure as defined in Minnesota Statutes Section
347.50, subd. 4, or on a substantial leash. For the purpose of the section, the
term "substantial leash" means a leash that properly and completely restrains the
potentially dangerous dog's movement.
(f) The owner of the potentially dangerous dog shall muzzle and restrain the dog on
a substantial leash not to extend more than six feet whenever off of the owners
property. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will prevent the dog from
biting any person or animal but that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere
with its vision or respiration; similar to a basket-type muzzle.
(g) The owner of a potentially dangerous dog must post a clearly visible purchased
"Beware of the Dog" sign. The sign must be a least ten inches by fourteen
inches in dimension.
(h) The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall notify the Anoka Police
Department in writing of the death, sale or transfer of the dog within fourteen
(14) days and inform the Police Department of the circumstances of the dog's
death and disposition, or the complete name, address and telephone number of
the person to whom the dog has been transferred.
(i) A person who owns a potentially dangerous dog and who resides on a rental
property must disclose to the property owner that a potentially dangerous dog
will reside on the property.
(j) Beginning six months after a dog is designated a "potentially dangerous dog;" an
owner may request annually that the Chief of Police or designee review the
designation. The owner must provide evidence that the dog's behavior has
changed due the dog's age, neutering, environment, completion of obedience
training that includes modification of aggressive behavior, or other factors. If
the Chief of Police or designee finds sufficient evidence that the dog's behavior
has changed, the designation may be rescinded.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10; ARTICLE II
4 of 4
(k) The City of Anoka will charge the owner of a potentially dangerous dog an
annual fee, as established in the Master Fee Schedule, in addition to any other
fees required to license a dog in the City.
Section 10-113. Appeal by Owner.
(a) The owner of a dog designated as a "dangerous dog" or a "potentially dangerous
dog" may appeal the designation by delivering a written notice of appeal to the
Chief of Police or designee within seven (7) days after receipt of the notice of
designation. The notice of appeal must identify the name, address and a
telephone number of the owner and must state the basis for the appeal. Upon
receipt of a valid notice of appeal, a hearing shall be held before a city hearing
examiner, who shall not be a member of the city staff. The hearing shall be
conducted pursuant to the Minnesota Rules of Administrative Hearings. The
hearing examiner shall receive evidence whether the dog is "dangerous" or
"potentially dangerous." Rules of evidence need not be strictly followed and the
records of an animal control officer or law enforcement officer shall be
considered without further foundation. After considering all evidence
submitted, the hearing examiner shall issue a written order setting forth whether
the animal is "dangerous" or "potentially dangerous." The order shall be made
within five business days after the hearing and shall be served by mail or
personal service upon the owner. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be
final, but is appealable to a court of law according to Minnesota Statutes Section
484.01, subd. 1.
(b) The hearing officer shall be appointed by the City Manager or his designee. The
hearing officer shall receive compensation in an amount to be determined by the
City Council. The decision of the hearing officer is effective the date it is
issued, unless a later date is stated in the decision.
Section 10-114. Violations.
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this Article may be
charged with a petty misdemeanor or a misdemeanor.
Sections 10-115 thru 10-130. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10; ARTICLE III
1 of 1
CHAPTER 10. ANIMALS
ARTICLE III. Non-Domesticated Animals and Farm Animals Prohibited.
Section 10-131. Animals prohibited.
Unless otherwise noted in this Chapter, no person shall keep, harbor, or maintain care
custody, or control over any non-domesticated or farm animal within City Limits.
Section 10-132. Exceptions to prohibition; permit required.
(a) Any person desiring to keep an animal prohibited by this ordinance may apply
for a temporary wild animal permit from the city council. Such permit may be
issued for a period not to exceed 30 days and shall specify conditions under
which such animals shall be kept. No such permit shall be issued unless such
prohibited animal is brought into the town for entertainment, exhibition or show
purposes only, or by persons keeping animals for a public zoo as volunteers,
docents or otherwise. A public zoo or other institution engaged in a permanent
display of animals, any bona fide research institution or veterinary hospital may
be issued a permanent wild animal permit provided applicable zoning
requirements are met.
(b) Nonpoisonous snakes or snakes not prohibited by this ordinance, birds kept
indoors, hamsters, mice, rabbits lizards and similar small animals capable of
being kept in cages continuously are also exempt and do not require a permit.
(c) Handicapped persons may keep monkeys trained as personal helpers by wild
animal permit subject to annual review.
(d) Before issuance of any temporary or permanent wild animal permit, the
applicant shall provide the city with proof of insurance, including public liability
insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000.00. The insurance shall provide
coverage for liability resulting from the ownership or possession of the specific
animal or animals being permitted.
Section 10-133. Non-Domesticated Animals and Farm Animals; At Large.
Any non-domesticated or farm animal kept in violation of this ordinance may be
impounded by the City unless such impounded animal is reclaimed and removed from the
City or issued a permit to allow it to remain in the City or the owner petitions the district
court for a determination that the animal is exempt from the provisions of this ordinance.
Such an impounded animal may be destroyed, sold or otherwise disposed of five (5) days
following notice to the owner of the animal's impoundment and the provisions of this
article.
Sections 10-134 thru 10-150. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
1 of2
CHAPTER 10, ARTICLE IV
CHAPTER 10. ANIMALS
ARTICLE IV. Poultry and Fowl
Section 10-151. Poultry and Fowl Permitted.
A person may keep, harbor, or maintain care custody, or control over no more 1han four
(4) chickens, ducks, geese or other fowl or poultry or combination of defined by this
article within City limits. No roosters shall be permitted.
Section 10-152.
Section 10-153.
Facilities .
(a) All poultry and fowl must be contained with the following restrictions:
(1) Housing facilities and grounds shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition, and in good repair. Flies, rodents and noxious odors
shall be controlled. Facilities shall be kept free of fecal matter and
collected fecal material shall be properly stored and disposed.
(2) Facilities shall remain fully enclosed to prevent outside animals and
migratory birds from entering the holding facility.
(3) Stored fecal mater shall not be allowed to accumulate on the property.
Stored fecal matter shall be removed at least once a week.
(4) Construction and maintenance of the holding facilities shall comply
with all zoning codes in Chapter 74 and State building codes. Fencing
shall be consistent with regulations of Chapter 74. A holding structure
shall be defmed as an accessory building in the zoning code.
Maintenance of Fowl and Poultry.
(a) Fowl not to be at large. No person owning or keeping chickens, ducks, geese, or
other fowl or poultry may permit the same to run at large or enter upon the
premises of another without permission, nor may any such fowl or poultry be
kept, raised or permitted to go on any street, park, Jake, or public ponding area.
(b) Confinement of fowl and poultry. Fowl and poultry must be confmed to the
holding facility except for short periods of time of exercise during which time
they must abide to Section 10-153 (a).
(c) Injury or annoyance to others. No fowl or poultry may be kept or raised in a
manner as to cause injury or annoyance to persons or other animals on other
property in the vicinity by reason of noise, odor, or filth.
(d) Impounding fowl or poultry. Any fowl or poultry at large in violation of this
section may be impounded by the City, and after being impounded for five (5)
business days or more without being reclaimed by the owner, may be humanly
euthanized or sold. A person reclaiming any impounded fowl or poultry shall
pay the cost of impounding and keeping the same.
(e) Feeding Area. Fowl and poultry shall be fed within the confines of the holding
facility. Feeding areas must be fully enclosed to prevent access from outside
animals and migratory birds.
(f) Manner of Feeding. Feeding fowl or poultry in a manner that results in the
attraction of animals that cause property damage, a threat to public health or
2 of2
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 10; ARTICLE IV
Section 10-154
animal health due to the number or type of animals attracted by excessive
amounts of feed or feeders being placed, or the byproducts of the feed
accumulating, are deemed a public nuisance and are prohibited.
Special Removal
(a) The City reserves the right to eliminate all fowl and poultry within City limits if
a pandemic regarding fowl and poultry is declared.
Sections 10-155 thru 10-170. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14; ARTICLE I
1 of 1
CHAPTER 14. LICENSING; AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT
ARTICLE I. In General
Sections 14-1 thru 14-30. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14; ARTICLE II
1 of 4
CHAPTER 14. LICENSING; AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT
ARTICLE II. Arcades and Pool Halls
Section 14-31. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Arcade. Means any business establishment, building, structure or tract of land which devotes
30 percent or more of its floor space to the public used of the following amusement or any
combination of any of the following amusements:
(a) Foosball, air hockey or pigeon hole tables;
(b) Pinball machines;
(c) Shooting gallery machines;
(d) Any electric or electronic device or game patterned after table tennis, hockey, and similar
games, including electric rifle or gun ranges;
(e) Any mechanical or electrical device which is designed to be played by a contestant or
contestants and upon which the contestants receive a score or rating based upon their
performance.
The calculation of floor space shall include the area occupied by or reserved for persons who use
or are waiting to use the amusements.
Section 14-32 thru 14-50. Reserved.
Sec. 14-51. License Required.
No person shall operate an arcade or pool hall without first paying a license fee and obtaining and
having a current license as herein provided. The license required under this section shall be in
addition to any license or licenses required to be obtained under any other provision of this Code.
Sec. 14-52. Application.
Any person desiring to operate an arcade or pool hall or to renew his license to conduct such
activity shall file with the City Clerk an application on forms provided by the City Clerk for that
purpose. The application form shall contain the following, together with any other information
which the City Manager may require:
(a) Full legal name, date of birth and address of applicant;
(b) Address of the proposed arcade or pool hall, and a diagram of the proposed floor plan of
the premises;
(c) The full legal name, date of birth, and address of all persons owning or having an interest
in the licensed premises and in the proposed business. In the case of a corporation, this
shall include the full legal names, dates of birth, and addresses of the officers and
directors of the corporation and all shareholders who own alone or in conjunction with
their spouse or children more than ten percent of the issued share of the corporate stock;
(d) If the licensed business is owned by a corporation, a copy of the certificate of
incorporation, articles of incorporation and bylaws of the corporation;
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14; ARTICLE II
2 of 4
(e) The full legal name, date of birth and address of the manager or managers who will
supervise the licensed activity;
(f) Whether any of the persons listed in subsections (1), (3) or (5) of this section have been
engaged in the business of operating an arcade or pool hall in the last five years;
(g) Whether any of the persons listed in subsections (1), (3) or (5) of this section have been
convicted of a crime or have had an application for an arcade or pool hall license denied,
revoked or suspended within the last five years;
(h) The applicant's plan of security for the licensed premises.
Section 14-53. License fee.
The license fee shall be for the calendar year and must accompany the license application. The
license fee shall be set by the Council which may set a higher fee for the first year than for license
renewals.
Section 14-54. Bond.
(a) At the time of filing an application for an arcade license under this section, the applicant
shall file a bond with a corporate surety with the City Clerk in the amount of $5,000.00.
Alternatively, the applicant may file a cash bond in the same amount. All such bonds
shall be kept in full force and effect throughout the license period and shall be
conditioned as follows:
(1) The licensee shall obey the laws relating to the licensed business;
(2) The licensee shall pay to the city when due all taxes, license fees, penalties and
other charges provided by law;
(3) In the event of violation of any law relating to the business for which the license
has been granted, the bond shall be forfeited to the city.
Section 14-55. Investigation and recommendation.
(a) All applications for licenses shall be referred to the Chief of Police and to such other
persons on the city staff as the City Manager shall deem necessary for investigation and
recommendation. The persons to whom an application has been referred shall make their
report and recommendations in writing.
(b) Upon receipt of the written reports and recommendations, the City Manager shall cause
to be published in the official newspaper, at least ten days in advance, a notice of public
hearing to be held by the City Council setting forth the day, time and place when the
hearing will be held, the name of the applicant and the location where the business is to
be conducted.
(c) The application, together with the City Manager's recommendation, shall be submitted to
the City Council at the hearing. After the hearing, the Council may grant or deny the
license. In granting the license, the Council may impose special conditions as it deems
such conditions to be necessary because of particular circumstances related to the
application.
Section 14-56. Ineligibility.
(a) Existence of any of the following conditions shall render the applicant ineligible for a
license:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14; ARTICLE II
3 of 4
(1) If the applicant or manager of the licensed business is:
a. Under 18 years of age;
b. An alien, a non-U.S. Citizen;
c. A foreign corporation.
(2) If the applicant, manager or persons owning the licensed activity:
a. Is not a person of good moral character and repute; and/or
b. Has been convicted of an offense which relates to the conduct of the
licensed business.
(3) If the applicant has operated a similar business elsewhere which operation did
not substantially comply with the provisions of this section relating to the
manner in which the business is conducted;
(4) If the applicant has been denied a license to conduct a like or similar activity or
has had such license suspended, revoked or canceled.
Section 14-57. Conditions of License.
(a) Issuance and retention of licenses shall be subject to each of the following conditions:
(1) Only premises which are located in a zoning district where the licensed business
is authorized in the City may be licensed;
(2) No premises may be licensed unless sufficient visibility exists from outside the
entrance to the premises for a person of average stature to visually survey the
entire premises and all possible locations of patrons therein;
(3) Arcades shall prohibit the consumption of alcoholic beverages, whether
classified as intoxicating or non-intoxicating, or the use of any controlled
substance upon any part of the licenses premises;
(4) Arcades shall not be open for business prior to 10:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.
Pool halls shall not be open for business between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
9:00 a.m.;
(5) No person under the age of 14 years shall be permitted to enter or remain upon
any part of the licensed premises unless accompanied by his parent or legal
guardian;
(6) Adequate off-street parking for automobiles must be provided in compliance
with the current Code requirements;
(7) The licensed premises shall fully comply with all applicable state and local
regulations dealing with health, zoning and building requirements;
(8) The licensee shall be responsible for maintaining order on all parts of the
licensed premises;
(9) Only amusements with a current valid city license sticker attached may be
offered for use or kept on the licensed premises;
(10) No wagering or betting for a consideration or any other gambling shall be
permitted on the licenses premises;
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14; ARTICLE II
4 of 4
(11) The licensed activity shall be conducted in such a manner and located in such a
place so as not to be likely to result in injury or damage to persons or property in
the neighborhood or injurious, annoying or disruptive to patrons of other
businesses located in the area;
(12) The applicant or manager or assistant manager designated in the license
application shall be present on the premises during all times the premises are
open;
(13) A uniformed security officer shall be present on arcade premises during all times
that the premises are open;
(14) No more than ten amusement devices shall be allowed on any one premises
licensed as an arcade.
Section 14-58. Suspension or revocation of license.
(a) The license may be revoked or suspended in accordance with this article whenever the
licensee, its owner, manager, or any of its employees or agents have engaged in any of
the following conduct:
(1) Fraud, deception or misrepresentation in connection with the securing of a
license;
(2) Conduct inimical to the interests of public health, safety and welfare;
(3) Conduct involving moral turpitude;
(4) Conviction of an offense involving moral turpitude by any court of competent
jurisdiction;
(5) Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this section or engaging in
conduct which would be grounds for denial of an initial application for
licensure.
Section 14-59 thru 14-80. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14; ARTICE III; RESERVED
1 of 1
CHAPTER 14. ARTICLE III. RESERVED
Sections 14-81 thru 14-130. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14; ARTICLE IV
1 of 2
CHAPTER 14. LICENSING; AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT
ARTICLE IV. Entertainment Devices
Section 14-131. Definition.
The term “entertainment device,” as used in this article shall include foosball, air hockey,
or pigeon hole tables, pinball machines, shooting gallery machines, any electric or
electronic device or game patterned after table tennis, hockey, and similar games,
including electric rifle or gun ranges, and any other mechanical or electrical device which
is designed to be played by a contestant or contestants and upon which the contestants
receive a score or rating based upon their performance.
Sections 14-132 thru 14-150. Reserved.
Section 14-151. License Required; exception.
No person shall maintain, keep or sell, within the City, an entertainment device without a
license therefore from the City. This section shall not apply to electronic devices held or
kept in storage or for sale, and which are not actually in use or displayed for use, or to
electronic devices located in a private dwelling and used exclusively for private
entertainment.
Section 14-152. Entertainment devices; license approval; annual license fee; location fee.
(a) Licenses for entertainment devices shall be issued for an annual period from
January 1 through December 31 for each year, provided, however that the initial
license fee for each applicant shall be prorated as of the date of the application.
The application for a license shall be submitted for approval to the City manager
and, if approved, the City shall thereafter issue the license upon payment of
appropriate fees. The applicable fees shall be:
(1) An annual fee for each business location regardless of the number of
machines in the amount established by the City council;
(2) An annual license fee for any of each machine.
State law reference--Limitation on license fee on amusement machines,
Minn. Stats. § 449.15.
Section 14-153. Contents; display.
Each license shall accurately describe the entertainment device, shall show the name of
the owner, address where such machine is located, the license fee and the period for
which a license is granted, such license shall at all times be conspicuously displayed
where such entertainment device is operated.
Section 14-154. Conditions for licensure.
(a) Issuance and retention of licenses shall be subject to each of the following
conditions:
(1) All entertainment devices shall be located within the confines of the
licensee's primary business premises but shall not be located in
entryways, hallways, or in areas which are not directly supervised by
the licensee nor shall they be located in any area separated from the
licensee's principal business activity;
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14; ARTICLE IV
2 of 2
(2) The licensee shall be responsible for maintaining order on all parts of
the premises;
(3) No wagering or betting for consideration or any other gambling shall be
permitted on the premises;
(4) All entertainment devices shall be located and their use shall be
supervised in such a manner that personal injury or property damage is
not likely to result from the location or use of the devices;
(5) All entertainment devices shall be located and their use supervised such
that the location and use of the devices does not annoy or disrupt
persons in the neighborhood or patrons of other businesses located in
the area;
(6) No more than eight amusement devices shall be allowed on any onebusiness
premises.
Section 14-155. Revocation.
The license provided in this article may be revoked by the City Council for any violation
of any provision of this article, but only after reasonable notice and an opportunity to be
heard.
Sections 14-156 thru 14-180. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14; ARTICLE V
1 of 4
CHAPTER 14. LICENSING; AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT
----------
ARTICLE V. Charitable & Legalized Gambling
*State law reference--Legalized gambling, Minn. Stats. Ch. 349; Local Regulation of Gambling,
Minn. Stats. § 349.213.
*State law reference--Local approval of licenses, Minn. Stats. § 349.213, subd. 2; local investigation fees,
Minn. Stats. § 349.16, subd. 8.
----------
Section 14-181. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to closely regulate and control the conduct of gambling and
to ensure that profits derived from gambling activities in the City of Anoka provide, to
the extent authorized by law, direct benefit to the citizens of Anoka.
Section 14-182. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Article, the following words and terms will have the meanings
given them:
Board. Minnesota State Gambling Control Board.
Lawful gambling. The operation of gambling activities by an organization eligible for a
license from the Board to conduct such activities.
Lawful purpose. Will have meanings as provided in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 349, as
may be amended from time to time.
Main Physical Office Location. Will mean the physical site for the organization
headquarters or the registered business office of the organization, which is located within
the City and has been located within the City for at least two (2) years immediately
preceding the application, and which is the physical site where the organization regularly
holds its meetings and conducts its activities, other than lawful gambling and fundraising.
Post Office box numbers do not qualify as the main physical office location.
Net profits, lawful purpose, and allowable expenses. Will have meanings as provided in
Minnesota Statutes Chapter 349, as may be amended from time to time.
Premise Permits. The authorization given by the Board, after passage of a resolution of
recommendation and support by the City Council, for a named organization to operate
lawful gambling activities at a specified location in the City.
Trade Area. The cities of Anoka, Andover, Champlin, Coon Rapids and Ramsey.
Section 14-183. Statute incorporated.
The current provisions of Minn. Stats. Ch. 349 are adopted and made a part of this Article
as if set out in full.
Section 14-184. Licensing Requirements.
(a) State License or Permit Required.
No organization shall directly or indirectly conduct gambling activities in the
City without obtaining the necessary approval, license or permit from the Board.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14; ARTICLE V
2 of 4
Section 14-185. Process for Consideration.
A copy of the application to be submitted to the Board, which describes the gambling
activity and states where the gambling activity will be conducted, shall be supplied to the
City Clerk at least thirty (30) days prior to the start date of the requested activity. The
application shall be verified by a duly authorized officer of the organization or the
designated gambling manager.
Section 14-186. Organizations Eligible.
(a) Organizations eligible to conduct gambling activities in the City shall be limited
to fraternal, religious, veterans, or other non-profit organizations, which have
been in existence for at least three (3) years.
(b) Organizations must meet all qualifications for a gambling license issued by the
Board.
(c) Organizations may pay rent only up to the maximum rent allowed in leases to
charitable organizations which is in compliance with what is set forth in
Minnesota Statutes.
(d) Organizations eligible to conduct gambling activities in the City shall be limited
to organizations that have their main physical office located in the City of
Anoka. Existing organizations and their premise permit locations that have been
approved by the Anoka City Council prior to August 1, 2007 are exempt from
this requirement as long as there is no lapse in their premise permit.
(e) Organizations that are not eligible due to the main physical office location
requirement, may be granted a waiver from the City Council, if within thirty
(30) days from the date of submittal of their Premise Permit application to the
City, no eligible organization meeting the physical office location requirement,
has expressed to the City a desire to operate gambling activities at the premises
applied for by the ineligible organization. The waiver would be granted only for
the specific location set forth in the Premise Permit application and would
remain in effect for the duration of the original Premise Permit license. Upon
the need for renewal of a Premise Permit location, a non-eligible organization
would follow the same process of approval as stated herein. The priority set by
the City Council for granting approval of a premise permit application and its
location shall be as follows:
1. First priority given to organizations whose main office location is
within the corporate limits of the City of Anoka.
2. Second priority given to organizations whose main office location is
located within the Anoka Area Chamber of Commerce limits and
whose main office location is within a City that allows an Anoka based
organization to hold a premise permit within their corporate limits, and
who is eligible to be granted a waiver from the eligibility requirements
by the Anoka City Council.
3. Third priority is given to all other organizations that are eligible to be
granted by waiver from the eligibility requirements by the Anoka City
Council.
Section 14-187. Disapproval of Premises Permit Issuance.
(a) The City shall recommend disapproval of an application for a premise(s) from
the Board if:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14; ARTICLE V
3 of 4
(1) The City's investigation indicates that the organization or gambling
manager failed to comply with the terms or conditions of any gambling
license or indicates a history of noncompliance with State or local law
regulating gambling activities; or
(2) The premises on which the gambling is to be conducted are unsuitable
for that purpose or the proposed activity reasonably can be expected to
disrupt other activities in the neighborhood.
(3) The premises upon which the activity is to be conducted lies within a
zoning district where such activity would be prohibited.
(4) The organization does not meet the eligibility requirements as stated in
this Article.
Section 14-188. Grounds for Revocation of Authority to Conduct Gambling Activities.
No organization shall have a vested right in conducting any gambling activities in the
City and any authority granted for such activities may be revoked by Council at any time
upon a showing that:
(a) Any misrepresentation has been made to the City or the Board by the
organization; or
(b) The organization has violated any provision of this Article or applicable State
law.
(c) The organization failed to comply with any regulation as set forth in this Article.
Section 14-189. Process for Revocation of Authority to Conduct Gambling Activities.
(a) Upon determination by the City that there is sufficient grounds for revocation of
an organizations authority to conduct gambling activities, the City shall:
(1) Notify the organization, in writing, that a public hearing will be held by
the City Council, to consider the revocation of the organization’s
authority to conduct gambling activities in the City.
a. Notification in writing must be sent to the organization at least
ten (10) days prior to the date the public hearing is held.
1. The notice shall state the date, time and location of
the public hearing and the nature of the charges
against the organization.
(2) The City Council shall revoke an organization’s authority to conduct
gambling activities in the City, through adoption of a Resolution
declaring the revocation and listing the grounds for the revocation. The
date of revocation shall be immediately upon adoption of said
resolution. The City shall forward a copy of the resolution to the
Board.
Section 14-190. Re-application after Revocation.
Any organization that has had their authority to conduct gambling activities in the City
revoked by either the City of Anoka or the Board, shall be prohibited from conducting
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14; ARTICLE V
4 of 4
any gambling activities in the City for one (1) full year from the effective date of the
revocation.
Section 14-191. Reporting Requirements for Premise Permit Holders.
Each organization which holds a State issued Premise Permit and is licensed to conduct
lawful gambling activities in the City shall report monthly to the City its gross receipts,
expenses and profits from those activities and the distribution of those profits, itemized as
to payee, purpose, amount and date of payment. This requirement may be satisfied by
submission of copies of the monthly reports required by the Board.
Section 14-192. Expenditures For Lawful Purposes.
During any year that an eligible organization is licensed to conduct gambling events, not
less than fifty percent (50%) of its lawful purpose expenditures will be for lawful
purposes conducted or located within the trade area. A report of the expenditures for
lawful purposes within the trade area shall be provided to the City each month after the
date of the adoption of this requirement. Additional reports may be required as
determined by the City.
Sections 14-193 thru 14-215. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14; ARTICLE VI
1 of 1
CHAPTER 14. LICENSING; AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT
ARTICLE VI. Reserved
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14;ARTICLE VII
1 of 8
CHAPTER 14. LICENSING; AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT
ARTICLE VII. Special Events
Section 14-251. Purpose and Intent.
The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the orderly, compatible and safe use of
property for temporary special events and to assure adequate provision of parking,
sanitary facilities, utilities and safety services.
Section 14-252. Definitions.
(a) Applicant means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, society or
group seeking and/or receiving a Special Events License from the City.
(b) City-Operated. A Special Event organized and conducted by the City and
largely funded by the City.
(c) City-Sponsored. A Special Event organized and conducted by a tax exempt
non-profit organization under Section 501(c) (3) through (10) of the Internal
Revenue Code that the City has elected to support through appropriation of
funds within the City’s budget. This is typically an annual recurring event. This
is an event that the City has determined is of general interest to the public and
advances the City’s public image.
(d) For Profit Sponsor. A Special Event organized and conducted by a person,
organization or company that does not qualify as a tax-exempt non-profit
organization under Section 501 (c) (3) through (10) of the Internal Revenue
Code.
(e) Gross Revenue. Total revenue received from the event, prior to any deductions
or allowances. When calculating gross revenue, proceeds from entry fees,
participation, alcohol sales, and free-will donations are included.
(f) License or Special Event means a license issued by the City to allow a Special
Event.
(g) Licensed Location. The location or locations where the Special Event will be
occurring.
(h) Local Non-Profit. A tax-exempt non-profit organization under Section 501(c)
(3) through (10) of the Internal Revenue Code based within the City or the Trade
Area.
(i) Non-Local Non-Profit Sponsor. A tax-exempt non-profit organization under
Section 501 (c) (3) through (10) of the Internal Revenue Code not based within
the City or the Trade Area.
(j) Outdoor means activity conducted outside of a permanent structure or building.
(k) Person means any person, association, partnership, firm, business trust,
corporation or company.
(l) Political Event Sponsor. A Special Event organized and conducted by a
political party, political committee, candidates, or candidates representative, for
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14;ARTICLE VII
2 of 8
purposes of a political rally, fundraising, campaigning, or similarly related
political activity.
(m) Residential Block Party. A private outdoor party, not open to the general public,
organized by residents for the purpose of interacting informally with
surrounding neighbors and which requires small sections of a City street to be
temporarily blocked off. Such residential streets shall be limited to streets
where no transit routes, commercial facilities, police or fire stations exist. Said
party(s) is limited to one (1) day only, during the hours of 9:00 a.m. – 10:00
p.m., including set-up and clean-up. Attendance shall be free. No fee for
entrance or participation shall be required, including but not limited to, a cover
charge or for the sale of food or beverages. Voluntary donations from invited
guests may be accepted by the Sponsor to off-set the party expenses; however,
no guest shall be required to make such donation as a condition of attendance.
(n) Trade Area. The cities of Anoka, Andover, Champlin, Coon Rapids and
Ramsey.
(o) Annual Special Event means any event that has been approved by the City and
held once each year with no lapse in the event occurring each year, and where
there are no substantial changes in the event details. City staff is responsible to
determining whether or not changes are considered substantial.
(p) Special Event means any temporary, outdoor privately-sponsored event open to
the general public and held on public or privately owned property. “Special
Event” shall not apply to the following:
(1) Any permanent place of worship, stadium, athletic field, arena, theatre,
auditorium, or fairs conducted pursuant to Minn. Stats. Chapter 38.
(2) Family gatherings, including family reunions, graduation parties,
baptisms, confirmations, weddings, etc.
(3) Garage sales.
(4) Non-recurring auctions.
(5) National Night to Unite Events established through the Anoka Police
Department.
(6) Funeral processions.
(7) Lawful picketing on sidewalks.
(8) Activities conducted by a governmental agency acting within the scope
of its authority.
(9) Residential neighborhood block parties, as long as they meet the
requirements of a Residential Block Party, as defined in Section 14-
252.
Section 14-253. License Required.
No person on or after the effective date of this Article shall conduct or allow to be
conducted any Special Event as defined in this ordinance without first obtaining a Special
Events License. A License is not required for an annual Special Event provided that the
City Clerk is notified at least sixty (60) days prior to the annual Special Event and the
annual Special Event has not changed substantially from the previous Special Event.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14;ARTICLE VII
3 of 8
Special Events that have been approved by the City and held in the City the year
preceding the adoption of this Article, as amended on June 6, 2016, are exempt from the
licensing requirements as established in this Article .
Section 14-254. Requirements for Issuance of a License.
(a) The following standards shall apply to all Special Events:
(1) Maximum Number of People. The Applicant shall not sell tickets to nor
permit attendance at the License Location of more than the maximum
number of people stated in the Special Event Application and/or
Special Event License.
(2) Sound Equipment. Sound producing equipment, including but not
limited to public address systems, radios, phonographs, musical
instruments and other recording devices, shall not be operated on the
Licensed Location of the Special Event so as to be unreasonably loud
or be a nuisance or disturbance to the peace and tranquility of the
citizens of Anoka.
(3) Sanitary Facilities. Adequate sanitary facilities must be provided by the
Applicant, which are sufficient to accommodate the projected number
of persons expected to attend the Special Event.
(4) Security. The Applicant shall employ at their own expense such
security personnel as are necessary and sufficient to provide for the
adequate security and protection of the maximum number of persons in
attendance at the Special Event and for the preservation of order and
protection of property in and around the Licensed Location. No License
shall be issued unless the City’s Chief of Police is satisfied that such
necessary and sufficient security personnel will be provided by the
Applicant for the duration of the Special Event.
(5) Food Service. If food service is made available on the Licensed
Location, it shall be delivered only through concessions licensed and/or
otherwise allowed by the Anoka County Environmental Services
Department.
(6) Fire protection. The Applicant shall, at their own expense, take
adequate steps to ensure adequate fire protection as determined by the
City of Anoka Fire Chief.
(7) Duration of Special Event. The Applicant shall operate the Special
Event only on those days and during the hours specified on the License.
(8) Cleanup Plan. The Special Event Applicant is responsible for clean-up
costs. Any extraordinary clean up required as determined by the City
will be charged to the Applicant, at the City’s cost.
(9) Waiver. The City Council may grant a waiver from the requirements of
this Article in any particular case where the Applicant can show that
strict compliance with this Chapter would cause exceptional and undue
hardship by reason of the nature of the Special Event or by reason of
the fact that the circumstances make the requirement of this Chapter
unnecessary. Such waiver may only be granted when there will be no
detriment to the public health, safety or welfare and when such waiver
will not impair the intent and purpose of these regulations.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14;ARTICLE VII
4 of 8
(10) Miscellaneous. Prior to the issuance of a License, the City Council
may impose any other conditions reasonably calculated to protect the
health, safety and welfare of persons in attendance or of the citizens of
the City of Anoka.
(b) The following additional standards shall apply to special events with an
expected attendance of over 200 persons. Sufficiency of the requirements of
these additional standards shall be determined by City staff.
(1) Crowd Control. A fence or barrier shall be constructed that completely
encloses the Licensed Location and shall be of sufficient height and
strength to prevent people in excess of the maximum permissible
number from entering the event. The fence or barrier shall have
sufficient entrances and exits to allow easy movement into and out of
the Special Event and provide traffic control onto established public
roads systems. This requirement may be waived if the City Council
determines that a fence will not be necessary for crowd control.
(2) Solid Waste Disposal. A sanitary method of disposing of solid wastes,
in compliance with State and local laws and regulations shall be
provided and shall be sufficient to dispose of the solid waste production
anticipated for the maximus number of people allowed by the License.
Plans shall include a provision for holding and collecting all such waste
at least once each day, sufficient trash containers and sufficient
personnel to perform such tasks.
(3) Parking and Traffic Control. A parking and traffic control plan for the
number of persons projected to attend the Special Event must be
submitted. Such plan must be sufficient to ensure a free flow of traffic
and make available rapid access for emergency vehicles. Further, the
Applicant shall provide adequate off-street parking facilities on the site
or within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet thereof to
accommodate the projected number of persons expected to attend the
Special Event.
(4) Recycling Collection & Processing. Applicant will submit a plan to
collect glass bottles, plastic bottles, and aluminum cans for the purpose
of recycling. The plan shall include appropriate recycling containers to
be placed next to each garbage container and marked for recycling,
clearly distinguishing recyclable collection from garbage collection.
The plan shall also provide details on separate containers for paper and
corrugated cardboard recycling and include confirmation of personnel
to perform all tasks involved in the coordination and follow through of
recycling collection processing.
Documentation shall be submitted to evidence that recycling collection
service will be performed and the materials will be recycled through a
licensed recycling hauler/facility. The Applicant shall supply to the
City, within one (1) week following the event, the tonnage information
(or weight slip) provided from the recycling hauler/facility
acknowledging that materials were properly recycled.
(5) Bonding. Before the issuance of a License, the Applicant shall obtain,
from a corporate bonding company authorized to do business in
Minnesota, a corporate surety bond in the amount of up to $50,000, to
be approved by the City Council. The exact amount shall be set by the
City Council, conditioned upon the Applicant’s faithful compliance
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14;ARTICLE VII
5 of 8
with all of the terms and provisions of this Chapter and all applicable
provisions of state or local law, and which shall indemnify the City of
Anoka, its agents, officer, and employees and the City Council against
any and all loss, injury or damage whatsoever arising out of or in any
way connected with the Licensed Location and for any costs
attributable to cleaning up and/or removing debris, trash, or other waste
resulting from the Special Event.
(6) Insurance. Before the issuance of a License, the Applicant shall obtain
public liability insurance with limits of not less than
$100,000/$300,000 and property damage insurance with a limit of not
less than $50,000 from a company or companies approved by the State
of Minnesota. Such insurance shall name the City of Anoka as an
additional insured and shall remain in full force and effect in the
specified amounts for the duration of the License. Evidence of
insurance shall include an endorsement to the effect that the insurance
company will notify the City Clerk in writing at least ten (10) days
before the expiration or cancellation of said insurance.
(7) Medical facilities. Medical or first aid facilities shall be provided which
are sufficient to accommodate the projected number of persons to
attend the Special Event.
(8) Camping facilities. If the Special Event is to continue overnight,
camping facilities in compliance with all state and local requirements
may be provided in an amount sufficient to provide camping
accommodations for the maximum number of people to be assembled
for camping.
(9) Lighting. The Applicant shall provide electrical illumination of all
occupied areas sufficient to insure the safety and comfort of all
attendees. The Applicant’s lighting plan shall be pre-approved by City
staff.
(10) Potable water supply. Potable water, meeting all federal and state
requirements for sanitary quality and sufficient to provide drinking
water for the maximum number of people allowed at the Special Event,
must be provided.
Section 14-255. Application Procedures.
A City supplied written application for a Special Event License shall be filed with the
City Clerk not less than sixty (60) days before the date proposed for holding the special
event. The written application shall be signed by the Sponsor of the event, or their
designee responsible for conducting the event and shall be accompanied by the applicable
fee adopted in the City’s Master Fee Schedule in effect at the time of submittal of the
Application.
Section 14-256. Fees and Charges.
(a) The fee for a Special Events License shall be established by the City Council.
(b) All Applicant’s for Special Events licensed by this Article shall be required to
pay for all costs incurred by the City to assist with the Special Event, including
but not limited to equipment and materials costs, whether provided by the City
or contracted by the City, over-time staff labor costs, security costs, electrical
costs, etc. These costs are determined by City staff. Payment of these costs are
due within thirty (30) days of the Special Event. Failure to pay these costs
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14;ARTICLE VII
6 of 8
within thirty (30) days of the Special Event may void an annual License and/or
be cause for denial of a future Special Events License, as determined by the City
Council.
(c) The City Manager has the sole authority to determine which Special Events the
City will provide financial, material, labor or other support to, and to what
extent.
(d) The Council may waive fees, recovery of costs or revenue sharing if the Special
Event:
(1) Is free and open to the public, is non-political, serves a secular purpose.
(2) Enhances community pride and positive image, as determined by the
City.
(3) Generates a positive economic impact for the City, as determined by
the City.
(4) Generates positive media exposure and visibility for the City, as
determined by the City.
(5) Demonstrates support for local charitable organizations.
Section 14-257. Financial Reporting.
All Special Events licensed by this Article shall be required to submit the following:
(a) At time of application submittal, a proposed budget detailing projected
operational expenditures and projected revenues for the Special Event.
(1) Administrative costs (i.e. wages/salaries) may not exceed 20%.
(b) No more than thirty (30) days after the Special Event, a finalized detailed
financial statement that documents all administrative costs, expenditures,
revenues and donation payout(s), consistent with Section 14-258.
Section 14-258. Revenue Sharing.
All Special Events licensed under this Chapter must meet the following Revenue Sharing
requirements:
(a) No less than 80% of the gross revenue, after expenses, shall be donated to a
local non-profit organization(s), approved by the City Council, through the
approval of a Special Events License. Revenue Sharing includes entry and
participation costs to the Special Event. Revenue derived from the sale of
alcoholic beverages is considered part of the Revenue Sharing requirements.
Revenue derived from the sale of food is not considered part of the Revenue
Sharing requirements.
Section 14-259. Operation.
The following standards shall be required in operation of a Special Event:
(a) The Applicant or their agent(s) shall maintain the Licensed Location and
facilities in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all times.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14;ARTICLE VII
7 of 8
(b) No dogs, cats or other animals shall be permitted to run loose on the Licensed
Location.
(c) No fires of any kind shall be permitted on the Licensed Location or in facilities,
except in grills or at locations designated for that purpose, or as approved by the
City.
(d) No person shall engage in any conduct that violates a state, county, or local law
or ordinances.
(e) Any Special Event that incorporates the sale or distribution of alcoholic
beverages must contract the sale of alcoholic beverages to a non-profit,
charitable, or religious organization, or a State Licensed manufacturer of malt
liquor, so long as the manufacturer meets all requirements of Minn. Stat. §
340A.404, Subd. 10, as may be amended. Such non-profit, charitable, religious
organization, or State Licensed manufacturer of malt liquor, must obtain a
Temporary On-Sale 3.2 Malt Liquor License or Temporary On-Sale Intoxicating
Liquor License from the City, and adhere to all City, County and State Laws
relating to the sale and/or distribution of alcohol.
(f) Alcoholic beverages that are sold or distributed in conjunction with a Special
Event will be limited to the following:
1. 3.2 Malt Liquor;
2. Wine, Strong Beer, other Malt beverages, which may not exceed 24%
ABV, and which must be sold, distributed, or served as a beverage
premixed by the manufacturer, and sold, distributed, or served directly
from the manufacturer’s individualized packaging containers, which
may not exceed 12 ozs.
(g) Any Special Event that incorporates the sale or distribution of food and/or
beverages must obtain the proper County and/or State license. The Sponsor of
the event must submit with their Special Event License application, a copy of
the Anoka County Food License, or a copy of the Anoka County Mobile &
Itinerant Food Service Licensing Reciprocity Agreement, pertinent to the
Special Events’ food and beverage sales and/or distribution.
Section 14-260. Granting a license.
The City Council, in its sole discretion, reserves the right to review and determine
whether or not a request for a Special Event is acceptable. It is the stated purpose of the
City Council that all such Special Events shall be for family-friendly activities only.
Special Event activities must be inclusive of events and activities for both adults and
children. In the event the City Council determines the activity does not meet these
criteria, such application may be denied.
Prior to Council consideration of the License, the City shall notify the Anoka Business &
Landowners Association, providing them with the Special Event details.
Section 14-261. Denial of License.
(a) The City Council shall have the right to deny the License if, in the judgment of
the City Council, granting of a License would adversely affect the safety, health
or welfare of the citizens of Anoka. Such denial may also be based upon the
following circumstances:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 14;ARTICLE VII
8 of 8
(1) The Special Event would unreasonably inconvenience the general
public.
(2) The Special Event would unreasonably infringe upon the rights of
abutting properties.
(3) The Special Event would conflict with another proximate event or
interfere with construction or maintenance work.
(4) There are not sufficient safety personnel or other necessary staff to
accommodate the Special event.
(5) Other issues in the public interest as identified by the City Council.
(b) The Applicant shall be notified of such denial and may appear before the City
Council to appeal the denial.
(c) After the initial Special Event has taken place, any aggrieved person may appeal
to the City Council to express objection to future issuance of a License to the
Applicant for the same type Special Event. Such appeal shall be conducted
through a public hearing, after having given ten (10) days notice to the
Applicant, the aggrieved person and a public notice.
Section 14-262. Transferability.
No transfer of a License shall be permitted from place to place, entity to entity, or person
to person without complying with the requirements of an original Special Events License
application.
Section 14-263. Prohibited Special Event(s).
No Special Events License shall be issued to a Political Event Sponsor, as defined in this
Article.
Section 14-264. Enforcement and Penalties.
(a) The Police Department and other such officers, employees, or agents as the City
Council or City Manager may designate, shall enforce the provisions of this
Article.
(b) The holding of a Special Event in violation of any provision of this Article shall
be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated as such.
(c) Any person violating any provision of this Article is guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Minnesota
Statutes.
Section 14-265. Revocation of License.
The License for a Special Event may be revoked by the City Council at any time if any of
the conditions necessary for the issuing of or contained in the License are not complied
with or if any of the provisions of this Article are violated.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18; ARTICLE I
CHAPTER 18: BUILDING AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE I. General
Section 18-1. Building numbers.
(a) The owner of every residential, commercial or industrial structure, whether public or
private, shall place house or building numbers on the structure as provided in this section.
This section shall not apply to barns, private garages or other similar accessory buildings
or structures used in connection with buildings or permanent structures displaying
building numbers.
(b) Each number of the street address of a structure shall be attached to the structure and
shall be located in a position near the front door of each structure so as to be clearly
visible from the street or road and not obstructed by any vegetation or other structure. If
the structure is more than 100 feet from the street or road, a separate post with the
numbers attached shall be placed within 30 feet of the street identifying the number of the
structure on the property. If the structure also abuts an alley, building numbers shall also
be attached in a conspicuous location to the alley side of the structure. If a garage or
similar accessory building obstructs the view of the main structure from the alley, the
building numbers for the structure shall be placed in a conspicuous location on the garage
or accessory building. Each number of the address shall be four inches or greater in
height and shall be of a color that contrasts with the color of the structure to which it is
attached. The numbers shall be in Arabic form.
(c) All structures for which numbers are required shall display numbers by June 1, 1985,
except that new structures completed after that date shall display such numbers prior to
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy if the structure is residential, or immediately
upon use of the building if the structure is commercial or industrial.
(d) Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a petty
misdemeanor.
State law reference--Authority to number buildings, Minn. Stats. §§ 410.33, 412.221, subd. 18.
Section 18-2. Licensing of radon testing and abatement contractors.
(a) No person in the city shall carry on the business of testing premises for the presence of
radon nor designing, constructing or installing radon gas abatement systems or equipment
without first having obtained a radon testing and abatement contractor's license from the
city. This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit a general contractor or
subcontractor from constructing ventilation systems or other active or passive building
features intended to avoid the accumulation of hazardous concentrations of radon in new
construction when such ventilation systems or other building features are included in
plans and/or specifications which have been approved by the building official.
(b) An applicant for a license as a radon testing and abatement contractor shall demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the building official that such applicant has sufficient knowledge
and skill to follow testing procedures approved by the building official, to select
abatement methods appropriate to the individual circumstances of each case, and to
implement those methods in a workmanlike and effective manner. Upon recommendation
by the building official and the applicant's payment of the required license fee, the city
council, after such investigation as it deems necessary, may grant or deny such license.
Licenses shall be issued for one calendar year, or any remaining part thereof, and shall
1 of 2
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18; ARTICLE I
expire on December 31 of each year unless renewed. The annual fee for a radon testing
and abatement contracting license shall be as established by the council.
Section 18-3. Plumber's bond and insurance.
(a) Plumbers shall execute and deposit with the clerk a bond in the sum of $2,000.00
executed by a surety company authorized to do business in this state. Such bond shall be
drawn on a form furnished by the city, and shall be conditioned that the plumber shall in
all respects well and faithfully perform all things by him undertaken in the making of
connections, repairs or taps of any kind with the water mains or pipes connected with the
waterworks system of the city, and shall save the city harmless of and from all accidents
and damages consequent thereto or by reason of any opening in any street, lane or avenue
made by him or any person in his employ, for the purpose of putting down service pipes
connecting with the waterworks of the city, and that he will restore all streets excavated
by him to their former good condition, and will keep and maintain the street and sidewalk
in good condition, to the satisfaction of the city manager, for a period of one year next
thereafter, and that he will pay all fines and penalties that may be imposed upon him by
law.
(b) A plumber shall also have personal liability insurance in the amounts of $50,000.00 per
claim and $100,000.00 per accident and $50,000.00 for property damage.
State law references--Plumbers generally, Minn. Stats. § 326.37 et seq.; local bond and
insurance, Minn. Stats. §§ 326.38, 326.40, subd. 4.
Sections 18-4--18-30. Reserved.
2 of 2
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18; ARTICLE II
CHAPTER 18: BUILDING AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE II. Building Code
----------
*State law reference--State building code, Minn. Stats. § 16B.59 et seq.
----------
Section 18-31. Organization and enforcement.
The organization of the building department and enforcement of the code shall be consistent with
Minn. Stats. § 16B.65. The manager of the city shall designate a qualified person to the council for
appointment as the city's building official.
Section 18-32. Minnesota State Building Code adopted.
The Minnesota State Building Code as adopted by the Commissioner of Administration pursuant
to Minnesota Statutes Chapter 16B.59 to 16B.75, including all of the amendments, rules and
regulations established, adopted and published from time to time by the Minnesota commissioner
of Administration, through the Building Codes and Standards Division, is hereby adopted by
reference with the exception of the optional chapters, unless specifically adopted in this ordinance.
The Minnesota State Building code is hereby incorporated in this ordinance as if full set out
herein..
Charter reference--Adoption by reference, § 3.11.
State law reference--Adoption by reference, Minn. Stats. § 471.62.
Section 18-33. Permits, inspections, fees, and time limits.
(a) Permits and Fess. The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as
authorized in Minnesota Statutes. Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by the
Minnesota State Building Code in accordance with the City’s adopted fee schedule. In
addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued for work governed by the
Minnesota State building Code in accordance with regulations set forth therein.
(b) Expiration. Notwithstanding continuing or on-going work, any building permit issued by
the city shall expire and by limitation be null and void if a certificate of occupancy and
final completion has not been issued within the following applicable period of time after
the date of permit issuance:
(1) Single-family residential dwellings, including new construction, remodeling or
additions: 18 months.
(2) Accessory buildings on single-family residential properties: 12 months.
(3) All multifamily and nonresidential construction: 24 months unless a shorter or
longer time is specified by the council at the time the original permit is issued.
(4) An expired building permit may be reissued once, for a term of one-half of its
original duration, upon payment of an amount equal to one-half the original
permit fee. Thereafter, if the permitted work is not completed within the
applicable time period, a new permit may be issued only upon such conditions
as the council by resolution may prescribe, including financial guarantees of
completion by a specified date.
1 of 2
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18; ARTICLE II
(c) Time limitations for exterior work. Notwithstanding continuing or on-going work or the
validity of any permit, all exterior work shall be completed as follows:
(1) No land shall remain disturbed and exposed without established grass or other
ground cover for a period exceeding 12 months, or any lesser period as may be
specified in the permit.
(2) All exterior construction including siding, roofing, doors, windows and finish
shall be completed and present a finished appearance within 12 months of the
start of construction.
(3) Failure to complete exterior work as required in this article shall result in
suspension of the existing permit until a reinstatement fee equal to 100 percent
of the original building permit has been made. Reinstatement of a building
permit does not extend the term of the permit but is a prerequisite to reissuance
when applicable.
(d) Unfinished construction. Any unfinished construction for which there is no current
building permit shall be governed by article III of this chapter in addition to any other
applicable law.
(e) Existing permits. Any permit outstanding at the time of the adoption of the ordinance
from which this article is derived shall be limited as set forth in this article.
Section 18-34. Violations and penalties.
Violations and penalties for violation of this article shall be as set forth in the Minnesota State
Building Code.
Section 18-35--18-60. Reserved.
2 of 2
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18; ARTICLE III; DIVISION I
CHAPTER 18; BUILDING AND BUILDING INSPECTIONS
ARTICLE III. Housing Standards
DIVISION 1. Generally
Section 18-61. Purpose.
(a) The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, and the general welfare
of the people of the city. These general objectives include, among others, the following:
(1) To protect the character and stability of residential areas within the city;
(2) To correct and prevent housing conditions that adversely affect or are likely to
adversely affect the life, safety, general welfare, and health;
(3) To provide standards for heating and sanitary equipment and for light and
ventilation necessary to protect the health and safety of occupants of buildings;
(4) To prevent the overcrowding of dwellings;
(5) To provide standards for the maintenance of existing residential buildings and
accessory structures and to thus prevent substandard housing and blight;
(6) To preserve the value of land and buildings throughout the city.
(b) With respect to disputes between tenants and landlords, and except as otherwise
specifically provided by the terms of this article, it is not the intention of the city council
to intrude upon the contractual relationship between the tenant and landlord. The city
council does not intend to intervene as an advocate of either party, nor to involve itself in
rent disputes, nor to act as an arbitrator, nor to hear complaints from tenant or landlord
which are not specifically and clearly relevant to the provisions of this article.
Section 18-62. Definitions.
(a) Generally. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning. The definitions contained in section 74-2 of this Code apply in this
article. Additionally, the following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this chapter.
Accessory use or structures means a use or structure subordinate to, and serving the
principal use or structure on the same lot and customarily incidental thereto which is not
used for living or sleeping by human occupants.
Anoka Building Code means section 18-32 of this Code, adopting the Minnesota State
Building Code as the building code for the city.
Building means any structure having a roof which may provide shelter or enclosure for
persons, animals, or chattel, and when such structure is divided by party walls without
openings, each portion of such building so separated shall be deemed a separate building.
Building official means the designated agent authorized by the city council to administer
and enforce this article.
1 of 3
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18; ARTICLE III; DIVISION I
Dwelling means a building or one or more portions thereof, occupied or intended to be
occupied for residential purposes, including at least one dwelling unit or rooming unit,
but not including rooms in motels, hotels, nursing homes, trailers, tents, cabins, or trailer
coaches.
Dwelling unit means a single-family dwelling or unit designed to accommodate one
family.
Family means:
(1) An individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption
living together; or
(2) A group of not more than five persons who need not be related by blood,
marriage or adoption, living together as a single house keeping unit in a
dwelling unit, exclusive of resident domestic employees.
Flush water closet means a toilet with a bowl and trap made in one piece, which is
connected to the city water and sewer system or other approved water supply and sewer
system.
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparing,
cooking, marketing, or processing of food, or the nonconsumed waste resulting from
animals or humans consuming food.
Habitable building means any building or part thereof that meets minimum standards for
use as a home or place of abode by one or more persons.
Habitable room means a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for
living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet
compartments, laundries, furnace rooms, unfinished basements (those without required
ventilation, required electric outlets and required exit facilities), pantries, utility rooms of
less than 50 square feet of floor space, foyers, connecting corridors, stairways, closets,
storage spaces, workshops, and hobby and recreation areas in parts of the structure below
ground level or in attics.
Heated water means water heated to a temperature of not less than 110 degrees
Fahrenheit, or such lesser temperature required by government authority, measured at
faucet outlet.
Kitchen means a space which contains a sink with counter working space, space for
installing cooking and refrigeration equipment, and space for the storage of cooking
utensils.
Maintenance means the upkeep of property and equipment in a safe working condition
for which it was installed and/or constructed.
Multiple-family dwelling means a dwelling or portion thereof containing two or more
dwelling units.
Occupant means any person (including owner operator) who lives, sleeps, cooks, and eats
in a dwelling unit or lives and sleeps in a rooming unit.
Operate means to charge rent for the use of a dwelling or a rooming unit.
2 of 3
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18; ARTICLE III; DIVISION I
Operator means the owner or his agent who has charge, care, control, or management of
a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
Owner means any person, firm, or corporation who alone, jointly, or severally with others
has title to any dwelling, or who has charge of, care of, or control of such property on
behalf of the title holder. Any person representing the actual owner shall be bound to
comply with the provisions of this ordinance to the same extent as the owner.
Permissible occupancy means the maximum number of persons permitted to reside in a
dwelling unit or rooming unit.
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or joint
venture or organization of any kind.
Plumbing means all of the following supplied facilities and equipment in a dwelling: gas
pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, steam pipes, garbage disposal units, waste
pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths,
installed clothes washing machines, bath basins, drains, vents, and any other similar
fixtures and the installation thereof, together with all connections to water, sewer, and gas
lines.
Premises means a property identifiable by address or legal description, including all
associated structures.
Public hall means a hall, corridor, or passageway for providing egress from a dwelling
unit to a public way.
Rental dwelling means a dwelling or portion thereof which is rented or available for rent.
Repair means the construction or renewal of any part of an existing building or its
utilities, facilities, or equipment for the purpose of its maintenance.
Rodent harborage means a place where rodents commonly live, nest, or establish their
habitat.
Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or
intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking and eating purposes.
Safety means the condition of being reasonably free from danger and hazards which may
cause accidents or disease.
Substandard dwelling means any dwelling which does not conform to the minimum
standards established by city ordinances.
Supplied means paid for, furnished by, provided by, or under the control of the owner,
operator, or agent of a dwelling.
(b) Meaning of certain words. Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "premises,"
or "structure" are used in this article, they shall be construed as through they were
followed by the words "or any part thereof."
Cross reference--Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sections 18-63--18-80. Reserved.
3 of 3
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18; ARTICLE III; DIVISION 2
1 of 1
CHAPTER 18; BUILDING AND BUILDING INSPECTIONS
ARTICLE III. Housing Standards
DIVISION 2. Administration and Enforcement
----------
*Cross reference--Administration, ch. 2.
----------
Subdivision I. In General
Section 18-81. Application, Administration and Enforcement.
The application, administration, and enforcement of the building code shall be in accordance with
Minnesota State Building code. The building code enforcement agency for the City of Anoka is
the Community Development Department and the code shall be enforced by the Minnesota
Certified Building Official designated by the City to administer the code.
Section 18-82. Inspection access.
If any owner, occupant, or other person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or of
a multiple dwelling fails or refuses to permit free access and entry to the structure or premises
under his control, or any part thereof for purpose of an inspection authorized by this article, the
building official may petition the court for an order for such inspection.
Section 18-83. Unfit for human habitation.
(a) Any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit or portion thereof which is damaged,
decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, vermin or rodent infested, or which lacks
provision for basic illumination, ventilation, or sanitation facilities to the extent that the
defects create a hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of the occupants or of the public
may be declared unfit for human habitation. Whenever any dwelling, dwelling unit, or
rooming unit has been declared unfit, the building official shall order the dwelling,
dwelling unit, or rooming unit vacated within a reasonable time and shall post a placard
on the dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit indicating that it is unfit for human
habitation, and any operating license previously issued for such dwelling shall be
revoked.
(b) It shall be unlawful for such dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit, or portion thereof,
to be used for human habitation until the defective conditions have been corrected and
written approval has been issued by the building official. No person other than the
building official shall deface or remove the declaration placard from any such dwelling
unit.
(c) The owner of any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit which has been declared unfit
for human habitation or which is otherwise vacant for a period of 60 days or more
immediately shall make the dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit safe and secure so
that it is not hazardous to the health, safety, and welfare of the public and does not
constitute a public nuisance. Any vacant dwelling open at doors, windows, or wall
opening, if unguarded, shall be deemed to be a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of
the public and is a public nuisance within the meaning of this article.
Section 18-84--18-100. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18; ARTICLE III; DIVISION 2
1 of 2
CHAPTER 18; BUILDING AND BUILDING INSPECTIONS
ARTICLE III. Housing Standards
DIVISION 2. Administration and Enforcement
----------
*Cross reference--Administration, ch. 2.
----------
Subdivision II. Compliance Orders
Section 18-101. Compliance order.
Whenever the building official determines that any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit, or
portion thereof, is in violation of this article or any other ordinance, he may issue a compliance
order setting forth the violations of this article or other ordinance and ordering the owner,
occupant, operator, or agent to correct such violations. The compliance order shall:
(a) Be in writing;
(b) Describe the location and nature of the violations of this article;
(c) Establish a reasonable time frame, not to exceed 30 days, to correct such violation;
(d) Notify the owner of his appeal recourse; and
(e) Be served upon the owner, operator, or occupant, personally, by sending a copy by
certified mail to his last known address, or by posting a copy at the main entrance to the
building and publishing it four times in a legal newspaper in the county.
Section 18-102. Appeals.
(a) When it is alleged by any person to whom a compliance order is directed that such
compliance order is based upon erroneous interpretation of this article, or upon a
misstatement or mistake of fact, such person may appeal the compliance order to the city
council. Such appeals must be in writing, must specify the grounds for the appeal, and
must be accompanied by a filing fee as determined by council resolution with the
building official within five business days after service of the compliance order. The
filing of an appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from
unless such stay would cause imminent peril to life, health, or property.
(b) Upon at least five business days' notice to the appellant of the time and place for hearing
the appeal and within 30 days after appeal is filed, the city council shall hold a hearing
thereon at which the city council shall modify or affirm the order in whole or in part.
Section 18-103. Restrictions or transfer of ownership.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit upon whom a
pending compliance order has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, or lease, or otherwise
dispose thereof to another person until the provisions of the compliance order have been complied
with, unless such owner shall furnish to grantee, lessee, or mortgagee a true copy of any notice of
violation or compliance order and shall obtain and possess a receipt of acknowledgment. Anyone
with an interest in the dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit who has received notice of the
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18; ARTICLE III; DIVISION 2
2 of 2
existence of a compliance order shall be bound by compliance order without further service of
notice upon him and shall be liable for all penalties and procedures provided by this article.
Section 18-104. Execution of compliance orders by public authority.
Upon failure to comply with a compliance order within the time set therein, and no appeal having
been taken, or upon failure to comply with a modified compliance order within the time set
therein, the criminal penalty established hereunder notwithstanding, the city council may by
resolution cause the cited deficiency to be remedied as set forth in the compliance order. The cost
of such remedy shall be a lien against the subject real estate and may be levied and collected as a
special assessment in the manner provided by Minn. Stats. ch. 429, for any of the reasons set forth
in Minn. Stats. § 429.101, subd. 1, and specifically for the removal and elimination of public
health or safety hazards from private property, but the assessment shall be payable in a single
installment. It is the intent of this section to authorize the city to utilize Minn. Stats. § 429.101 to
promote the public's health, safety, and general welfare.
Section 18-105. Penalties.
Any person who fails to comply with a compliance order after a right of appeal has expired and
any person who fails to comply with a modified compliance order within the time set therein, upon
conviction thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Sections 18-106--18-120. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18; ARTICLE III; DIVISION 3
CHAPTER 18; BUILDING AND BUILDING INSPECTIONS
ARTICLE III. Housing Standards
DIVISION 3. Minimum Standards
Section 18-121. General requirements.
No person shall occupy as owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
rooming unit for the purpose of living therein which does not comply with the following
requirements.
(a) Foundations, exterior walls, and roofs. The foundation, exterior walls, and exterior roof
shall be substantially water tight and protected against vermin and rodents and shall be
kept in sound condition and repair. The foundation element shall adequately support the
building at all points. Every exterior wall shall be free of structural deterioration or any
other condition which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portion of the walls or
to the interior spaces of the dwelling. The roof shall be tight and have no defects which
admit rain and roof drainage and shall be adequate to prevent rainwater from causing
dampness in the walls. All exterior surfaces, other than decay resistant materials, shall be
protected from the elements and decay by paint or other protective covering or treatment.
If the exterior surface is unpainted or lacks protective coating or is determined by the
building official to be deteriorated, the surface shall have a protective covering applied. If
the exterior surface of the pointing of any brick, block, or stonewall is loose or has fallen
out, the surface shall be repaired.
(b) Windows, doors, and screens. Every window, exterior door, and hatchway shall be
substantially tight and shall be kept in repair. Every window, other than a fixed window
or storm window, shall be capable of being easily opened. Every window, door, and
frame shall be constructed and maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall
construction as to completely exclude rain, vermin and rodents from entering the
building.
(c) Floors, interior walls, and ceilings. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling shall be
protected against the passage and harborage of vermin and rodents and shall be kept in
sound condition and good repair. Every floor shall be free of loose, warped, protruding,
or rotting flooring materials. Every interior wall and ceiling shall be maintained in a tight
waterproof condition. Toxic paints or materials with a lasting toxic effect shall not be
used. Every toilet room and bathroom floor surface shall be capable of being easily
maintained.
(d) Rodent proof. Buildings found to be rodent infested shall be made rodent resistant. All
opening in the exterior walls, foundations, basements, ground, or first floors, and roofs
which have one-quarter-inch diameter or larger opening shall be rodent proofed in an
approved manner. Interior floors or basements, cellars, and other areas in contact with the
soil shall be paved with concrete or other rodent-impervious material.
(e) Fence maintenance. All fences supplied by the owner on the premises and all fences
erected by an occupant on the premises shall consist of metal, wood, masonry, or other
decay-resistant material. Fences shall be maintained in good condition. Materials, other
than decay resistant varieties, shall be protected against decay by use of paint or other
preservatives.
1 of 7
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18; ARTICLE III; DIVISION 3
(f) Accessory structure maintenance. Accessory structures shall be structurally sound and be
maintained in good repair. The exterior of such structures shall be made weather resistant
through the use of decay-resistant materials such as paint or other preservatives.
(g) Safe building elements. Every foundation, roof, floor exterior and interior wall, ceiling,
inside and outside stair, porch and balcony, and appurtenance thereto shall be safe to use
and capable of supporting normal structural loads.
(h) Facilities to function. All equipment or utilities required under city ordinances and every
chimney and flue shall function effectively in a safe and working condition.
(i) Grading and drainage. Every yard, court, or passageway on the premises on which a
dwelling stands shall be graded and drained so as to be free of standing water that
constitutes a detriment to health and safety.
(j) Yard cover. Every yard of a premises on which a dwelling stands shall be maintained to
prevent dust and erosion.
Section 18-122. Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
No owner or other person shall occupy or let to another person any dwelling, dwelling unit, or
rooming unit unless it and the premises are fit for human occupancy and comply with all
applicable legal requirements of the state and the city as set forth specifically in the following
subsections.
(a) Maintenance of shared or public areas. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or
more dwelling units shall maintain or shall provide for maintenance of the shared or
public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
(b) Housekeeping of occupied areas. Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit, or
rooming unit shall properly housekeep that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit, and
premises thereof that he occupies and controls.
(c) Storage and disposal of refuse. Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming
unit shall store and dispose of all his refuse and garbage and any other organic waste
which might provide food for insects and/or rodents as required by chapter 66, article III.
(d) Responsibility for storage and disposal of garbage and refuse. Every owner of a
multiple-family dwelling shall supply facilities for the storage and/or disposal of refuse,
garbage, and recycling materials. All garbage, waste material, debris, and recyclables
shall be kept in an enclosed building or properly contained in a closed container designed
for such purposes. Refuse enclosures shall provide screening of containers and have a
concrete floor base. Gates may not be required if properly oriented on the site. Design of
such facilities shall be reviewed/approved by city staff prior to issuance of a building
permit. Each owner of a multiple-family dwelling existing on or before April 8, 1994,
shall make such improvements at such time as a building permit may be taken for
remodeling or other improvements costing more than $5,000.00. In the case of singlefamily
and duplex dwellings, it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to furnish such
facilities as prescribed by city ordinance.
(e) Responsibility for storm and screen doors and windows. The owner of a rental dwelling
unit shall be responsible for providing, maintaining and hanging all screen and storm
doors and storm windows whenever storm and screen doors and windows are required
under the provisions of this article.
2 of 7
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18; ARTICLE III; DIVISION 3
(f) Responsibility for pest extermination. Every occupant of a single-family dwelling shall be
responsible for the extermination of vermin infestations and/or rodents on the premises.
Every occupant of a dwelling unit in a building containing more than one dwelling unit
shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one
infested, except when infestation is caused by the failure of the owner to maintain a
dwelling in a reasonably rodent proof condition; then, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner. When infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units
in any building or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more
dwelling units, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.
(g) Rodent harborage prohibited in occupied areas. No occupant of a dwelling shall
accumulate boxes, firewood, lumber, scrap metal, or any other similar materials in such a
manner that may provide rodent harborage in or about any dwelling. Outside stored
materials shall be stacked neatly in piles at least four inches off bare soil or ground.
(h) Rodent harborage prohibited in public areas. No owner or occupant of a dwelling shall
accumulate or permit the accumulation of boxes, lumber, scrap metal, or any other
similar materials in such a manner that may provide rodent harborage in or about shared
or public areas of a dwelling or premises. Materials stored outside by the owner or
permitted to be stored by the owner shall be stacked neatly in piles at least four inches
above bare soil or ground.
(i) Prevention of food for rodents. No owner or occupant of a dwelling unit shall store,
place, or allow to accumulate any materials that may serve as food for rodents in a site
accessible to rodents.
(j) Maintenance of plumbing fixtures and facilities. The owner of a dwelling unit shall
maintain all supplied plumbing fixtures and facilities therein in good working order.
(k) Minimum heating capability and maintenance. In every dwelling unit or rooming unit
when the control of the supplied heat is the responsibility of a person other than the
occupant, a temperature of at least 70 degrees Fahrenheit or such lesser temperature
required by government authority shall be maintained at floor level, when the outdoor
temperature is between 20 degrees below zero and 60 degrees above zero Fahrenheit.
(l) Removal of snow and ice. The owner of any rental dwelling shall be responsible for the
removal of snow and ice from parking lots and/or driveways, steps, and walkways on the
premises. Outside the central business district, which is governed by section 50-31,
individual snowfalls of three inches or more or successive snowfall accumulations to a
depth of three inches shall be removed from walkways and steps within 48 hours after
cessation of the snowfall.
(m) Minimum exterior lighting. The owner of a rental dwelling or dwellings shall be
responsible to provide and maintain effective illumination in all exterior parking areas
and walkways.
(n) Maintenance of driveway and parking areas. The owner of a multiple-family dwelling or
dwellings shall be responsible to provide and maintain in good condition paved and
delineated parking areas and driveways for tenants. Each driveway and parking area on
any multiple-family property existing on or before April 8, 1994, shall be paved with
asphalt, concrete, brick, or similar dust-free surface at such time as a building permit may
be taken for either remodeling or improvements costing more than $5,000.00.
Section 18-123. Minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities.
3 of 7
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18; ARTICLE III; DIVISION 3
No person shall rent or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purposes
of living, sleeping, cooking, and eating therein which does not provide the following:
(a) Kitchen sink. A sink in good working condition and properly connected to an approved
water supply system and which provides at all times an adequate amount of heated and
unheated running water under pressure and which is connected to an approved sewer
system per chapter 66 of this Code.
(b) Food storage. Cabinets and/or shelves for the storage of eating, drinking, and cooking
equipment and utensils, and of food that does not require refrigeration for safekeeping
and a counter or table for food preparation. The cabinets and/or shelves and counter or
table shall be of sound construction furnished with surfaces that are easily cleanable and
that will not impart any toxic or deleterious effect to food.
(c) Stove and refrigerator. A stove for cooking food and a refrigerator for the safe storage of
food at or below 40 degrees Fahrenheit, which are properly installed with all necessary
connections for safe, sanitary, and efficient operation. Such stove and refrigerator need
not be installed when a dwelling unit is not occupied or when the occupant is expected to
provide a stove or refrigerator on occupancy, in which case sufficient space and adequate
connections for the installation and operation of the stove and refrigerator must be
provided.
(d) Toilet facilities. Within every dwelling unit there shall be a nonhabitable room which is
equipped with a flush water closet in compliance with the state plumbing code. Such
room shall have an entrance door which affords privacy. The flush water closet shall be
equipped with easily cleanable surfaces, shall be connected to an approved water system
that at all times provides an adequate amount of running water under pressure to cause
the water closet to be operated properly, and all shall be connected to a sewer system in
compliance with chapter 66 of this Code.
(e) Lavatory sink. Within every dwelling unit there shall be a lavatory sink. The sink may be
in the same room as the flush water closet, but if located in another room, the lavatory
sink shall be located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in
which the water closet is located. The lavatory sink shall be in good working condition
and shall be properly connected to an approved water system and shall provide at all
times an adequate amount of heated and unheated running water under pressure and shall
be connected to a sewer system which complies with chapter 66 of this Code.
(f) Bathtub or shower. Within every dwelling unit there shall be a nonhabitable room which
is equipped with a bathtub or shower in good working condition. Such room shall have an
entrance door which affords privacy. Such bathtub or shower may be in the same room as
the flush water closet, or in another room, and all shall be properly connected to an
approved water supply system and shall provide at all times an adequate amount of
heated and unheated water under pressure and shall be connected to a sewer system
which complies with chapter 66 of this Code.
Section 18-124. Stairways, porches, and balconies.
The owner shall keep every stairway, inside or outside of a dwelling, and every porch or balcony
shall be kept in safe condition and sound repair, including but not limited to the following: stairs
and handrails shall conform to the city building code standards; every porch, balcony, or deck
which is 30 inches or more above grade shall have a guardrail that conforms to the state building
code standards; every handrail and guardrail shall be firmly fastened and maintained in good
condition; no flight of stairs shall have settled out of its intended position or have pulled away
4 of 7
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18; ARTICLE III; DIVISION 3
from the supporting or adjacent structures enough to cause hazard; no flight of stairs shall have
rotting, loose, or deteriorating support; excepting spiral and winding stairways, the treads and
risers of every flight of stairs shall be essentially uniform in width and height; stairways shall be
capable of supporting a live load of 100 pounds per square foot of horizontal projection.
Section 18-125. Access to dwelling units.
Access to or egress from each dwelling unit shall be provided without passing through any other
dwelling unit.
Section 18-126. Door locks.
No owner shall let or rent to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit unless all
exterior doors of the dwelling or dwelling units are equipped with safe, functioning locking
devices. Rental dwellings shall be furnished with door locks as follows:
(a) Building access. For the purpose of providing a reasonable amount of safety and general
welfare for persons occupying multiple-family dwellings with common areas, an
approved security system shall be maintained for each multiple-family building to control
access. The security system shall consist of locking building entrance or foyer doors, and
locked door leading from hallways into individual dwelling units. Dead-latch type door
locks shall be provided with releasable lever knobs (or doorknobs) on the inside of
building entrance doors and with key cylinders on the outside of the building entrance
doors. Building entrance door latches shall be of a type that is permanently locked.
(b) Unit access. Every door that provides ingress or egress for a dwelling unit within a
multiple-family building shall be equipped with an approved lock that has a deadlocking
bolt that cannot be retracted by end pressure, provided however, that such door shall be
openable from the inside without the use of a key or any special knowledge or effort.
(c) Existing buildings. All multiple-family dwellings in existence at the time this ordinance is
adopted, which were not previously required to have an approved security system, shall
not be subject to the requirements of subsection (1) of this section.
Section 18-127. Minimum standards for light and ventilation.
No person shall occupy as owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
rooming unit which does not comply the following requirements:
(a) Habitable room ventilation. Except where there is supplied some other device affording
ventilation and approved by the building official, every habitable room shall have at least
one window facing directly outdoors which can be opened easily. The minimum total of
openable window area in every habitable room shall be greater than eight percent of the
floor area of the room, with a minimum of eight square feet.
(b) Nonhabitable room ventilation. Every bathroom and water closet compartment, and every
laundry and utility room shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of windows,
or skylights having an area of not less than three square feet, except that no windows
shall be required if such rooms are equipped with a ventilation system which is approved
by the building official.
(c) Electric service, outlets, and fixtures. Every dwelling and rooming unit and all public and
common areas shall be supplied with electric service, functioning overcurrent protection
devices, electric outlets, and electric fixtures which are properly installed, which shall be
maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be connected to a source of electric
5 of 7
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18; ARTICLE III; DIVISION 3
power in a manner prescribed by ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city and by the
laws of the state. The minimum capacity of such electric service and the minimum
number of electric outlets and fixtures shall be as follows:
1. A dwelling containing one or two dwelling units shall have at least the
equivalent of 100-ampere, three-wire electric service per dwelling unit.
2. Each dwelling unit shall have at least one branch electric circuit for each 600
square feet of dwelling unit floor area.
3. Every habitable room shall contain one electrical convenience outlet for each 12
lineal feet, or major fraction thereof, measured horizontally around the room at
the baseboard line, provided that in each one ceiling-type electric light fixture
may be substituted for one of the required electrical convenience outlets.
4. Every water closet compartment, bathroom, kitchen, laundry room, and furnace
room shall contain at least one supplied ceiling-type or wall-type electric
convenience outlet.
5. Every public hall and public stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be
adequately lighted to provide at least ten foot-candles of illumination of all parts
thereof at all times by means of properly located electric light fixtures; provided
that such electrical lighting may be omitted from sunrise to sunset where there
are windows or skylights opening directly to the outside and where the total
window or skylight area is at least one-tenth of the combined horizontal area of
the floor and stairway of each such public hallway and where such windows or
skylight provide adequate natural light to all parts of each public hallway. Every
public hall and stairway in dwellings containing two dwelling units shall be
supplied with convenient light switches, controlling an adequate lighting system
that will provide at least ten foot-candles of illumination on all parts thereof,
which may be turned on when needed.
6. A convenient switch or equivalent device for turning on a light in each dwelling
unit shall be located near the point of entrance to such unit.
Section 18-128. Minimal thermal standards.
(a) No person shall occupy as owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling
or rooming unit, for the purpose of living therein which does not have heating facilities
which are properly installed and maintained in a safe and working condition and which
are capable of safely heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and water closet
compartments in every dwelling unit located therein to a temperature of at least 70
degrees Fahrenheit or such lesser temperature required by government authority to be
maintained at floor level, when the outdoor temperature is 20 degrees below zero
Fahrenheit.
(b) Gas or electric appliances designed primarily for cooking or water heating purposes shall
not be considered as heating facilities within the meaning of this section.
(c) Portable heating equipment employing flame and the use of liquid fuel does not meet the
requirement of this section and is prohibited.
(d) No owner or occupant shall install, operate, or use a space heater employing a flame that
is not vented outside the structure in an approved manner.
6 of 7
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18; ARTICLE III; DIVISION 3
Section 18-129. Construction standards.
Every dwelling within the city shall conform to section 18-32, which adopts the Minnesota State
Building Code as the building code for the city.
Section 18-130. Maximum density, minimum space for rental units.
No person shall permit or let to be occupied any rental dwelling or rooming unit for the purpose of
living therein which does not comply with the following requirements:
(a) Permissible occupancy of dwelling unit. The maximum permissible occupancy of any
rental dwelling or rooming unit shall be determined as follows:
1. For the first occupant, 150 square feet of habitable floor space and for every
additional occupant thereof, at least 100 square feet of habitable room floor
space.
2. In no event shall the total number of occupants exceed two times the number of
habitable rooms, less kitchen, in the dwelling or rooming unit.
(b) One family per dwelling unit. Not more than one family, except for temporary guests,
shall occupy a dwelling unit.
Section 18-131. Enforcement and inspection authority.
The building official or his designee shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article.
Inspections shall be conducted during reasonable hours and the building official shall present
evidence of his official capacity to the owner or occupant in charge of the dwelling or rooming
unit. The building official shall keep confidential all evidence, exclusive of the inspection record,
which he may discover or obtain in the course of an inspection made pursuant to this section and
such evidence shall be considered privileged.
Sections 18-132--18-160. Reserved.
7 of 7
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18; ARTICLE IV; DIVISION 1
CHAPTER 18; BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE IV. Moving of Buildings*
----------
*Cross references--Environment, ch. 30; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50; moving of buildings, §
74-161.
State law reference--Moving of buildings, Minn. Stats. § 221.81.
----------
DIVISION 1. Generally
Section 18-161. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given them
by this section.
Building means a structure designed, built or occupied as a shelter or roofed enclosure for persons,
animals or property and used for residential, business, mercantile, storage, commercial, industrial,
institutional, assembly, educational or recreational purposes.
Removal location means any location in the city to which a building may properly be moved and
on which such a building may be properly located after such moving under the provision of this
article.
Cross reference--Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Section 18-162. Enforcement of article.
The city manager, the building official, the police chief and the city engineer shall enforce and
carry out the requirements of this article.
Section 18-163. Building mover's license.
(a) Required. No person shall move, remove, raise or hold up any building within the city
without first obtaining a mover's license from the building official. The mover's license
fee will be determined by council resolution and must be paid at the time of filing the
license application.
(b) Insurance. A mover's license will not be issued until the applicant files a liability
insurance policy or policies insuring the applicant against liability imposed by the law in
the amount of at least $500,000.00 for a single injury or claim of damage and at least
$1,000,000.00 maximum liability. The policy must provide that it may not be canceled by
the insurer except upon notice to the city. In case of cancellation of the insurance, the
license will be automatically suspended until the insurance has been replaced.
(c) Bond or letter of credit. A mover's license will not be granted until the party applying
submits a bond or letter of credit in the sum of $5,000.00 with good and sufficient
sureties to be approved by the city attorney and the city council. The bond or letter of
credit shall be conditioned on the premise that the applicant will pay any and all damage
which may be caused to any property, either public or private, within the city, and will
indemnify and hold harmless the city against all liabilities, judgments, costs, and
expenses that accrue against the city as a consequence of granting the license. Such
expenses shall include city costs for the services of public utility maintenance personnel
necessitated by the moving of any buildings.
1 of 2
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18; ARTICLE IV; DIVISION 1
(d) Term; nontransferable. Each license issued under this section terminates on January 1
next succeeding the issuance of the permit, unless sooner revoked or forfeited, and shall
not be transferable or assignable.
(e) Revocation. A license may be revoked by the building official upon satisfactory proof of
any of the following:
(1) The licensee has been proven incompetent to properly move the building;
(2) The licensee has proceeded with any work in a manner that endangers people or
property;
(3) The licensee has been convicted for failure to comply with this section or related
ordinances; and/or
(4) For good cause.
Section 18-164. Removal of wires.
The person owning, operating, or controlling overhead electrical or other wires shall be
responsible to remove or displace the wires, as may be required for the removal of a building
authorized by a moving permit under this article.
Section 18-165--18-180. Reserved.
2 of 2
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18; ARTICLE IV; DIVISION 2
1 of 2
CHAPTER 18; BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE IV. Moving of Buildings.
DIVISION 2. Moving Permit.
Section 18-181. Required.
In each and every instance before raising, holding up, or moving any building, the licensed mover
shall obtain a moving permit from the building official.
Section 18-182. Application information.
An application for such moving permit shall designate the origin and destination of such building,
the route over which it is to be moved, and shall state the time in which the moving of such
building will be completed.
Section 18-183. Issuance of moving permit.
No permit to move a building shall be issued unless and until the following conditions are fully
complied with and approved by the building official:
(a) A conditional use permit has been granted for the property to which the building will be
moved.
(b) The building to be moved complies in all respects with the building code and other
applicable ordinances. The owner of the building to be moved may present to the
building official complete and detailed plans showing changes which will be made in
order to attain compliance with such provisions. In the event such changes are proposed,
a permit authorizing the moving of the building shall not be issued until the owner has
agreed in writing to complete the necessary changes within a period of six months, the
building official has approved the plans, the building permit fee has been paid, the
building permit issued, and a performance bond, letter of credit, or certified check
guaranteeing completion of such changes, equal to at least 1.5 times the cost of the
proposed estimated work as estimated by the building official, has been posted with the
city.
(c) The application must be accompanied by a moving permit fee. The fee will be computed
on the same basis as a building permit fee for new construction and the valuation shall be
based on the value of the completed building on the new location. This fee shall apply to
all applications for moving permits to locate a building within the city. The fee for a
moving permit to a location outside the city shall be established by the city council.
Section 18-184. Removed building to comply with architecture of neighborhood.
No permit shall be issued under the provisions of this article unless and until the building official
shall be satisfied that the building proposed to be removed will in its removal location conform to
the general character and to the type of architecture of the neighborhood.
Section 18-185. Deposit for expenses of the city.
Upon the receipt of an application for a moving permit, the building official shall procure an
estimate of expenses that will be incurred in removing and replacing any city electric wires, street
lamps, or pole lines, or any other property of the city, and any related materials that will be
required to move the building through the city. Prior to issuance of the permit, the building official
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18; ARTICLE IV; DIVISION 2
2 of 2
shall require of the applicant a deposit of a sum of money equal to twice the amount of the
estimated expense.
Section 18-186. Liability for expenses, etc., above deposit.
The permittee shall be liable for any expense, damage or costs in excess of deposited amounts or
securities. If necessary, the city attorney shall prosecute an action against the permittee in a court
of competent jurisdiction for the recovery of such excessive amounts.
Section 18-187. Duties of permittee generally.
Every permittee under this article shall:
(a) Use designated streets. Move a building only over streets designated for such use in the
written permit.
(b) Notify of revised moving time. Notify the building official in writing of a desired change
in moving date and hours as proposed in the application.
(c) Notify of damage. Notify the building official in writing of any and all damage done to
property belonging to the city within 24 hours after the damage or injury has occurred.
(d) Display lights. Cause red lights to be displayed during the nighttime on every side of the
building, while standing on a street, in such manner as to warn the public of the
obstruction, and shall at all times erect and maintain barricades across the streets in such
manner as to protect the public from damage or injury by reason of the removal of the
building.
(e) Street occupancy period. Remove the building from the city streets after one day of such
occupancy, unless an extension is granted by the building official.
(f) Comply with governing law. Comply with this article, chapter 74 and all other applicable
ordinances and laws upon relocating the building in the city.
(g) Pay expense of officer. When the building official has ordered the licensee to obtain the
services of a traffic officer to accompany the movement of the building to protect the
public from injury, the permittee shall pay the expense of the officer at the rate
established by the council for the estimated period required for the moving.
(h) Clear old premises. Remove all rubbish and materials and fill all excavations to existing
grade at the original building site, when located in the city, so that the premises are left in
a safe and sanitary condition.
Section 18-188. Procedure when original premises left unsafe.
The city shall proceed to do the work necessary to leaving the original premises in a safe and
sanitary condition, where permittee does not comply with the requirements of this article and the
cost thereof shall be charged against the general deposit.
Sections 18-189--18-210. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 1
CHAPTER 18; BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE V. Swimming Pools
DIVISION 1. Generally
Section 18-211. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section:
Portable swimming pool means a rubber or plastic swimming pool which can be erected without
permanent support.
Private residential swimming pool means any constructed or assembled swimming pool or
portable swimming pool which is used or intended to be used as a swimming pool in connection
with group I occupancies as defined in the state building code, and available only to the family of
the householder and his guests.
Swimming pool means any structure, basin, chamber or tank constructed or designed to contain an
artificial body of water for swimming, diving, relaxation or recreational bathing, and having a
depth of two feet or more at any point, and with a surface area exceeding 150 square feet.
Cross reference--Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Section 18-212. Enforcement officer specified.
The building official is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this
article.
Cross reference--Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq.
Section 18-213. Design and construction requirements.
The design and construction of all private residential swimming pools shall comply with the
following:
(a) Structural design. The pool structure shall be engineered and designed to withstand the
expected forces to which it will be subjected.
(b) Overflow and surface design. The pool and surrounding area shall be constructed and
arranged in such a manner that no splash or overflow water shall return to the pool. No
surface or roof drainage shall be permitted to enter the pool.
(c) Finish. Pool floor and walls shall have a cleanable, white or similar light-colored and
impermeable surface.
(d) Handholds. Handholds shall be provided and shall not be more than nine inches above
the normal waterline and shall extend around the entire periphery of the pool.
(e) Pool deck. Unobstructed deck areas not less than 48 inches wide shall be provided to
extend entirely around the pool. The deck surface shall have a pitch of at least one-fourth
inch to the foot, designed so as to prevent back drainage into the pool. If the deck drains
are provided, drain pipe lines shall be at least two inches in diameter and drain openings
shall have an open area of at least four times the cross sectional area of the drain pipe.
1 of 3
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 1
The deck drain system shall be indirect connection to the recirculation system piping. No
deck, other than the ground surface, shall be required for any pool that is totally above
ground and which is less than four feet in height.
(f) Steps or ladders. One or more means of egress in the form of steps or ladders shall be
provided from any pool having a water depth of 36 inches or more. Treads of steps and
ladders shall be equipped with nonslip material.
(g) Plumbing. All supply and waste piping connected to such swimming pool shall be
installed in accordance with the state plumbing code.
(h) Water supply. The water supply serving the swimming pool shall be potable water or of a
quality otherwise acceptable to the building official. All portions of the water distribution
system serving the swimming pool and auxiliary facilities shall be protected against
backflow. Water introduced into the pool, either directly or to the recirculation system,
shall be supplied through an air gap in accordance with the state plumbing code. When
such connections are not possible, the supply shall be protected by a suitable backflow
preventer in accordance with the state plumbing code, installed on the discharge side of
the last control to the fixture, device or appurtenance.
(i) Drainage. Pools shall be equipped with facilities for completely emptying the pool to the
sanitary sewer, or other suitable disposal unit acceptable to the building official. There
shall be no direct physical connection between the sewer system and any drain from the
swimming pool or recirculation system. Any swimming pool or gutter drain or overflow
from the recirculation system when discharged to the sewer system, storm drain, or other
approved natural drainage course shall connect through a suitable air gap or air break so
as to preclude the possibility of backup of sewer or waste into the swimming pool piping
system. The water from the pool shall not be drained on the streets or sidewalk or any
other public property or private property not owned by the pool owner.
(j) Heaters. All gas-fired or oil burning swimming pool heaters and builders shall comply
with the plumbing code and heating code of the city.
Section 18-214. Electrical requirements.
(a) All electrical installations provided for, installed and used in conjunction with a
residential swimming pool or portable swimming pool shall conform with the state
electrical code.
(b) The following parts of swimming pools shall not be placed under existing service-drop
conductors or any other open overhead wiring; nor shall such wiring be installed above
the following:
(1) Swimming pool and the area extending ten feet horizontally from the inside of
the walls of the pool.
(2) Diving structure.
(3) Observation stands, towers or platforms.
(c) All metal fences, enclosures or railings near or adjacent to a private residential swimming
pool or portable swimming pool, which might become electrically alive as a result of
contact with broken overhead conductors, or from any other cause, shall be effectively
grounded.
2 of 3
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 1
(d) Lighting, when used to illuminate any swimming pool, shall be so arranged and shaded as
to reflect light away from adjoining premises.
Section 18-215. Chemical treatment.
Gaseous chlorinating systems shall not be used as a disinfecting method for a private residential
swimming pool or portable swimming pool. Below ground pools shall meet the requirements for
recirculation, disinfection and water quality maintenance as required for public swimming pools as
set forth in the department of health miscellaneous environmental health rules (Minnesota Rules,
Part 4717.0100 to 4717.3900).
Section 18-216. Fences.
Outdoor private residential swimming pools shall be protected by a fence, wall or building or
other enclosure or any combination thereof. All fence openings or points of entry into the pool
area enclosure shall be equipped with gates. The fence and gates shall be at least four feet in
height. All gates shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices placed at the top of
the gate or otherwise inaccessible to small children and provided with hardware for permanent
locking devices. The openings between the bottom of the fence and the ground surface shall not be
more than four inches.
Section 18-217. Approval of other design and equipment.
Any swimming pool, the design and equipment of which incorporates features other than those set
forth in this article, shall be subjected to review and approved by the building official in
accordance with acceptable standards and in conformance with current public health and safety
practices.
Section 18-218. Location.
No portion of a swimming pool or appurtenances thereto shall be located from the lot line at a
distance less than that required for side yard for a one-story principal building, as set forth in the
chapter 74.
Section 18-219. Dangers to life and health prohibited.
No private residential swimming pool or portable swimming pool shall be used, kept, maintained
or operated in the city if such use, keeping, maintaining or operating shall be the occasion of any
nuisance shall be dangerous to life or detrimental or health.
Sections 18-220--18-235. Reserved.
3 of 3
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 18; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
CHAPTER 18; BUILDING AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE V. Swimming Pools
DIVISION 2. Permit
Section 18-236. Required.
No person shall construct or erect a private residential swimming pool or reconstruct any such
pool or do any alteration, addition, remodeling or repair to such a swimming pool in excess of the
value of $100.00 without first obtaining a permit from the building official. A permit shall be
required for the re-erection of any such swimming pool which was once erected with permit or
which was in existence at the date of the enactment of this article, and then disassembled, and
which is not re-erected in the same location.
Section 18-237. Plans to be submitted.
Plans and specifications and pertinent explanatory data shall be submitted with the application for
a permit under this article. No new plan shall be required for the re-erection of a pool according to
a plan previously submitted. The plans shall be reviewed relative to design, operation and
maintenance insofar as health and safety features are concerned in accordance with the standards
prescribed in this article. The plans shall be drawn to scale of not less than one-fourth inch per
foot. The plans shall include the following data and such other information as may be reasonably
requested by the building official.
(a) The general layout of the entire building lot on which the pool is to be located, including
the distance of the pool from the lot lines, the location of all utilities, and the location of
any source of contamination within 50 feet of the pool.
(b) The dimensions of pool, including the effective length and width of the pool, pool decks
and other similar items.
(c) The source of water supply and method drainage, including all pipes, inlets, outlets and
waste and discharge lines.
Section 18-238. Construction in accordance with approved plans; deviations.
Swimming pools, appurtenances, water supply and drainage systems and other features shall be
constructed in conformity with the approved plans. If any deviation from such plans is desired, a
supplementary plan covering that portion of the work involved shall be filed for approval and shall
conform to the provisions of this article.
Section 18-239. Permit fee.
The fee for a permit shall be as established and set forth in the fee schedule established by the city
council under subsection 74-37(b).
1 of 1
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 20; ARTICLE I
1 of 3
CHAPTER 20. HERITAGE PRESERVATION REGULATIONS
ARTICLE I. Regulations.
Section 20.1. Purpose.
This Ordinance is adopted for the purpose of protecting the historic and aesthetic
qualities of the City by preserving, rehabilitating or restoring, when reasonable, buildings
or structures which constitute or reflect distinctive features of the architectural or
historical resources of the City and thereby promoting the public welfare and preserving
the cultural heritage of the City.
Section 20.2. Definitions.
(a) Historically Significant Building or Structure means any building or structure or
portion of a building or structure currently on or in the future listed on the
National Historic Register or located in a designated local Heritage Preservation
District, a local Heritage Preservation Site, or any structure located in the
Historic Downtown Core District (as identified in Article II of this chapter) that
was constructed in 1935 or prior.
(b) Commission means the Heritage Preservation Commission.
(c) Demolition means the complete dismantling, removing, razing or destruction of
a building; also, for purposes of this Article, physically removing a building
from its original foundation.
Section 20.3. Permits Required.
No building or structure may be demolished without obtaining a demolition permit. An
application for a demolition permit must be filed with the City Building Official.
For historically significant buildings or structures, the Building Official must forward a
copy of each demolition permit application to the Commission for review according to
this article.
Any person receiving such a permit may conduct the demolition of the building as
authorized under such permit only in compliance with the terms of the permit and only
before the permit expires.
Section 20-4. Demolition Plan Review for Historically Significant Properties.
(a) Within thirty (30) days after a determination that the building is historically
significant, the applicant for the demolition permit must submit three (3) copies
of a demolition plan to the Heritage Preservation Commission staff. The
demolition plan shall include the following information:
(1) A map showing the location of the building or structure to be
demolished on its property and with reference to neighboring
properties;
(2) A legal description of the property and owner of record;
(3) Photographs of all building elevations;
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 20; ARTICLE I
2 of 3
(4) A description of the building or structure or portion of the building or
structure to be demolished;
(5) The reason for the proposed demolition and date supporting the reason,
including where applicable, data sufficient to establish any economic
justification for demolition;
(6) Proposed plans and a schedule for reuse of the property on which the
building or structure to be demolished is located;
(7) Relation of the demolition and future site to the comprehensive plan
and zoning requirements;
(8) A description of alternatives to demolition;
(9) Evidence that the building or structure has been advertised for sale for
restoration or reuse and that sale for restoration or reuse is not
economically feasible.
(10) Any available architectural drawings.
(11) A history of the building and date of construction, based on appropriate
historical resources, such as deeds, map, etc.
(b) The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the pending application
according to the requirements for public hearings as found in the zoning chapter
of the City Code. The Commission shall consider the architectural and historic
merit of the building, the effect of demolition on surrounding buildings, and the
effect of any new proposed construction on the remainder of the buildings and
surrounding buildings.
(c) After a public hearing and review of the application material, the Commission
shall recommend approval of the demolition permit upon finding that the owner
has made a reasonable effort to sell or preserve the structure and there is no
feasible alternative to demolition. If the Commission finds that there is a
feasible alternative to demotion, the Commission shall recommend denial of the
demolition permit.
(d) Upon recommendation of the Commission, the City Council shall consider the
request and approve or deny the demolition permit. Such action shall take place
within sixty (60) days after receipt and acceptance of the information required to
be submitted under Section 20-4(a).
Section 20-5. Emergency Demolition.
If a historically significant building or structure poses an immediate threat to health or
safety due to its deteriorated condition, the owner of the building or structure may request
issuance of an emergency demolition permit. If the Building Official finds that the
condition of the building or structure poses a serious and imminent threat to public health
and safety and that there is no reasonable alternative to immediate demolition, the
Building Official may issue an emergency demolition permit.
Section 20-6. Expiration.
Any demolition permit that is issued pursuant to an application subject to this Article
shall expire one hundred eighty (180) days after the permit is issued if the work
authorized by such permit has not commenced.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 20; ARTICLE I
3 of 3
Section 20-7. Waiver.
In cases of hardship, any person aggrieved by the requirements of this Article may apply
to the City Council for waiver of all or a portion of the applicable restrictions. A waiver
may be granted where the City Council finds substantial hardship caused by the
restrictions of this Article and finds the waiver will not unduly affect the purposes for
which the Article was enacted.
Section 20-8. Amendment to this Chapter.
(a) Request for Amendment. An amendment to this Chapter may be initiated by a
City resident, the Heritage Preservation Commission or the City Council.
(b) Review of Proposed Amendment. Proposed amendments ahall be reviewed by
the Heritage Preservation Commission prior to presentation to the City Council
for final consideration.
Section 20-9. Injunction.
In addition to any other relief provided by this Ordinance, the City Attorney may apply to
a Court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to prohibit the continuation of any
violation of this Ordinance. This application for relief may include seeking a temporary
restraining order, temporary injunction and permanent injunction.
Section 20-10. Enforceability and Violations.
Unless expressly provided otherwise, any person or entity violating any provisions of the
City Code, including this Chapter, any rule or regulations adopted in pursuance of any
such provision, or any other order lawfully enforcing the City Code or this Chapter, may
be charged with a petty misdemeanor or misdemeanor. The term “petty misdemeanor
and misdemeanor” are defined in Minnesota Statutes Section 609.02, as amended. In
addition to seeking prosecution of a violation as a petty misdemeanor or misdemeanor,
the City may separately, or in conjunction with the prosecution, bring an action for
specific performance to enforce any provisions of the City Code, including this Chapter,
any rule or regulation adopted in pursuance of such provision, or any order lawfully
enforcing the City Code, including this Chapter.
Sections 20-11 thru 20-39. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 20; ARTICLE II
1 of 2
CHAPTER 20. HERITAGE PRESERVATION REGULATIONS
ARTICLE II. Regulations for Historic Downtown Core District.
Section 20-40. Purpose and Intent.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this Article is to protect the integrity and historic turnof-
the-century character of the Historic Downtown Core District.
(b) Intent. It is intended that the regulations contained in this Article will assist in
maintaining the historic character of this district while allowing for normal
maintenance and repair of commercial structures.
Section 20-41. Area of Application.
The Historic Downtown Core District, as shown on the map at the end of this Article, is
part of the area identified by the Heritage Preservation Commission as Historic District 5.
The regulations shall apply to commercial buildings within the bounded area identified as
well as both sides of Third Avenue as contained in the Core District.
Section 20-42. Exterior Materials Standards for Construction, Remodeling, Repair and/or
Maintenance of Commercial Buildings within the District.
(a) Infill Buildings. An infill building façade shall be composed of materials that
are similar to original adjacent facades. New buildings shall not stand out
against other buildings in the district and shall be compatible with the general
area. Site plan approvals for new commercial buildings in this district will be
reviewed by the Planning Director or their designee for consistency and the
preservation guidelines promulgated for Historic District 5.
(b) Materials. The use of brick, stone, decorative masonry, or other similar
materials is required on new or existing building façades that can be viewed
from a public street, not including an alley.
(c) Color texture, and style schemes. All exterior finish colors shall be consistent
with the period colors as identified on the color palettes on file with the Planning
Department. All exterior textures and styles for existing buildings shall be
consistent with the period of construction of the building.
(d) Repair and Maintenance of Masonry Surfaces. New mortar joints shall match
the style, size, composition and color of the original joints.
(e) Removal and replacement of exterior materials. Where existing exterior
materials do not meet requirements of this Article, the same or significantly
similar material may be used to replace or repair the façade, except when a total
or combination of at least 50% or more of the façade is removed for any reason
within an 18 month period, the entire façade must comply with requirements of
this Article.
Section 20-43. Approval Process.
(a) Application. Plans for exterior work on commercial buildings located in this
district, including construction renovations, remodeling, alterations,
rehabilitation, maintenance, repair and painting, shall be submitted to the
Planning Director or the Director’s designee for review and approval.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 20; ARTICLE II
2 of 2
(b) Appeals. A person may appeal the decision by the Planning Director or the
Director’s designee and request review by the Heritage Preservation
Commission, Planning Commission and City Council. The appeal process shall
be as follows:
(1) An appeal must be submitted in writing to the Planning Department
explaining the reasons for the appeal, detail of the proposed material,
and any other information deemed pertinent. A fee for said appeal, as
established by the City Council, shall also be paid at the time the
written appeal is submitted to the Planning Department.
(2) The Planning Department shall then present the appeal to the Heritage
Preservation Commission who shall hold a public hearing. All
property owners within the Historic Downtown Core District shall be
notified of the hearing by mail and official notice shall be posted in the
City’s official newspaper ten (10) days prior to the hearing. The
Heritage Preservation Commission shall make a recommendation to the
City Council based on the following findings:
(a) The proposed design or material is consistent with the
purposes of this Article.
(b) The proposed design or material would enhance the
architectural appearance of the building, and would be equal
or superior to designs or materials permitted by this Article.
(c) The proposed design or material would be in harmony with
the character of adjacent buildings and the surrounding
district.
(3) The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the City
Council based on the criteria listed in subpart (b) (2). No public
hearing is required by the Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission may make their recommendation before or after the public
hearing is held by the Heritage Preservation Commission.
(4) The City Council shall make a final determination on the appeal based
on the criteria listed in subpart (b) (2); recommendation of Heritage
Preservation Commission and/or recommendation of the Planning
Commission.
Sections 20-44 thru 20-59. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 20; ARTICLE III
1 of 7
CHAPTER 20. HERITAGE PRESERVATION REGULATIONS
ARTICLE III. Regulations for Heritage Preservation Districts, Sites or Structures.
Section 20-60. Definitions. For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words or phrases are defined as
follows. Words not defined in this Chapter shall have the meaning as found in Chapter 74 of the
City Code, or if not defined, shall have their common meaning.
City. Means the City of Anoka.
City Register. Means a City maintained listing of City-designated Heritage Preservation District,
Sites or Structures.
Commission. Means the City of Anoka Heritage Preservation Commission.
Heritage Preservation District. Means a contiguous collection or group of lands, parcels, sites,
structures, buildings or objects that are determined to be historically, culturally, or architecturally
significant as a whole and has been designated as a Heritage Preservation District pursuant to this
Article.
Heritage Preservation Guidelines. Means the established criteria by which any proposed changes,
including architectural or site modifications, are judged for a Heritage Preservation District, site or
structure.
Heritage Preservation Site. Means any individual property, parcel, or place that has been
determined to be historically, culturally, or architecturally significant and has been designated a
Heritage Preservation Site pursuant to this Article.
Heritage Preservation Structure. Means any building, structure, work of art, or other object that
has been determined to be historically, culturally, or architecturally significant and has been
designated as a Heritage Preservation Structure pursuant to this Article.
National Register of Historic Places. Means the Nation’s official list of properties worthy of
designation by the United States Department of the Interior, National Park Service.
Property Owner. Means the record owner of real property located in the City of Anoka.
Section 20-61. Purpose and Intent.
The purpose and intent of Heritage Preservation designation is to provide for the preservation of
the buildings, lands, sites, and areas or neighborhoods that possess historical, cultural or
architectural significance in the City.
Section 20-62. City Designation of a Heritage Preservation Site.
(a) Designation.
(1) The Commission or any person of voting age may nominate a site of the City
Register with the written permission of the Property Owner of the site.
(2) The Property Owner shall bear the responsibility of assuring the Commission
that the designation will not have a detrimental impact upon any person or entity
having a financial interest in the site.
(3) An affirmative vote of a majority of the entire commission is necessary to
recommend designation of a site.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 20; ARTICLE III
2 of 7
(b) Background Report.
(1) Prior to recommending a site for City designation, an investigation and report on
the historical and cultural significance of the site shall be completed by City
staff and forwarded to the Commission.
(2) The report shall contain the legal description of the site and shall note any
projected or planned improvements for the site.
(c) Criteria for Designation. The Commission may recommend designation of a site only
when, in its sole discretion, the property meets at least two of the following:
(1) The site has character, interest, heritage or cultural characteristics, or value as
part of the development of the City;
(2) The site was the location of a significant historical event;
(3) The site is identified with a person or persons who have significantly contributed
to the culture or development of the City;
(4) The site’s unique location represents an established visual feature of a
neighborhood or the community as a whole.
(5) The site is identified with the work of a landscape architect whose individual
work has influenced the development of the City of Anoka.
(6) The site embodies elements of design, materials or craftsmanship that represent
architectural innovation.
(d) Hearing. Upon receipt of the information required in Section 20-62 (a) and (b), the
Commission shall hold a public hearing to consider designation. At least ten (10) days
prior to the hearing, the City shall (1) publish notice of said hearing in the official
newspaper and (2) send a copy of the hearing notice to the Property Owner.
(e) Recommendation to the City Council. The Commission shall forward a complete report
to the City Council, including the Commission’s recommendation, the criteria upon
which any designation is being considered, the background report, proposed Heritage
Preservation guidelines specific to the proposed site and minutes from the hearing.
(f) City Council Action. The City Council may, by ordinance, designate the site as a
Heritage Preservation site or the Council may deny the designation. The City Council
shall include written findings in support of their decision.
Section 20-63. City Designation of a Heritage Preservation Structure.
(a) Designation.
(1) The Commission or any person of voting age may nominate a structure to the
City Register with the written permission of the Property Owner of the structure.
(2) The Property Owner and the owner of the structure shall bear the responsibility
of assuring the Commission that the designation will not have a detrimental
impact upon any person or entity having a financial interest in the structure.
(3) An affirmative vote of a majority of the entire Commission is necessary to
recommend designation of a structure.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 20; ARTICLE III
3 of 7
(b) Background Report.
(1) Prior to recommending a structure for City designation, an investigation and
report on the historical, cultural and architectural significance of the structure
shall be completed by City staff and forwarded to the Commission.
(2) The report shall contain the legal description of the site on which the structure is
located and shall note any projected or planned improvements to the structure.
(c) Criteria for Designation. The Commission may recommend designation of a structure
only when, in its sole discretion, the structure meets at least two of the following:
(1) The structure embodies a distinguishing characteristic of an architectural type;
(2) The structure is identified with the work of an architect or master building
whose individual work has influenced the development of the City;
(3) The structure embodies elements of architectural design, detail, materials, or
craftsmanship that represents significant architectural innovation;
(4) The structure was constructed prior to 1930;
(5) The structure has character, interest or value as a part of the development,
heritage or cultural characteristics of the City of Anoka;
(6) The structure was the location of a significant historical event;
(7) The structure is identified with a person or persons who significantly contributed
to the culture of the development of the City of Anoka; and
(8) The structure’s unique location or singular physical characteristics represent an
established and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood, community or the City
as a whole.
(d) Hearing. Upon receipt of the information required in Section 20-63, the Commission
shall hold a public hearing to consider designation. At least ten (10) days prior to the
hearing, the City shall (1) publish notice of said hearing in the official newspaper and (2)
send a copy of the hearing notice to the Property Owner and owner of the structure.
(e) Recommendation to the City Council. The Commission shall forward a complete report
to the City Council, including the Commission’s recommendation, the criteria upon
which any designation is being considered, the background report, proposed Heritage
Preservation guidelines specific to the proposed structure and minutes from the hearing.
(f) City Council Action. The City Council may, by ordinance, designate the structure as a
Heritage Preservation structure or the Council may deny the designation. The City
Council shall include written findings in support of their decision.
Section 20-64. City Designation of a Heritage Preservation District (HPD).
(a) Establishment of a Heritage Preservation District.
(1) Designation of a HPD establishes a special overlay district that will be identified
on the City’s zoning map.
(2) Designation of land as a HPD shall not change or affect, in any way, the uses
allowed or the restrictions then or thereafter applicable to the land under any
other zoning classification in which the land is then or thereafter located.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 20; ARTICLE III
4 of 7
(3) All of the underlying zoning district regulations shall continue to apply to the
land within an HPD.
(4) Additional restrictions may also apply to land within an HPD as a result of
designation.
(b) Designation. Before land may be considered for designation of an HPD district, the
Commission must receive a petition bearing the signatures of a majority of Property
Owners within the proposed district.
(c) Background Report.
(1) Prior to recommending a district for City designation, an investigation and
report on the historical, cultural, and architectural significance of the district
shall be completed by City staff and forwarded to the Commission. The report
shall provide information on the historical significance of buildings, structures,
sites or objects within the proposed district.
(2) The report shall recommend the boundaries of the proposed district and shall
include the legal descriptions of all properties to be included in the district.
(3) All recommendations shall be made in consideration of any master plans, zoning
requirements, projected public improvements, and existing or proposed
redevelopment applicable to the properties under consideration for designation.
(d) Criteria for Designation. The Commission may recommend designation of an HPD only
when, in its sole discretion, the property or properties within the proposed district meet at
least two (2) of the following criteria:
(1) The district has character, interest or value as a part of the development,
heritage, or cultural characteristics of the City;
(2) The district's location was a site of a significant historical event;
(3) The district is identified with a person or persons who have significantly
contributed to the culture or development of the City;
(4) The district embodies a distinguishing characteristic of an architectural type;
(5) The district is identified with the work of an architect or master builder whose
individual work has influenced the development of the City;
(6) The district embodies architectural design, detail, materials or craftsmanship
that represents significant architectural innovation;
(7) The district's unique location or singular physical characteristics represent an
established and visual feature of a neighborhood or the City as a whole.
(e) Hearing. Upon receipt of the information required in Section 20-65, (b) and (c), the
Commission shall hold a public hearing to consider designation. At least ten (10) days
prior to the hearing, the City shall: (1) publish notice of said hearing in the official
newspaper and (2) send a copy of the hearing notice to all of the Property Owners within
the proposed district.
(f) Recommendation to the City Council. The Commission shall forward a complete report
to the City Council, including the Commission's recommendation, the criteria upon
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 20; ARTICLE III
5 of 7
which any designation is being considered, the background report, proposed Heritage
Preservation guidelines specific to the proposed district and minutes from the hearing.
(g) City Council Action. The City Council may, by ordinance, designate the proposed site as
a Heritage Preservation District or may deny the designation. The City Council shall
include written findings in support of their decision.
Section 20-65. Review & Approval.
(a) Additional Review Required. Review of proposed construction affecting designated
sites, structures or districts shall be required in the following situations:
(1) When proposed work is inconsistent with the approved guidelines for the site,
structure or district; or
(2) When moving a building into the district.
(b) Process for Approval. Requests for approval of projects under subsection (a) of this
section shall be accompanied by three (3) copies of detailed plans for the proposed
construction, including a site plan showing the location of structures on the site and the
location of the new construction, building elevations, and design details and materials
as necessary to evaluate the request. The application shall be submitted to the
appropriate staff who, within fifteen (15) business days of submission, shall determine
whether the submission is complete. If incomplete, the applicant will be notified with
instructions for completing the application. If complete, staff shall forward the
application to the Commission for review, consideration and recommendations to the
City Council.
The Building Official shall not issue any permits related to an application for
construction within a designated Heritage Preservation District or on a designated site
or structure until the request has been approved by the appropriate staff, based on
compliance with this Chapter.
(c) Review Criteria. When considering requests under this Section and in making its
recommendations to the City Council, the Commission shall make reasonable attempts
to:
(1) Provide a compatible use for a property that requires minimal alteration of the
building, structure, or site and its environment. If no compatible use can be
found, adaptive reuse may be considered in lieu of demolition.
(2) Keep the distinguishing original qualities or character of a building, structure
or site and its environment.
(3) Avoid the removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive
architectural features where possible.
(4) Treat distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship that
characterize a building, structure, or site with sensitivity. If no discernible
architectural style is present, a building exterior may emulate or compliment
other prevailing styles in the district.
(5) Repair deteriorated architectural features if possible. In the event replacement
is necessary, the new material should match the material being replaced in
composition, design, color, texture, and other visual qualities.
(6) Require that surface cleaning of structures be undertaken with the least abrasive
means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that will damage
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 20; ARTICLE III
6 of 7
historic building materials shall not be undertaken absent extreme
circumstances and prior City Council approval.
(7) Permit contemporary designs for alterations and additions to existing properties
when such alterations and additions do not destroy historical, architectural or
cultural material, and such design is compatible with the size, scale, color,
material, and character of the property, neighborhood or environment.
(8) Protect the essential form and integrity of the primary structure.
(9) Protect and preserve archeological resources affected by, or adjacent to any
project.
(10) Retain the original exterior walls or surface of buildings and structures to the
maximum extent possible. In no case shall more than fifty percent (50%) of the
original exterior walls be destroyed, removed or covered.
(d) Commission Review. The Commission shall determine if the work to be performed
would adversely affect the Heritage Preservation District, site or structure based on the
criteria set forth in subsection (c) of this Section. The Commission shall make and
forward written findings to the City Council in support of their recommendation for
either approval or disapproval.
(e) City Council Action. Upon receipt of a recommendation from the Commission, the City
Council shall consider the application at its next available meeting and shall approve or
deny the request by resolution. The Council shall make written finding in support of
their decision.
Section 20-66. Emergency Repairs. In emergency situations where repair is needed to protect the safety of
a structure and its inhabitants, the Building Official, in consultation with other appropriate
staff, may, without Commission action, approve the repair of only those items needed to
insure safety. If a permit is issued pursuant to this Section, the Building Official shall require
that such repairs be made in conformance with the recommended standards of historic
preservation as set forth in this Article and adopted Heritage Preservation Guidelines, to the
extent possible. In addition, staff shall notify the Commission of such action and specify the
facts or conditions constituting the emergency situation.
Section 20-67. Exception. The regulations of this Article do not apply to the Historic Downtown Core
District as identified in Article II of this Chapter.
Section 20-68. Penalty for Violations. Any Property Owner, owner, or occupant of any area, place,
building, structure, or other object within a locally designated Heritage Preservation Dsitrict,
or a designated site, or of a designated structure, who violates any provision of this Article,
shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day the subject property is in
violation of this Article shall constitute a separate violation and may be punishable as such.
The imposition of penalties herein prescribed shall not prevent the City from taking
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent unlawful alteration of a building, structure, site or
district. Such action may include any civil remedy including injunction, restraining order,
declaratory action, civil enforcement action, or nuisance abatement action under State Law or
Cit ordinance.
Section 20-69. City Register. The office of the City Clerk shall record the legal descriptions of all
designated site, structures or districts within the City.
Section 20-70. District Court Appeals. Any Property Owner or owner of a structure aggrieved by a
decision of the City Council under this Article may file an appeal with the Anoka County
District Court. No appeal shall be effective unless it is served within sixty (60) days from the
decision of the City Council.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 20; ARTICLE III
7 of 7
Section 20-71. Incentives and Tools. In furtherance of the City’s Heritage Preservation goals, the
Commission may”
(a) Develop and promote the use of incentives and/or tools to encourage preservation,
i.e. façade easements.
(b) Work with the Economic Development Commission and the Housing &
Redevelopment Authority to identify programs and incentives for City-designated
heritage preservation properties.
(c) Encourage property owners to consider listing their property on the National Register
of Historic Places.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22; ARTICLE I
1 of 1
CHAPTER 22. LICENSING; BUSINESSES & SERVICES
ARTICLE I. Courtesy Benches
Section 22-1. License Required.
No person shall place a courtesy bench bearing advertisements upon a public sidewalk
without an annual license issued by the City Clerk. Such a license shall be issued upon a
showing that the placement of the courtesy bench will not endanger public safety. A fee
in the amount established by the Council shall be paid to the city prior to the issuance of
the license.
Sections 22-2 thru 22-30. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22; ARTICLE II
1 of 1
CHAPTER 22. LICENSING; BUSINESSES & SERVICES
ARTICLE II. Arborists/Tree Care
Section 22-31. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any individual, partnership or corporation to conduct as a business, the
cutting, trimming, pruning, removal, spraying or otherwise treating of trees in the City without
first having secured a license from the City to conduct such a business.
Section 22-32. Application.
An application for a license under this ordinance shall be available at the office of the City Clerk.
The application for a license shall be made on a form by the City.
Section 22-33. Liability Insurance.
No license or renewal shall be granted, nor shall the same be effective until the applicant files with
the City Clerk, proof of a public liability insurance policy covering all operations of such applicant
under this ordinance, during the full term of the license, for the sum of:
(a) One hundred thousand and 00-100 ($100,000) – against liability for bodily injuries or
death for each person; and
(b) Three hundred thousand and 00-100 ($300,000) – against liability for bodily injuries or
death to more than one person from one accident; and
(c) On hundred thousand and 00-100 ($100,000) – against liability for damage or destruction
of property.
The City shall be named and the insurance provided shall include the City as an additional party
insured. Said policy shall provide that it may not be cancelled by the insurer except after ten (10)
days written notice to the City, and if such insurance is so cancelled and the licensee shall fail to
replace the same with another policy conforming to the provisions of this ordinance, said license
shall be automatically suspended until such insurance has been replaced.
Section 22-34. Bond.
No license shall be issued until the applicant provides a twenty-five hundred dollar ($2,500) bond
to the City, which shall be approved in a form as to security by the City.
Section 22-35. Chemical Treatment Requirements.
Applicants who propose to use chemical substances in any activity related to treatment or disease
control of trees and shrubs, shall file with the City Clerk proof that the applicant or an employee of
the applicant administering such treatment has been certified by the Agronomy Division of the
Minnesota Department of Agriculture as a “Commercial Pesticide Applicator”. Such certification
shall include knowledge of tree disease chemical treatment.
Section 22-36. Fee(s).
The annual license fee shall be determined by the City Council.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE III
1 of 11
CHAPTER 22. LICENSING; BUSINESSES & SERVICES
ARTICLE III. Pawnshop & Pawnbrokers*
----------
*State law references--Pawnbrokers, Minn. Stats. ch. 325J; local regulation of pawnbrokers,
Minn. Stats. §§ 325J.02(b), 325J.13.
----------
Section 22-81. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
Pawnbroker. Means a person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending
money on the security of pledged goods left in pawn, or in the business of purchasing
tangible personal property to be left in pawn on the condition that it may be redeemed or
repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time. The following
are not pawnbrokers:
(a) Any bank regulated by the state, the comptroller of the currency of the United
States, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the board of governors of the
Federal Reserve System, or any other federal or state authority and their
affiliates;
(b) Any bank or savings association whose deposits or accounts are eligible for
insurance by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or any successor to it
and all affiliates of those banks and savings associations;
(c) Any state or federally chartered credit union; and any industrial loan and thrift
company or regulated lender subject to licensing and regulation by the state
department of commerce.
Pawnshop. Means the location at which or premises in which a pawnbroker regularly
conducts business.
Pawn transaction. Means any loan on the security of pledged goods or any purchase of
pledged goods on the condition that the pledged goods are left with the
pawnbroker/pawnshop and may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed
price within a fixed period of time.
Person. Means an individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, joint
venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity, however organized.
Pledged goods. Means tangible personal property other than chooses in action, securities,
bank drafts, or printed evidence of indebtedness, that are purchased by, deposited with, or
otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker/pawnshop in connection
with a pawn transaction.
State law reference--Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. § 325J.01.
Section 22-82. Hours of operation.
No property shall be received or sold as a pledge or purchase by any pawnbroker/pawnshop before
7:00 a.m., or after 9:00 p.m. on any day. Further, no pawnbroker/pawnshop shall be open for
business on Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE III
2 of 11
Section 22-83. Records required.
(a) Every pawnbroker shall maintain on the premises a record of all transactions of pledged
or purchased goods for a period of three (3) years. These records shall be a correct copy
of the entries made of the pawn transactions. A pawnbroker shall upon request provide to
the Anoka Police Department a complete and accurate record of pawn transactions. If the
pawnbroker provides the records in a computerized format, they must be provided in the
interchange file specification, as defined in Minnesota Statute 325J.05 (c).
(b) Each licensee under this article shall keep a record of each transaction made in the course
of his business. Such records shall be in a form prescribed by the city clerk and shall, in
all instances, be legibly made in ink and be in the English language. The records so kept
shall include the following information about each transaction:
(1) The full name, home address, home telephone number and business telephone
number, and date of birth of the person pledging or selling the item.
(2) The time and date of the transaction.
(3) A complete and accurate description of the item pledged or sold, including, but
not limited to, all identifying numbers and identifying marks, and model and
serial numbers if indicated on them.
(4) A physical description of the person pawning or selling the item, which may
include:
a. Race;
b. Sex;
c. Height;
d. Weight;
e. Color of eyes;
f. Color of hair;
g. Other physical characteristics.
(5) The amount of money paid or loaned for the item.
(6) The signature of the person pledging or selling the item.
(7) The identification number from any of the following forms of identification of
the seller or pledgor:
a. Current valid driver's license containing a picture issued by a province
of Canada or a state;
b. Current valid photo identification card issued by a province of Canada
or a state;
c. The identification information from the current valid driver's license or
current valid photo identification card must either be stamped or
photocopied by the pawnbroker and the actual identification must be
displayed to the pawnbroker at the time of the transaction.
(8) The maturity date of the pawn transaction and the amount due.
(9) The monthly and annual interest rates, including all pawn fees and charges.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE III
3 of 11
(10) Any other information the police chief shall require.
(11) A color photograph or color video recording of:
a. Each customer involved in a billable transaction.
b. Each item pawned or sold that does not have a unique serial or
identification number permanently engraved or affixed.
c. If a photograph is taken, it must be at least two inches by two inches
and maintained in such a manner that the photograph can be readily
matched and correlated to all other records of the transaction. Such
photograph must be available to the chief of police or his designee
upon request. The photograph must include an identifiable front facial
close-up of the person and items photographed must be accurately
depicted.
State law references--Entries on pawn tickets, Minn. Stats. § 325J.04, subd. 1; retention of
records, Minn. Stats. § 325J.05(b).
Section 22-84. Reports to police.
(a) Notwithstanding any other ordinance, State Statute, rule, regulation, or Minnesota Statute
352J.13, Pawnbrokers must provide to the Police Department the information required in
this Article for all reportable transactions. The pawnbroker must display a sign of
sufficient size, and in a conspicuous place on the premises, so as to inform all patrons that
transactions are reported to the Police Department on a daily basis. Pawnbrokers must
submit every reportable transaction to the Police Department daily as follows:
(1) Pawnbrokers must provide to the Police Department the information as required
in this Article, (Section 22-83), for al reportable transactions, by transferring it
from their computer to the Police Department via modem. All required records
must be transmitted completely and accurately after the close of business each
day in accordance with standards and procedures established by the Police
Department.
(2) If a pawnbroker who has consistently report via modem is unable to successfully
transfer the required reports by modem, the pawnbroker must provide the Police
Department printed copies of all reportable transactions for that day by 12:00
noon the next business day, in writing, on forms approved by the Police
Department.
(3) All records required by this Article shall be kept at the licensee’s place of
business for three (3) years and shall be available for Police inspection at any
reasonable time.
Section 22-85. Billable transaction fees.
In addition to an annual license fee, every licensee shall pay a billable transaction fee for each
transaction in an amount set by the Council. The billable transaction fee shall reflect the cost of
processing transaction information and other regulatory expenses. The billable transaction fee
shall be billed monthly and is due and payable within 30 days of billing. Failure to timely pay the
billable transaction fee shall constitute a violation of this article and shall constitute grounds for
suspension or revocation of license.
Section 22-86. Verification of identification of property.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE III
4 of 11
All employees of a pawnshop shall verify the identification information from any pawned property
by personal inspection of the property to determine any serial numbers or other identification
information on the property.
Section 22-87. Printed pawn ticket.
The following shall be printed on all pawn tickets:
(a) The statement that "Any personal property pledged to a pawnbroker within this state is
subject to sale or disposal when there has been no payment made on the account for a
period of not less than 60 days past the date of the pawn transaction, renewal, or
extension; no further notice is necessary. There is no obligation for the pledgor to redeem
pledged goods."
(b) The statement that "The pledgor of this item attests that it is not stolen, it has no liens or
encumbrances against it, and the pledgor has the right to sell or pawn the item."
(c) The statement that "This item is redeemable only by the pledgor to whom the receipt was
issued, or any person identified in a written and notarized authorization to redeem the
property identified in the receipt, or a person identified in writing by the pledgor at the
time of the initial transaction and signed by the pledgor. Written authorization for release
of property to persons other than the original pledgor must be maintained along with the
original transaction record."
(d) A blank line for the pledgor's signature.
State law reference--Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. § 325J.04, subd. 2.
Section 22-88. Holding of property.
When the Chief of Police, or any member of the police force designated by the Chief of Police,
notifies any pawnbroker not to sell any property received on deposit or purchased by him, or not
to permit the same to be redeemed, the pawnbroker shall not sell nor permit such property to be
redeemed until such property is released in writing by the Chief of Police, or their designee.
A copy of the records required by this Chapter must be made available to the Chief f Police, or
their designee, upon written request of the Police Chief or their designee.
The following hold limits are placed on personal property deposited with or purchased by any
licensee under this Chapter:
Buys: thirty (30) days after a copy of the records required by this Chapter have been made
available to the Chief of Police, or his designee, except upon written permission of the Chief of
Police or his designee.
Pawns: Sixty (60) days after a copy of the records required by this Chapter have been made
available to the Chief of Police, or his designee, except upon written permission of the Chief of
Police or his designee.
State law reference--Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. § 325J.06.
Section 22-89. Redemption.
Any person who pawns an item shall have at least 30 days to redeem the item before it may be
sold. Only the person who pawned the property and displayed identification to the pawnbroker or
any person with the written consent of the person who pawned the property shall redeem the
pawned property.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE III
5 of 11
Section 22-90. Effect of non-redemption.
(a) A pledgor shall have no obligation to redeem pledged goods or make any payment on a
pawn transaction. Pledged goods not redeemed within at least 60 days of the date of the
pawn transaction, renewal, or extension shall automatically be forfeited to the
pawnbroker, and qualified right, title, and interest in and to the goods shall automatically
vest in the pawnbroker.
(b) The pawnbroker's right, title, and interest in the pledged goods under subsection (a) of
this section is qualified only by the pledgor's right, while the pledged goods remain in
possession of the pawnbroker and not sold to a third party, to redeem the goods by paying
the loan plus fees and/or interest accrued up to the date of redemption.
(c) A pawn transaction that involves holding only the title to property is subject to
Minn. Stats. Chs. 168A or 336.
State law reference--Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. § 325J.06.
Section 22-91. Permitted charges.
(a) A pawnbroker may contract for and receive a pawnshop charge not to exceed
three percent per month of the principal amount advanced in the pawn transaction plus a
reasonable fee for storage and services. A fee for storage and services may not exceed
$20.00 if the property is not in the possession of the pawnbroker.
(b) The pawnshop charge allowed under subsection (a) of this section shall be deemed
earned, due, and owing as of the date of the pawn transaction and a like sum shall be
deemed earned, due, and owing on the same day of the succeeding month. However, if
full payment is made more than two weeks before the next succeeding date, the
pawnbroker shall remit one-half of the pawnshop charge for that month to the pledgor.
(c) Interest shall not be deducted in advance, nor shall any loan be divided or split so as to
yield greater interest or fees than would be permitted upon a single, consolidated loan or
for otherwise evading any provisions of this section.
(d) Any interest, charge, or fees contracted for or received, directly or indirectly, in excess of
the amount permitted under this section, shall be uncollectible and the pawn transaction
shall be void.
(e) A schedule of charges permitted by this section shall be posted on the pawnshop premises
in a place clearly visible to the general public.
State law reference--Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. § 325J.07.
Section 22-92. Prohibited transactions.
No pawnbroker shall knowingly purchase or receive on deposit or pledge anything of value as
security for a loan of money from any person under lawful age, nor from intoxicated persons,
those of unsound mind, or from any individual with a criminal record relating to a theft-related
offense.
State law reference--Transactions with minors, Minn. Stats. § 325J.(5).
Section 22-93. Prohibited acts.
A pawnbroker and any clerk, agent, or employee of a pawnbroker shall not:
(a) Make any false entry in the records of pawn transactions;
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE III
6 of 11
(b) Falsify, obliterate, destroy, or remove from the place of business the records, books, or
accounts relating to the licensee's pawn transactions;
(c) Refuse to allow the chief of police, the attorney general, or any other duly authorized
state or federal law enforcement officer to inspect the pawn records or any pawn goods in
the person's possession during the ordinary hours of business or other times acceptable to
both parties;
(d) Make any agreement requiring the personal liability of a pledgor or seller, or waiving any
provision of this section, or providing for a maturity date less than one month after the
date of the pawn transaction;
(e) Fail to return pledged goods to a pledgor or seller, or provide compensation as set forth in
this chapter, upon payment of the full amount due the pawnbroker unless either the date
of redemption is more than 60 days past the date of the pawn transaction, renewal, or
extension and the pawnbroker has sold the pledged goods pursuant to this chapter, or the
pledged goods have been taken into custody by a court or a law enforcement officer or
agency;
(f) Sell or lease, or agree to sell or lease, pledged or purchased goods back to the pledgor or
seller in the same, or a related, transaction;
(g) Sell or otherwise charge for insurance in connection with a pawn transaction; or
(h) Remove pledged goods from the pawnshop premises or other storage place approved by
the City at any time before the expiration of the redemption period pursuant to Minnesota
Statute 325J.06. However, (i) a pawnbroker is permitted to return pledged goods to the
borrower at any time during the redemption period, (ii) a pawnbroker is permitted to sell
the pledged goods or remove the pledged goods from the pawnshop premises or other
storage place at any time after the expiration of the redemption period set forth in
Minnesota Statutes 325J.06, and (iii) a pawnbroker who purchases goods not involving a
pawn transaction is permitted to sell or remove the purchased goods from the pawnshop
premises or other storage place thirty-one (31) days or later from the purchase transaction
date.
(i) Fail to maintain a record of each pawn transaction for three (3) years.
(j) Accept a pledge or purchase from a person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
State law reference--Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. § 325J.08.
Section 22-94. Redemption; risk of loss.
Any person to whom the receipt for pledged goods was issued, or any person identified in a
written and notarized authorization to redeem the pledged goods identified in the receipt, or any
person identified in writing by the pledgor at the time of the initial transaction and signed by the
pledgor shall be entitled to redeem or repurchase the pledged goods described on the ticket. In the
event the goods are lost or damaged while in possession of the pawnbroker, the pawnbroker shall
compensate the pledgor, in cash or replacement goods acceptable to the pledgor, for the fair
market value of the lost or damaged goods. Proof of compensation shall be a defense to any
prosecution or civil action.
State law reference--Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. § 325J.09.
Section 22-95. Motor vehicle title pawn transactions.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE III
7 of 11
(a) In addition to the other requirements of this article, a pawnbroker who holds a title to a
motor vehicle as part of a pawn transaction shall:
(1) Be licensed as a used motor vehicle dealer under Minn. Stats. § 168.27, and post
such license on the pawnshop premises;
(2) Verify that there are no liens or encumbrances against the motor vehicle with the
department of public safety; and
(3) Verify that the pledgor has automobile insurance on the motor vehicle as
required by law.
(b) A pawnbroker may not sell a motor vehicle covered by a pawn transaction until 90 days
after recovery of the motor vehicle.
State law reference--Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. § 325J.095.
Section 22-96. Conduct of persons on licensed premises.
(a) No person may pawn, pledge, sell, leave, or deposit any article of property of another
person or entity, whether with or without their permission, nor shall any person pawn,
pledge, sell, leave, or deposit any article of property in which another has a security
interest with any licensee.
(b) No minor may pawn, pledge, sell, leave, or deposit any article of property with any
licensee.
(c) No person may pawn, pledge, sell, leave, or deposit any article of property with any
licensee without first having presented a current valid photo driver's license or current
valid picture identification card.
(d) All licensees shall by adequate signage and separate written notice inform persons
seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, leave, or deposit articles of property with the licensee of
the requirements of this section. For the purpose of this section the term "adequate
signage" shall be deemed to mean at least one sign, of not less than four square feet in
surface area, comprised of lettering of not less than three-quarters of an inch in height,
posted in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises and stating substantially the
following:
TO PAWN OR SELL PROPERTY:
YOU MUST BE AT LEAST 18 YEARS OF AGE.
YOU MUST BE THE TRUE OWNER OF THE PROPERTY.
THE PROPERTY MUST BE FREE OF ALL CLAIMS AND LIENS.
YOU MUST PRESENT VALID PHOTO IDENTIFICATION.
VIOLATION OF ANY OF THESE REQUIREMENTS IS A CRIME.
For the purpose of this section the term "separate written notices" shall be deemed to
mean either the receipt, or a printed form incorporating a statement to the effect that the
person pawning, pledging, selling, leaving, or depositing the article is at least 18 years of
age, is the true owner of the article, and that the article is free of all claims and liens;
which is acknowledged by way of signature of the person pawning, pledging, selling,
leaving, or depositing the article.
(e) No person seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, leave, or deposit any article of property with any
licensee shall give a false or fictitious name; nor give a false date of birth, nor give a false
or out-of-date address of residence or telephone number, nor present a false driver's
license or identification card to any licensee.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE III
8 of 11
(f) Violations of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor.
Sections 22-97 thru 22-115. Reserved.
Section 22-116. License Required.
(a) A person shall not engage in business as a pawnbroker or otherwise portray the
person as a pawnbroker unless the person has a valid license authorizing
engagement in the business. Any pawn transaction made without benefit of a
license is void.
(b) A separate license is required for each place of business. The city may issue
more than one license to a person if that person complies with this article for
each license.
State law reference--Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. § 325J.02(b), (c).
Section 22-117. Application procedure.
(a) Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate, or conduct a pawnbroker shop
shall file a completed application with the City upon a form provided by the
office of the city clerk and pay a nonrefundable application fee in an amount set
by the council. The application, once accepted, shall be investigated by the City.
Copies of this application shall be forwarded to such other City departments as
the City shall deem necessary for verification and investigation of the facts set
forth in the application. A written recommendation to the City Council as to the
issuance or non-issuance of the license shall be presented at a regularly
scheduled City Council meeting within thirty (30) days of the City’s acceptance
of the application.
(b) The completed application form shall contain all information indicated,
including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Name, place, date of birth, and street residence of the applicant and any
and all managers, employees or agents to be employed at the pawn
shop. This information shall be supplemented and updated when a new
employee is hired by the pawnshop.
(2) The business address and the name and address of the owner of the
premises.
(3) A statement as to whether the applicant and any employee has ever
been convicted of any crimes and, if so, the state and county of
conviction, the date of conviction, and the specific crime so convicted.
(4) Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation, or partnership.
a. If the applicant is a corporation, the state of the incorporation
and the names and addresses of all officers and directors.
b. If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of all
partners.
(5) The name, address and home phone number of the manager or
proprietor of the business.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE III
9 of 11
(c) If the applicant is a natural person, the application shall be signed and sworn to
by the person; if a corporation, by an agent authorized to sign; if a partnership,
by a partner.
(d) No person shall make any false statement in the application. The making of any
false statement in any application is a misdemeanor, and in addition to all other
penalties, the licensee's license may be revoked by the city council for giving
any false information on the application.
(e) A new application fee shall be required whenever there is any change in the
facts presented by the application other than date, applicants' home address or
building owners' address, or in the case of any license not renewed prior to its'
expiration.
Section 22-118. Bond.
(a) Each application shall be accompanied by a bond in the amount of $5,000.00
executed by a corporation authorized to do business in this state and conditioned
that in conducting such business the licensee will observe all laws in relation to
pawnbrokers, and will conduct business in conformity thereto, and that the
licensee will account for and deliver to any person legally entitled any goods
which have come into the licensee's hand through the licensee's business as a
pawnbroker, or in lieu thereof, will pay the reasonable value in money to the
person.
(b) The bond shall be maintained so long as the pawnbroker does business as such
for the benefit of the city or any person who shall suffer any damage through the
act of such pawnbroker and shall not be terminable without advance of
termination to the city clerk.
Section 22-119. Licensee eligibility.
(a) To be eligible for or to maintain a pawnbroker license, a person must operate
lawfully and fairly within the purposes of this article and:
(1) May not be a minor at the time that the application for a pawnbroker's
license is filed;
(2) May not have been convicted of any crime directly related to the
occupation licensed as prescribed by Minn. Stats. § 364.03, subd. 2,
unless the person has shown competent evidence of sufficient
rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of a licensee
under this article as prescribed by Minn. Stats. § 364.03, subd. 3; and
(3) Must be of good moral character or repute.
(b) Any change, directly or beneficially, in the ownership of any licensed pawnshop
shall require the application for a new license and the new owner must satisfy all
current eligibility requirements.
Section 22-120. Compliance with zoning ordinance.
No pawnbroker license shall be granted for a location where a pawnshop would not be
allowed under City Zoning Regulations or Minnesota Statute.
State law reference--Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. § 325J.03.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE III
10 of 11
Section 22-121. Number of licenses.
No more than two pawnbroker licenses shall be issued by the city at any time and priority
shall be given to qualified applicants for renewal of existing licenses.
Section 22-122. Annual fee.
The annual fee to be paid to the city for the license required by this Article shall be as
established by the council.
Section 22-123. Transfer.
A license under this division shall authorize the licensee to carry on its business only at
the permanent place of business designated in the license. No license may be transferred
to a different location or a different licensee.
Section 22-124. Continuing effect of license.
Each license shall remain in full force and effect until surrendered, suspended, revoked,
or expired.
State law reference--Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. § 325J.02(d).
Section 22-125. Expiration.
All licenses shall expire at the end of each calendar year.
Section 22-126. Pre-existing contracts.
No expiration, revocation, suspension, or surrender of any license shall impair or affect
the obligation of any preexisting lawful contract between the licensee and any pledgor.
State law reference--Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. § 325J.02(e).
Section 22-127. Notification to police of expiration, suspension, revocation, etc.
The police shall be notified by the city of any licensee whose license has expired or been
surrendered, suspended, or revoked as provided by this article.
State law reference--Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. § 325J.02(f).
Section 22-128. Denial, suspension, or revocation of license.
(a) Any license under this article may be denied, suspended, or revoked by the City
Council.
(b) Any fee paid to the City for a license will be forfeited to the City upon denial,
suspension or revocation of the license.
(c) The City Council may appoint an administrative hearings officer to hear
testimony, present findings, conclusions and make recommendations to the City
Council regarding the denial, suspension or revocation of a license for the City
Council’s consideration.
Section 22-129. Temporary suspension of license.
(a) The chief of police may temporarily suspend the license of a pawnshop for a period not to
exceed five business days for the following reasons:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE III
11 of 11
(1) Filing false information in the course of the application.
(2) Failure to inform the City of the required information when hiring a new
employee.
(3) Conviction of any crime by the licensee or employee, of any law relating to
theft, damage or trespass to property, sale of a controlled substance or operation
of a business.
(4) Failure to comply with any provisions of this article.
(b) Within the then (10) business days, the City Council may conduct a hearing to consider
further suspension or revocation of the license.
State law references--Pawnbrokers, Minn. Stats. ch. 325J; local regulation of pawnbrokers,
Minn. Stats. §§ 325J.02(a), 325J.13.
Sections 22-130 thru 22-150. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE IV.
1 of 6
CHAPTER 22. LICENSING; BUSINESSES & SERVICES
ARTICLE IV. Peddlers, Solicitors and Transient Merchants
----------
State law references--Hawkers, peddlers and transient merchants, Minn. Stats. ch. 329; authority relative
to transient commerce, Minn. Stats. §§ 410.33, 412.221, subd. 19, 437.02; municipal regulation of hawkers, peddlers
and transient merchants, Minn. Stats. § 329.15.
----------
Section 22-151. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
Peddler. Means any person who goes upon the streets, sidewalks or other property in the
City showing goods or merchandise for sale and selling them. The term "peddler" also
means any person who travels from place to place within the City carrying or transporting
goods or merchandise and selling them.
Non-profit Canvasser/Solicitor. Means any organization, society, association or
corporation that solicits, or has solicited in its name, donations of money or property or
financial assistance of any kind or desiring to sell or distribute any item of literature or
merchandise for which a fee is charged or solicited from persons other than members of
such organizations, upon the streets, an office or business building, by house-to-house
canvass or in public places for charitable, religious, patriotic philanthropic or other nonprofit
purpose.
Solicitor. Means any person who goes from residential house to house, business to
business, or upon the streets and sidewalks or other public areas for the purpose of
obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares, products, merchandise, other
personal property, or services, of which he may be carrying or transporting samples, or
that may be described in a catalog or flyer, or by any means, and for which delivery or
performance shall occur at a later date. The absence of samples or catalogs shall not
remove a person from the scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the person's
activity is to obtain or attempt to obtain orders as described in this definition.
Transient merchant. Means any person, firm or corporation who engages temporarily in
the business of selling or delivering goods, wares, or merchandise within the City, and
who, in the furtherance of such purposes, hires, leases, uses or occupies any of the
following or any portion thereof: building, structure, lot, vacant lot, motor vehicle, trailer,
railroad car, or tent.
Section 22-152. Exemptions.
This article does not apply to the following:
(a) Vendors of milk, groceries, bakery products, or other perishable commodities or
vendors of soft water service or laundry and dry cleaning pick-up and delivery
who make an uninvited call upon the occupant of a resident as a preliminary step
to the establishment of a regular route service for the sale and delivery of such
commodities or the providing of such services to regular customers; or for the
sale of goods, merchandise or services to business, commercial, or industrial
users at their place of business.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE IV.
2 of 6
(b) Sidewalk sales authorized by the City Council.
(c) Garage sales or rummage sales when conducted in or by a nonprofit institution,
or when conducted upon the premises of an owner of the articles being offered
for sale provided that such sales do not last longer than 72 hours, and provided
that no more than three sales be conducted at any given location within one year.
(d) Any bona fide auction sale by a City resident.
(e) Any sale under court order.
(f) The sale and display of merchandise as allowed by Anoka City Code.
(g) The sale of regularly published newspapers.
Section 22-153. Special events.
The following standards shall apply to events as designated by Council Resolution:
(a) Any peddler or transient merchant license application or solicitor registration,
other than a non-profit canvasser/solicitor registration, which is applied for and
scheduled to take place during a time which overlaps the days, geographical
areas and times of approved special events, as designated by Council resolution,
shall require approval by the governing board of the special event.
(1) Any previously issued peddler or transient merchant license or solicitor
registration other than a non-profit canvasser/solicitor registration for a
duration of time which overlaps the days, geographical areas and times
of special events, as designated by Council Resolution, shall not be
effective for the designated days, areas or times of such events.
(b) The governing board of the special event may designate where peddlers and
transient merchants shall set up their outside booth or sales stand, including
those located on private property. This section will apply to the designated areas
of events as determined by Council Resolution.
(c) In addition to the registration requirements of this article, all solicitors, other
than non-profit canvassers/solicitors, must have the written consent of the
governing board of any special event as determined by City Council Resolution,
to conduct regulated activities during the designated times and areas of the
special event. The governing board of the special event may regulate the time,
place and manner of solicitation activities.
(d) Any person violating any provision of this section is guilty of a petty
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties set forth in
Minn. Stats. § 609.02, subd. 4a., as amended, and shall be subject to a fine as set
forth in the City’s Master Fee Schedule. Any subsequent violation of this section
shall be a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties set
forth in Minn. Stats. § 609.02, subd. 3, as amended.
Section 22-154. Peddlers and solicitors may be prohibited by placard.
Any resident of the City who wishes to exclude peddlers, solicitors or non-profit
canvassers/solicitors from premises occupied by the resident may place upon or near the
usual entrance to such premises a printed placard or sign bearing the following notice:
"Peddlers and Solicitors Prohibited," in letters at least one-half inch high. No peddler or
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE IV.
3 of 6
solicitor shall enter in or upon any premises or attempt to enter in or upon any premises
where such a placard or sign is placed and maintained. No person other than the person
occupying such premises shall remove, injure, or deface such placard or sign.
Section 22-155. Permission of property owner required.
In addition to all other requirements and prohibitions of this Article, no transient
merchant shall sell or offer for sale any goods, wares, or merchandise within the City
from a stationary location on public or private property without first obtaining the written
consent of the property owner or occupant.
Section 22-156. Prohibited Conduct.
No peddler, solicitor, non-profit canvasser/solicitor, or transient merchant shall create a
public nuisance as that term is defined by State and/or Local Law, nor shall any person
engage in business after the hour of 8:00 p.m. or before 9:00 a.m. unless a previous
appointment has been made; nor shall any person furnish false information on the
application required in Section 22-178; nor shall any such person sell merchandise or
services by means of statements which the person making them knows or should know
are false or misleading; nor shall any such person violate any provision of Chapter 74. No
transient merchant shall occupy any area within a sight triangle at any intersection for the
purpose of advertising and/or conducting business.
For purpose of this section, a sight triangle is the area located at the corner of intersecting
streets contained by a triangle composed of sides measuring 50 feet in length from the
corner along the curb line or edge of the street and the line connecting the non-joining
ends of those two sides.
Sections 22-157 thru 22-175. Reserved.
Section 22-176. License/registration required.
(a) No peddler or transient merchant shall sell or offer for sale any goods, wares, or
merchandise within the City unless a license therefore shall first be secured as
provided by this article.
(b) No person shall conduct business as a peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant
within the City limits without first having obtained the appropriate license.
(c) All For-Profit solicitors shall be required to register with the City. Registration
shall be made on a form supplied by the City. A registration processing fee shall
be required. Such fee shall be established by the Council to offset administrative
costs and the costs of investigations. No additional licensing fee shall be
required. The City shall conduct background investigations on all solicitors
listed in the application and upon successful investigations, shall issue to the
registrant proof of registration, which shall be nontransferable.
(d) Non-profit Canvasser/Solicitor:
1. Any organization, society, association or corporation desiring to solicit,
or have solicited in its name, money, donations of money or property or
financial assistance of any kind or desiring to sell or distribute any item
of literature or merchandise for which a fee is charged or solicited from
persons other than members of such organizations, upon the streets, an
office or business building, by house-to-house canvass or in public
places for charitable, religious, patriotic philanthropic or other nonCITY
OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE IV.
4 of 6
profit purpose shall be exempt from licensing and fees as stated in this
Article, provided a registration application in writing on a form
furnished by the City is filed, which shall include the following
information:
a. Name and purpose of the cause for which the license is
sought.
b. Names and addresses of the officers and/or directors of the
organization.
c. The period during which the solicitation is to be carried on.
d. Whether or not any commissions, fees, wages or emoluments
are to be expended in connection with such solicitation.
e. The names and addresses of all persons conducting the
canvassing/solicitation.
Local church and school related entities shall be exempt from the
registration application of this Section.
2. Upon the foregoing being satisfied, such organization, association or
corporation shall furnish all its members, agents or representatives
conducting the solicitation, credentials in writing stating the name of
the organization, name of agent, and the purpose of the solicitation.
Such credentials shall be kept on the person of the members, agents or
representatives during the actual solicitation and be presented to anyone
requesting to see the same.
Section 22-177. Group sales.
In the case of group sales where two or more transient merchants are engaged in business
at the same time and location, it shall not be necessary for any such transient merchant to
obtain a license under this article provided that the sponsor, promoter, or organizer of the
group sale has obtained a license as required under this article and has submitted such
information for all other transient merchants involved in the group sale as may be
required by the City Manager.
Section 22-178. Application and issuance.
(a) Application for such license shall be made to the City Clerk on a form supplied
by the City. The applicant shall include:
(1) The name, address, and date of birth of the applicant and of all persons
associated with the license;
(2) A photocopy of a current State issued identification, Driver’s License
or Passport for each individual listed in the application.
(3) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold;
(4) The name, address and phone number of the employer or business, if
any;
(5) Any felonies or gross misdemeanors, or any crimes of theft, fraud or
crimes of physical danger or threat, of which the registrant has been
convicted, and the nature of the crime or crimes of which the registrant
was convicted and the date and place of each conviction;
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE IV.
5 of 6
(6) In the case of transient merchants, the place where the business is to be
carried on;
(b) Applications shall be investigated by the City. Upon completion of a successful
investigation, a license or proof of registration will be granted by the City to the
applicant. Such proof of registration for Peddlers and For-profit Solicitors must
be conspicuously worn at all times when peddling and/or soliciting in the City.
Section 22-179. Denial of license.
(a) Reasons for Denial.
(1) The applicant, or anyone whose activity would be covered by the
license, has been convicted of a felony, gross misdemeanor or any
crime of theft, fraud or conviction of any crime that may endanger the
safety of the public.
(2) The applicant has furnished false information on the application.
(3) The applicant has previously sold goods in the City without a license if
one was required.
(4) No transient merchant license shall be issued unless the applicant
submits written consent of the property owner, as required under in this
Article, along with the license application.
(5) No peddler's license shall be issued to peddlers whose sales occur
directly from vehicles on any City street outside of residential districts.
(6) No transient merchant license shall be issued for sales from any
location which does not have sufficient parking for customers or for
areas where customers and/or customer parking would interfere with
normal traffic flow as determined by the City.
(b) Appeal of Denial.
In the event of the denial of the application, the applicant shall have the right to
appeal such decision to the City Council within ten (10) days after receipt of
such denial. The City Council shall consider the appeal by the applicant at a
regularly scheduled meeting. The decision of the City Council shall be final.
Section 22-180. License fees.
Fees for licenses shall be established by the City Council. Events identified by City staff
that will require additional police services or Community Service Officers services will
be charged a fee as established in the Master Fee Schedule or determined by City Council
or staff.
Section 22-181. Duration of license.
Each license shall be valid only for the period specified in such license.
Section 22-182. License to be carried or displayed.
All licenses shall be carried by the licensee and the license shall be exhibited to any
officer or citizen upon request. If any business is conducted from a stationary location the
license shall be conspicuously posted and displayed.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE IV.
6 of 6
Section 22-183. License not transferable.
All licenses under this article shall be nontransferable. No refunds shall be made on
unused portions of license. Each peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall secure a
separate license.
Section 22-184. Revocation of license.
The license issued pursuant to this article may be revoked by the City Council after
notice and hearing, for any of the following reasons:
(a) Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the registration or
in the application for license;
(b) Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in connection with the
selling of goods, wares or merchandise;
(c) Any violations of this article;
(d) Conviction of the licensee of any crime involving moral turpitude, fraud, or
theft;
(e) Conducting the business licensed under this article in any unlawful manner or in
such manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or a menace to the health,
safety or general welfare of the public.
Sections 22-185. Suspension.
The City has the right to suspend a license during the pendency of any criminal charges
alleging acts of dishonestly, assaultive type behavior, disorderly conduct, or any other
violations of State or Local Laws as the City deems reasonable or necessary.
Applicant will be notified of said suspension with the right to petition the City Council
for reinstatement. The City Council shall consider the petition for reinstatement at a
regularly scheduled meeting. T he City Council decision shall be final.
Sections 22-185 thru 22-210. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE V.
1 of 7
CHAPTER 22. LICENSING; BUSINESSES & SERVICES
ARTICLE V. Saunas, Massage Establishments and Adult Uses
Section 22-211. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
Adult use means the same as the definition given in Adult Use & Establishments section
of the City Code.
Employee means any person who renders any service in connection with the operation of
the massage business and receives compensation from the operator of the business or
patrons.
Massage means any method of treating the superficial parts of a patron for hygiene,
exercise, or relaxation purposes by rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding,
vibrating, or stimulating with the hands or any instrument or by the application of air,
liquid, or water baths of any kind whatever.
Massage establishment means any public facility wherein a person may receive from
another person a massage for a fee or other consideration.
Massage Therapist means any person who engages in the practice of massage as defined
in this section, except when a massage is administered by a licensed physical therapist,
nurse, physician, chiropractor, barber, or cosmetologist or is administered by a massage
therapist who is working for or is an employee of a medical professional licensed under
Minnesota Statutes Chapter 147 or 148, providing such services at the office location of
the licensed medical professional, and the massage is part of the professional services
ordinarily provided by such licensed persons.
Patron means any person who receives a massage under such circumstances that it is
reasonably expected that he will pay money or give any other consideration therefore.
Public steam bath, sauna or public heat bathing room mean any public facility used for
the purpose of bathing, reducing, relaxing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning,
relaxing, or reducing agent.
Sections 22-212 thru 22-230. Reserved.
Section 22-231. License Required.
(a) Business license. No person, Partnership, Limited Liability Corporation, or
Corporation shall engage or carry on a business, a principal part of which is a
massage establishment, public steam bath, sauna, public heat bathing room, or
adult use without a license issued by the City Council for each and every
separate office or place of business operated by such person in the city. The fee
for such license shall be non-proratable and nonrefundable and shall be
determined by the Council.
(b) Message therapist license. No person shall practice massage unless each person
has a valid and subsisting massage therapist license issued to him/her by the city
council of the city. The fee for such a permit shall be non-proratable and
nonrefundable and shall be determined by the Council.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE V.
2 of 7
Section 22-232. Business license application.
(a) Every applicant for a license required by this chapter shall file an application
with the City of Anoka upon a form provided by the office of the city clerk and
pay an application fee in the amount determined by the City Council. After
Council approval or denial, no application fee shall be refunded. The
application, once accepted, shall be referred to the Anoka Police Department for
investigation. Copies of this application shall be forwarded to such other city
departments as deemed necessary for verification and investigation of the facts
set forth in the application. Each application shall contain the following
information:
(1) A definition of services to be provided, the location, mailing address,
and all telephone numbers where the business is to be conducted.
(2) The name and residence address of each applicant (hereinafter all
provisions which refer to the applicant shall include all partners of a
partnership and the officers and managing agent of a corporation).
a. If applicant is a corporation, the names and residence
addresses of each of the officers and directors of said
corporation.
b. If applicant is a partnership, the names and residence
addresses of each of the partners including limited partners,
and the address of the partnership itself, if different from the
address of the business establishment.
c. The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present
address of the applicant.
d. Copy of identification, such as driver's license.
e. The sauna, massage, public steam bath, public heat bathing
room, adult use, or similar business history and experience of
the applicant, and including but not limited to whether or not
such applicant is or has previously operated in this or another
city or state under license or permit and has had such license
or permit denied, revoked, or suspended, and the reason
therefore.
f. All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic
violations of the applicant, including the dates of convictions,
nature of the crimes, and places convicted.
g. Authorization for the city, its agents, and employees to seek
information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the
statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of
the applicant for the license.
h. Such other identification and information as required by the
city necessary to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore
specified as required to be set forth in the application.
(b) Upon completion of the above-described application and the furnishing
of all of the foregoing information, the city clerk shall accept the
application for the necessary investigations. The holder of a business
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE V.
3 of 7
license shall notify the city clerk of each change in any of the data
required to be furnished by this section within ten days after such
change occurs.
Section 22-233. Massage therapist license application.
Application for a massage therapist license shall be made to the city clerk in the same
manner as provided for business licenses, accompanied by an application fee which shall
be determined by the City Council. Once acted upon by the Council, the application fee is
nonrefundable. The application shall contain the following information.
(a) The business address and all telephone numbers where the massage is to be
practiced.
(b) Name and residence address and all names, nicknames, and aliases by which the
applicant has been known, including the two previous addresses immediately
prior to the present address of the applicant.
(c) Copy of identification showing that the applicant is at least 18 years of age and
their date of birth.
(d) A complete statement of all convictions of the applicant for any felony or
misdemeanor or violation of a local ordinance, except misdemeanor traffic
violations.
(e) Aa certified copy of a certificate of graduation from a school of massage which
is registered with or approved by the State Department of Education or State
Department of Higher Education Services, located in the State in which the
school operates. Said certificate must indicate successful completion of at least
150 hours of training.
(f) The massage or similar business history and experience (five years) prior to date
of application, including but not limited to whether or not such person in
previously operating in this or another city or state under license or permit has
had such license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended and the reasons
therefore.
(g) A listing of all memberships in local or national massage organizations.
(h) Authorization for the city, its agents, and employees to obtain information and
conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the
application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit.
Section 22-234. Conditions governing issuance.
(a) Business license applications.
(1) No license shall be issued if the applicant or any of its owners,
employees, or agents is a person of bad repute.
(2) Licenses shall be issued only if the applicant and all of its owners,
employees, and agents are free of convictions for offenses which
involve moral turpitude or which relate directly to the person's ability,
capacity, or fitness to perform the duties and discharge the
responsibilities of the licensed activity.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE V.
4 of 7
(3) Licenses shall be issued only to applicants who have not, within two
years prior to the date of application, been denied licensure, or who
have not within such period had its license revoked.
(4) Licenses shall be issued only to applicants who have fully answered all
of the information requested in the application, have paid the full
license fee, and have cooperated with the city in review of the
application.
(5) If the applicant is a natural person, a license shall be granted only if
such person is 18 years of age or older.
(6) Licenses may be granted only for locations in the general commercial
districts of the city or, in the case of adult uses, in the adult use district,
and such license will be denied if the granting of the license would be
inconsistent with the comprehensive plans of the city or would
otherwise have a detrimental effect upon the property or properties in
the vicinity.
(7) Licenses shall be granted only to businesses which can meet the safety,
sanitary and building code requirements of the city.
(b) Massage therapist License..
(1) Licenses shall be issued only to persons of good repute who have
successfully completed at least 150 hours of training in massage from a
school of massage which is registered with or approved by the State
Department of Education or State Department of Higher Education
Services, located in the State in which the school operates.
(2) Licenses shall be issued only to persons free of convictions of offenses
which involve moral turpitude or which relate directly to the person's
ability, capacity, or fitness to perform the duties and discharge the
responsibility of the occupation.
(3) Licenses shall not be issued to persons who, within one year prior to
the date of application, have been denied a permit or who has had his
permit revoked in this or any other state.
(4) Licenses shall be issued only to persons who have answered fully all of
the information requested in the application and have paid the full
application fee.
(5) Licenses shall be issued only to persons 18 years of age or older.
Section 22-235. Approval or denial of application.
The City Council shall act to approve or deny an application for an initial or lapsed
licensed license under this ordinance within a reasonable period of time and in no event
shall the city act to approve or deny such license or permit later than 120 days from the
date that the application was accepted by the city clerk. Every license or permit issued
pursuant to this ordinance will terminate on December 31, unless renewed, sooner
suspended, or revoked.
Section 22-236. Revocation or suspension.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE V.
5 of 7
(a) Business license. A business license under this article may be revoked,
suspended, or not renewed by the city council upon a showing that the licensee,
its owners, employees, or agents have engaged in any of the following conduct:
(1) Fraud, deception, or misrepresentation in connection with the securing
of the license.
(2) Habitual drunkenness or intemperance in the use of drugs, including
but not limited to the use of drugs defined in Minn. Stats. § 618.01,
barbiturates, hallucinogenic drugs and amphetamines, Benzedrine,
Dexedrine or other sedatives, depressants, stimulants, or tranquilizers.
(3) Conduct adversely affecting the public health, safety, and welfare of
the general public.
(4) Engaging in conduct involving moral turpitude.
(5) A violation of any provision of this article.
(b) Massage Therapist License.. A Massage Therapist License may be revoked or
suspended or not renewed by the city council for any of the following:
(1) Fraud, deception, or misrepresentation in connection with the securing
of the permit.
(2) Habitual drunkenness or intemperance in the use of drugs, including
but not limited to the use of drugs defined in Minn. Stats. § 618.01,
barbiturates, hallucinogenic drugs and amphetamines, Benzedrine,
Dexedrine or other sedatives, depressants, stimulants, or tranquilizers.
(3) Conduct adversely affecting the public health, safety, and welfare of
the general public.
(4) Engaging in conduct involving moral turpitude.
(5) Violating any provisions of this article.
Sections 22-237 Renewal of Business and Therapist Licenses.
Licensees shall submit an application for renewal according to the procedures set forth
above. Renewal licenses shall be administratively approved, unless there is an objection
or significant concern expressed during the investigation, or if the license has lapsed over
thirty (30) days from its expiration date, at which time the renewal application shall be
forwarded to the City Council for consideration.
Sections 22-238 thru 22-255. Reserved.
Section 22-256. Restrictions.
The licensee and the persons in its employment shall comply with all applicable
regulations and laws of the city and state relating to safety and morals.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE V.
6 of 7
Section 22-257. Inspection of premises.
The licensee shall permit and allow the inspection of the premises during business hours
by all appropriate city employees and agents.
Section 22-258. Responsible party.
If the licensee is a partnership or corporation, the applicant shall designate a person to be
manager and in responsible charge of the operation of the business. Such person shall
remain responsible for the conduct of the business until another suitable person has been
designated in writing by the licensee. The licensee shall promptly notify the city clerk in
writing of any such change indicating the name and address of the new manager and the
effective date of such change.
Section 22-259. List of current employees.
The licensee shall furnish the city clerk a list of current employees indicating their names,
addresses and which employees, if any, are practicing massage as a part of their duties.
The licensee, within ten (10) days, shall notify the city clerk of any change in the list.
Section 22-260. Hours of operation.
The licensed premises shall not be open for massage nor shall patrons be permitted on the
premises for the purpose of massage between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. of the
following day.
Section 22-261. Age restriction.
No person under 18 years of age shall be employed in an establishment requiring a
license under the provisions of this article.
Section 22-262. Business License requirement.
No such business shall employ or use any person as a massage therapist unless such
person has a current license as provided by this article.
Section 22-263. Restrictions upon massage therapists.
(a) Any massage therapist shall have their license or a true copy thereof displayed
in a prominent place at his place of employment. Any massage therapist within
the city shall inform the city clerk of any changes in employment or location of
employment within the city, or any change in residence address, within 30 days
of such change.
(b) No massage therapist shall perform massage between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and
9:00 a.m. of the following day.
Section 22-264. Miscellaneous restrictions.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any employee to place his hands upon the sexual parts of
another person.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating, or managing a business
license under this article knowingly to cause, allow, or permit in or about such
premises any agent, employee, or any other person under his control or
supervision to perform such acts prohibited in subsection (a) of this section.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE V.
7 of 7
(c) It shall be unlawful for any holder of a license under this article to administer
massage on an outcall basis. Such persons shall administer massage solely
within a business licensed within this article to carry on such massage.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any massage service to be carried on within any cubical,
room, booth, or other area within a massage establishment which is fitted with a
door capable of being locked.
Section 22-265. Alcoholic beverages prohibited.
No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide, or keep or cause to be sold, given,
dispensed, provided, or kept any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any massage
establishment, public steam bath, sauna, or public heat bathing room licensed under this
article.
Section 22-266. Operating requirements.
(a) Every portion of the premises of a business licensed under this article including
appliances and apparatus shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary
condition.
(b) Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a
location available to all prospective customers.
(c) All businesses licensed under this article shall be provided with clean, laundered
sheets and towels in a sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use
thereof and stored in a sanitary manner.
Section 22-267. Exceptions.
It shall not be required for a massage therapist to obtain a license described in this Article
when the therapist is working for or is an employee of a medical professional licensed
under Minnesota Statutes and providing such services at the office location of the
medical professional.
Sections 22-267 thru 22-290. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE VI
1 of 4
CHAPTER 22. LICENSING; BUSINESSES & SERVICES
ARTICLE VI. Tanning Salons
Section 22-291. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
Employee means the person designated by the licensee/permittee for the facility to assist
and instruct the public in the correct operation of the tanning facility.
Fee means amount charged to any individual or group of individuals in exchange for use
of a tanning facility or facilities whether direct or by virtue of membership or access.
Other compensation means payment or exchange of goods or anything of value for use of
the tanning facility or facilities.
Patron means any member of the public who is provided access to a tanning facility in
exchange for a fee or other compensation or any individual who in exchange for a fee or
other compensation is afforded use of a tanning facility as a condition or benefit of
membership or access.
Tanning equipment means the sun lamp products and ultra-violet lamps intended to
induce sun tanning through the irradiation of any part of the living human body.
Tanning facility means a room or booth, or suite of rooms under one management at one
address, which house ultra-violet lamps or products containing such lamps intended for
the irradiation of any part of the living human body for cosmetic or non-medical related
purposes.
Section 22-292. Facilities and equipment.
(a) Users shall, on each visit, be provided, free of charge, with sanitary eyewear that
will protect eyes from ultra-violet radiation and allow adequate vision necessary
to maintain balance.
(b) The operator shall inspect the facility to ensure that the floors are dry. Such
floors are to be made dry prior to each individual's use.
(c) The operator shall post signs and supply handouts warning consumers of the
potential effects of radiation on persons taking medication and the possible
relationship of radiation to skin cancer.
(d) The operator shall be responsible for manufacturer specified sanitizing
procedures for all sun lamp equipment between every use.
(e) Convenient toilet facilities and dressing rooms shall be provided with all tanning
facilities. Toilet facilities shall include a water closet and hand washing sinks.
Toilet facilities and dressing rooms shall be clean and in working order at all
times.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE VI
2 of 4
(f) All tanning rooms, booths and cubicles or other areas where patrons utilize
tanning equipment will be so equipped and constructed so as to provide
complete privacy to the patron. No licensee, or employee, shall intentionally
view, photograph or videotape any tanning patron while in a tanning room,
booth, cubicle or other area, nor shall allow any other person to do so.
Sections 22-293 thru 22-310. Reserved.
Section 22-311. License Required.
No person, partnership or corporation shall engage or carry on an operation of a tanning
facility used by the public for a fee or other compensation without a license issued by the
city council for each and every separate office or place of business operated by such
person in the city.
Section 22-312. Application.
(a) Every applicant for a license required by this article shall file an application
under oath with the city upon a form provided by the office of the city manager,
and pay an application fee in the amount determined by the council. No
application fee shall be refunded. The application, once accepted, shall be
referred to the city building official and city fire marshal for investigation.
Copies of the application shall be forwarded to such other city departments as
the city council shall deem necessary for verification and investigation of the
facts set forth in the application. The building official and fire marshal shall
make a written recommendation to the city council as to the issuance or
nonissuance of the license within 30 days. The council may order and conduct
such additional investigation as it deems necessary.
(b) Each application shall include the following information:
(1) Applicant/owner's full name, date of birth, mailing address and all
telephone numbers. The term "applicant" includes all partners of a
partnership and the officers and managing agents of the corporation.
(2) The name of the tanning facility and a complete description of services
to be provided.
(3) Copies of identifications, such as driver's license and social security
card of applicant/owner.
(4) Name, address and date of birth of each employee who will be
employed in such establishment.
(5) A description of any other business to be operated on the same
premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the
applicant/owner.
(6) Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information
and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in
the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the license.
(7) Such other identification and information as required by the city
necessary to discover the truth of the matters specified in this article as
required to be set forth in the application.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE VI
3 of 4
(c) If the owner/operator operates more than one such tanning facility, the
owner/operator shall file a separate application and fee for each facility owned
or operated. Within 30 days of receipt of such application, the building official
and fire marshal shall complete the initial inspection of the premises of such
tanning facility and insure that the premises and tanning facility is installed and
will be operated in accordance with this article.
(d) In the event of a change of ownership, the new owner will be required to apply
for a license to own and operate such a tanning facility within 30 days after
taking possession of the property.
Section 22-313. Conditions governing issuance.
(a) No license shall be issued if the applicant or any of its owners, employees or
agents has been convicted of a felony.
(b) No license shall be issued if the applicant or any of its owners, employees or
agents has been convicted of any offense which involves moral turpitude or
which directly relates to the applicant's ability, capacity or fitness to perform the
duties, and discharge the responsibilities of the licensed activities.
(c) Licenses shall be issued only to applicants who have not, within two years prior
to the date of application, been denied licensure or who have not, within such
period, had their license revoked.
(d) Licenses shall be issued only to applicants who have fully answered all the
information requested in the application, have paid the full license fee, and have
cooperated with the city in review of the application.
(e) If the applicant is a natural person, the license shall be granted only if such
person is 18 years of age or older.
(f) Licenses may be granted only for locations in such commercial districts in
which such conduct is properly zoned pursuant to the provisions of this Code.
Licenses shall be granted only to businesses which can meet the safety, sanitary
and other building code requirements of the city.
Section 22-314. License fee.
The fee to be paid to the city for a license for a tanning facility shall be as established by
the council.
Section 22-315. Renewal; nontransferability.
(a) The license issued by the city pursuant to this article shall be renewed each year
on or before January 1.
(b) The license issued under this article is valid only for the location stated on the
license and is not transferable.
Section 22-316. Display of license.
The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises of the tanning
facility.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE VI
4 of 4
Section 22-317. Suspension and revocation.
Any license issued under this article may be revoked, suspended or not renewed by the
city council upon a showing that the licensee, its owners, employees or agents, have
engaged in any of the following conduct:
(a) Maintained unsanitary or other conditions in the operation of this facility, which
in the health officer's judgment, constitute a substantial hazard to the public
health.
(b) Engage in fraud, deception or misrepresentation in connection with the securing
of the license.
(c) Engage in any conduct which would constitute grounds for refusal to issue a
license.
(d) Engage in conduct adversely affecting the public health, safety and welfare.
(e) Failing to comply with any of the requirements pursuant to section 22-292.
Sections 22-318 thru 22-340. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22; ARTICLE VIII
1 of 3
CHAPTER 22. LICENSING; BUSINESSES & SERVICES
ARTICLE VIII. Used Car Dealers
----------
*State law reference--Motor vehicle dealers, Minn. Stats. § 168.27.
----------
Section 22-401. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section:
Motor vehicle means any self-propelled vehicle not operated exclusively upon railroad
tracks and any vehicle propelled or drawn by a self-propelled vehicle and includes
vehicles known as trackless trolleys which are propelled by electric power obtained from
overhead trolley wires but not operated upon rails, except snowmobiles, manufactured
homes, and park trailers.
Used car dealer means any person whose principal business is (i) the buying and selling
or storage of used motor vehicles, or (ii) providing a place and facilities for the sale of
motor vehicles by other persons.
Used motor vehicle means a motor vehicle for which title has been transferred from the
person who first acquired it from the manufacturer, distributor, or dealer.
Section 22-402. Records required.
Every person licensed under this article shall keep and preserve a book in which there
shall be made at the time of the transaction, a record in English of every purchase, sale,
storage, or exchange of all used motor vehicles, purchased, sold, stored, exchanged, or
left in his possession for sale, or storage. Such records shall include the following
information: the name, place of residence, including street and number, and a personal
description of each person from whom a used motor vehicle is obtained, or to whom such
a vehicle is delivered, the date and hour received or delivered, a description of the used
motor and manufacturers' numbers and any other serial number and any peculiar mark or
marks of identification whatsoever, style of body, seating or other capacity, color, and car
and license number.
Section 22-403. Inspection of books, records, etc.
The books provided for in Section 22-402 and all used motor vehicles, in the possession
of the licensee shall be at all reasonable times open to the inspection of the chief of
police, any member of the police force, or any person duly authorized in writing by the
chief of police for such purpose. No licensee, clerk, agent, or other person in charge of
the premises or business of a licensee, shall refuse to admit thereto any person authorized
in this section to examine records, or fail to exhibit to such person on demand all motor
vehicles, books, papers, and inventories relating thereto.
Sections 22-404 thru 22-420. Reserved.
Section 22-421. License Required.
(a) No person shall carry on the business of a Used Car Dealer in the City of Anoka
without first obtaining a license to Sell Used Motor Vehicles from the City of
Anoka.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22; ARTICLE VIII
2 of 3
(b) No person shall carry on business from any other place in the City than the one
designated in the license therefore; nor shall such person continue to carry on
business after such license has been revoked, cancelled, suspended or has
expired.
(c) No license herein provided shall be granted to or renewed for, any person who
has been convicted of any of the following:
(1) Conviction within the previous year of the date of application of a
violation of this article or applicable zoning regulations;
(2) Conviction within the previous five (5) years of the date of application
of knowingly receiving stolen goods;
(3) Conviction within the previous five (5) years of the date of application
of a petty misdemeanor, misdemeanor, or gross misdemeanor, relating
to the sale of motor vehicles, the operation of a motor vehicle business
or its’ motor vehicle business transactions;
(4) Conviction within the previous ten (10) years of the date of application
of any felony.
(d) No license herein provided shall be granted to, or renewed for, any person who
does not hold a valid and current State of Minnesota Dealership license.
(e) No license shall be granted to any person doing business in a location contrary
to the provisions of the zoning code or amendments thereof, unless a conditional
use permit has been granted under Article IV of Chapter 74.
(f) No person shall be permitted to move a business licensed there under to a
location within the City prohibited by the Zoning Code.
Section 22-422. Application.
Every person desiring to procure a license, as provided in this article, shall file with the
city clerk a written application furnished by the city. Such application shall contain the
names and residences of (i) the applicant, if an individual, (ii) the partners, if a
partnership, (iii) the shareholders and officers, if a corporation, or (iv) the members of a
limited liability company. Such application shall also describe in detail the character of
the business in which the applicant desires to engage. It shall also state the following:
(a) The length of time such applicant(s), has or have resided in the City, applicant's
places of previous employment, whether the applicant has been convicted of a
felony, gross misdemeanor, misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor, other than
petty misdemeanor minor traffic violations, and, if so, what offense, when, and
what court.
(b) The premises where such business is to be located, giving street and number.
(c) Whether the applicant has previously, either alone or with someone else, been a
used car dealer or motor vehicle junk dealer.
(d) Such other information as may be required by the City Council.
Section 22-423. Issuance; contents; reapplication after denial.
Upon the filing of the application as provided for in this Article, the City Council may,
upon its approval of such application after such investigation as it shall require and the
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22; ARTICLE VIII
3 of 3
payment to the City of the license fee, issue to the applicant a license to engage in the
business as a Used Car Dealership. All licenses shall state clearly the location of the place
of business from which the person receiving such license shall be authorized to carry on
the business as used car dealer, the date of issuance and expiration of the license, and the
name and address of the licensee. No applicant to whom a license has been refused shall
make further application until a period of at least one (1) year shall have elapsed since the
last previous rejection. In the event another individual or entity applies for a license or
renewal of a license for a premises of a previously rejected applicant, the City Council
may, in its sole discretion, deny the application or renewal unless the new applicant
provides verification, to the satisfaction of the City Council, that the rejected applicant
will have no interest in the operation of the business.
Section 22-425. Fee; term; use by another person; duplicates.
Every used car dealer shall pay such license fees as are determined by Council ordinance.
There shall be no pro-rating of license fees. All licenses shall be issued as of initial
approval or January 1st and shall continue in force until December 31st, unless renewed,
sooner suspended, or revoked. No license shall be used by any person other than the
original licensee, and any holder of such license who permits it to be used by another
person, and any person who uses such license granted to any other person, shall be guilty
of a violation of this article.
Section 22-426. Renewal of License.
The renewal of a license shall be in the same manner as stated for the issuance of an
initial license, which shall be acted upon Administratively, with the exception of
applications that have lapsed over thirty (30) days from their expiration date, or which a
concern or objection has been expressed by a City department during the investigation of
the renewal application. Such application must be forwarded to the City Council for
action.
Section 22-427. Revocation.
The City Council may, at any time, for such cause as it, upon investigation, deems
sufficient, revoke any license granted under the provisions of this article. Whenever any
license granted under the provisions of this article shall be revoked, no refund of an
unearned portion shall be made and no license shall be granted to any person whose
license has been revoked within a period of one year from the date of such revocation.
Notice of such revocation and the reasons therefore in writing shall be served by the City
Clerk upon the licensee by mailing the notice to the address given in the license and upon
filing a copy of such with the city manager.
Sections 22-428 thru 22-446. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE IX
1 of 6
CHAPTER 22. LICENSING; BUSINESSES & SERVICES
ARTICLE IX. Fireworks
Section 22-447. Purpose and Intent.
Due to the inherent risks of fire and injury to persons and property associated with the
sale, possession and use of fireworks, the City Council has determined that it is necessary
and in the interest of public health, safety and welfare to establish reasonable regulations
concerning fireworks. The City Council makes the following findings regarding the need
to license and regulate the sale, distribution, storage and display of fireworks permitted
under State law:
(a) Consumer fireworks contain pyrotechnic chemical compositions that are
combustible; accordingly, the unregulated accumulation, storage, display and
sale of these items present fire safety hazards; and
(b) The improper disposal of consumer fireworks presents environmental hazards;
and
(c) Due to their short-term and mobile nature, it is more difficult and demanding of
public safety resources and City staff to enforce compliance with City
ordinances and state law for temporary and transient sales of consumer
fireworks than it is for permanent, established business.
Section 22-448. Adoption of State Law.
Fireworks are regulated by Minnesota State Statutes § 624.20 through 624.25 inclusive,
which are hereby adopted by reference and as may be amended from time to time and
Minnesota State Fire Code, Chapter 33.
Section 22-449. License Required.
It is unlawful to sell, display or store fireworks in the City of Anoka in violation of
Minnesota Statutes 624.20 through 624.25. Consumer fireworks, as defined in this
Chapter, may; however, be sold, displayed, advertised for sale, or stored as inventory for
sale upon issuance of a license approved by the City of Anoka.
Section 22-450. Definitions.
Applicant. As used in this Chapter shall mean the individual person who signs the
application to the City for a license on behalf of the person or entity who applies for a
license under this Chapter.
Consumer Fireworks. As used in this Chapter shall mean wire or wood sparkling items
which are non-explosive and non-aerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical mixture
per tube or a total of 200 grams or less for multiple tubes, snakes, and glow worms,
smoke devices, or trick noisemakers which include paper streamers, party poppers, sting
poppers, snappers, and drop pops, each consisting of not more than twenty-five
hundredths grains of explosive mixture.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE IX
2 of 6
Fireworks. As used in this Chapter shall mean any substance or combination of
substances or articles prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by
combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, and includes blank cartridges, toy
cannons, and toy canes in which explosives are used, the type of balloons which require
fire underneath to propel them, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles,
daygo bombs, sparklers other than those specified in Section 17.104 (a), or other
fireworks of like construction, and any fireworks containing any explosive or
inflammable compound, or any tablets or other device containing any explosive
substance and commonly used as fireworks.
Licensee. As used in the Chapter shall mean the individual person or entity to whom a
license is issued by the City under the provisions of this Chapter to store, display or sell
or advertise for sale consumer fireworks, and a person or entity to whom a license is
issued by the City to make a public display of fireworks.
Section 22-451. Application for License.
An application for a license for the sale, storage, display and sale or advertising for sale
of consumer fireworks shall be made to the City Clerk and must be approved by the City
Council.
(a) Required information. The complete license application shall be given to the
City Clerk a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of the
storage, display, or sale of consumer fireworks by the licensee and shall include
the following information:
1. Applicant’s and proposed licensee’s full name, address, phone number,
and date of birth. The applicant and licensee must be eighteen (18)
years of age or older. If a corporate application, the applicant shall be
the store manager.
2. The addresses and phone numbers for all the sites for which the
proposed licensee intends to store, display or sell consumer fireworks.
3. The zoning designation of each site.
4. An agreement by the applicant and the licensee that the applicant and
licensee understand that those persons storing, displaying or selling
consumer fireworks must be at least eighteen (18) years of age.
5. An agreement by the applicant and the licensee that they understand
what constitutes consumer fireworks and which fireworks are illegal
under state law and this ordinance.
6. Documentation signed by the owner of the real property at which the
storage, display or sale of consumer fireworks, or the public display of
fireworks is to take place, showing to the satisfaction of the City
Council that the owner has granted to the proposed licensee permission
to use the property for that purpose.
7. An 8 ½ by 11-inch floor plan designating the area within buildings on
the site for storage, sale, or display of consumer fireworks.
8. A list documenting the identity, type, weight and numerical quantity of
consumer fireworks that will be located within buildings on the site.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE IX
3 of 6
9. A certificate of insurance showing proof that the licensee will have,
before commencement of the use of a license for storage, display, sale
or advertising for sale of consumer fireworks, a policy of public general
liability, bodily injury and property damage insurance from a company
or companies approved by the City of Anoka in the minimum amount
of one million dollars ($1,000,000) single limit.
10. Such other information as may be reasonably required by the City of
Anoka to process the license application.
(b) Background Check. Prior to processing the application, a criminal background
check must be conducted of the applicant and the proposed licensee. Neither the
applicant nor the licensee, or owner shall have been convicted of a felony or a
fire or fireworks related misdemeanor within three (3) years of the date of
application.
(c) Inspection of Location. Prior to processing the application, the Fire Chief shall
make a determination that the location where consumer fireworks are to be
stored, displayed or sold meets appropriate codes to regulate and control the
inherent hazards of the product, and that the persons in charge of selling,
displaying or storing the consumer fireworks are competent and trained to
handle such consumer fireworks.
Section 22-452. Issuance of License.
The City Council shall grant a consumer fireworks license to an applicant who complies
with the provisions of this Chapter unless the applicant or the licensee or the site at which
the licensee proposes to operate have been the subject of or location of prior violations of
this Chapter or a similar ordinance in another jurisdiction. Licenses granted hereunder
shall be non-transferable. A separate license shall be required for each location at which a
licensee intends to store, display, sell or advertise for sale consumer fireworks or make a
public display of fireworks.
Section 22-453. License Period and Fee.
Licenses shall expire one (1) year from the date of the resolution approving the
application. Re-issuance shall require new application and City Council approval.
License fees shall not be prorated and are non-refundable. The fee shall be as established
from time to time by the City Council.
Section 22-454. Terms and Conditions for Issuance of a License.
A license for the storage, display, or sale of consumer fireworks shall be issued only upon
the following terms and conditions:
(a) Storage, display or sales of consumer fireworks may occur only in industrial and
commercial zoning districts in which the activity constitutes a permitted use, and
must comply with all applicable City ordinances. No exterior storage, display,
sales or transient sales of consumer fireworks shall be permitted. Outdoor
movable or portable places of business, mobile kiosks, trailers, or other nonpermanent
or mobile stands shall not be used for the storage, display or sale of
consumer fireworks.
(b) No storage, display or sales for commercial use shall occur on property used for
residential, educational, or public assembly purposes.
(c) Below grade storage is prohibited.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE IX
4 of 6
(d) Smoking shall not be permitted in any building or tenant space where consumer
fireworks are stored, displayed or sold. Areas where consumer fireworks are
stored, displayed or sold shall provide “no smoking” signs in red letters not less
than two (2) inches in height on white background All signs shall be maintained
in legible condition and shall be approved by the Fire Chief.
(e) Discharge of consumer fireworks shall be prohibited within one hundred feet
(100’) of any building in which fireworks are manufactured, stored, displayed or
sold.
(f) Each location at which consumer fireworks are stored, sold, or displayed shall
have a minimum of two (2) 2.5 gallon pressurized water extinguishers or a dry
chemical extinguisher carrying a classification no less than 3A-20BC, and be
adequate for the amount of fireworks on hand as determined by the Fire Chief.
(g) The premises where the licensed activity is to take place must be in compliance
with the State Building Codes and State Fire Codes. There shall be at least two
(2) exits accessible to all occupants from all buildings where the licensed
activity takes place.
(h) In buildings without an automatic sprinkler system approved by the Fire Chief,
consumer fireworks displays or storage shall be limited to 62.5 pounds net
pyrotechnic composition or two hundred fifty (250) pounds gross weight, if the
pyrotechnic composition is not known.
(i) Storage or display of consumer fireworks in buildings protected throughout by
an automatic sprinkler system approved by the Fire Chief shall be limited to one
hundred twenty-five (125) pounds net pyrotechnic composition or five hundred
(500) pounds gross weight if the pyrotechnic composition weight is not known.
(j) All buildings in which consumer fireworks are stored, displayed or sold shall be
posted in a conspicuous location with a list of all consumer fireworks located on
the property, together with material safety data sheets for those materials. The
posting shall state the description, weight and quantity of fireworks on the
property.
(k) Upon request, samples of the fireworks shall be made available to the Fire Chief
for testing purposes.
(l) The age of all purchasers of consumer fireworks must be verified to be eighteen
(18) years by photo identification at the time of each sale.
(m) The premises where the licensed activity takes place are subject to inspections
by City employees, including the Fire Chief, Building Official, and Police
Officers, during normal business hours, at the discretion of the City.
(n) Safety information approved by the Fire Chief must be available at each sale of
consumer fireworks.
Section 22-455. Discharge Rules and Regulations.
(a) It is unlawful to discharge consumer fireworks on public property.
(b) It is unlawful to use, fire, or discharge any fireworks along the route and during
any parade or at any place of public assembly or in any commercial district.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE IX
5 of 6
(c) It is unlawful at any time to throw or toss any fireworks at any person, animal,
vehicle, or other thing or object.
(d) Fireworks may only be discharged in an area with a water source connected to a
hose or other acceptable means of putting out a fire.
(e) The Fire Chief may ban fireworks or shorten the season of the fireworks
discharge if a drought is evident or any equitable need for public safety arises.
(f) Juveniles may not possess fireworks unless under the direct supervision of a
responsible adult.
Section 22-456. Public Display.
Licenses will not be issued for the public display of fireworks except in accordance with
Minnesota Statutes 624.22, and shall require that the application for and issuance of the
license for public display of fireworks be the same, so far as applicable, as the
requirements for a license for storage, display and sale of consumer fireworks.
Section 22-457. Revocation of License.
In the event of the discovery of fraud in the application for the consumer fireworks
license, or the conviction of the licensee or manager, officer or owner of a felony or of a
violation of this Chapter or a similar ordinance in another jurisdiction, the license may be
revoked. Revocation shall not occur unless the licensee has first been provided written
notice by the City of the violation(s) and of its intent to seek revocation, and an
opportunity for a timely hearing on the revocation before the City Council. If, in the
opinion of the Fire Chief or the City Manager that the continued operation under the
license following discovery of the violation would constitute an unreasonable and
imminent danger to persons or property, those officials may temporarily suspend the
license until the Council has acted on a revocation request by those officials. If a license
is revoked, neither the applicant, the licensee, or the premise where the licensee’s
licensed activity took place, may apply for, obtain or be the site for a license for a period
of twelve (12) months from the effective date of the revocation.
Section 22-458. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief or his/her designee, in conjunction with the Building
Official and Police Officers, to enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
Section 22-459. Violations.
(a) Any person who violates the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) Any violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall preclude the applicant,
licensee, or the site of violation from qualifying for another license or as a place
where the license activity may occur for a period of twelve (12) months from the
effective date of revocation.
(c) Materials that are in violation of this Chapter or pose a threat to public safety
may be confiscated and destroyed. Costs associated with disposal may be
assessed back to the property from which the materials were removed in the
same manner as in the recovery of the costs of abatement of a nuisance.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE IX
6 of 6
(d) In the event of a violation of this Chapter, the City may institute appropriate
proceedings, including bringing criminal charges, or seeking civil or injunctive
relief, to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such violation. The City, in any court
of competent jurisdiction, may recover all costs incurred for corrective action.
Any violator of this Chapter shall be responsible for the City’s cost of
prosecution, including attorney fees.
Section 22-460. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Chapter is, for any
reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of administrative agency of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed to be a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions thereof.
Sections 22-461 thru 22-480. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE XI
1 of 3
CHAPTER 22. LICENSING; BUSINESSES & SERVICES
ARTICLE XI. Parades
Section 22-500. License Required.
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade
permit shall have been obtained from the chief of police.
Section 22-501. Application--Filing.
A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of
police on forms provided by such officer within not less than 20 days nor more than 60
days before the date upon which it is proposed to conduct the parade.
Section 22-502. Application--Contents.
The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such
parade.
(b) If the parade is proposed to be conducted for or on behalf of, or by an
organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the
organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization.
(c) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will act as parade
chairman and be responsible for the conduct of the parade.
(d) The date the parade is to be conducted.
(e) The starting point, route to be traveled and termination point of the parade.
(f) The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles which will constitute
such parade and the type and description of the animals and vehicles.
(g) The hours when such parade will start and terminate.
(h) A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the
width of the streets proposed to be traveled.
(i) The location and description of any assembly areas for such a parade.
(j) The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such
assembly area.
(k) The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade.
(l) Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably
necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued.
Section 22-503. Application--Late filing.
The chief of police, where good cause is shown therefore, shall have authority to consider
any application which is filed not less than ten days before the date such parade is
proposed to be conducted. On applications by school officials, the chief of police may
grant a permit if the application is made three days prior to the date of such parade.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE XI
2 of 3
Section 22-504. Standards for issuance.
The chief of police shall issue a permit when, from a consideration of the application and
such other information is available to him, he finds as follows:
(a) Conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly
movement of other traffic within the city contiguous to the parade route or
interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment.
(b) The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of
police officers as to prevent normal police protection to the city.
(c) The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the
parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection to areas
contiguous to such assembly areas.
(d) The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or
property nor provoke disorderly conduct.
(e) The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of
termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route.
Section 22-505. Notice of rejection.
The chief of police shall act upon the application for a parade permit within three days
after the filing thereof. If the chief of police disapproves the application, he shall
immediately mail to the applicant a notice of his actions stating the reasons for the denial
of the permit.
Section 22-506. Appeal procedure.
Any person aggrieved by a denial of a permit shall have the right to appeal to the city
council at its next scheduled meeting following such denial. Written notice of such appeal
shall be given to the city manager before such next scheduled city council meeting.
Section 22-507. Alternative permit.
The chief of police, in denying an application for a private permit, shall be empowered to
authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time or over a route different from that
named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within
three days after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written acceptance with
the chief of police.
Section 22-508. Notice to other officials of issuance.
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the chief of police shall send a copy
thereof to the city manager, fire chief and to the director of any public transportation
system, the regular routes of whose vehicles will be affected by the route of the proposed
parade.
Section 22-509. Contents of permit.
Each permit shall state the following information:
(a) Starting time.
(b) Minimum and maximum speed of parade.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE XI
3 of 3
(c) Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade.
(d) The portions of the streets to be traveled.
(e) The maximum length of the parade.
(f) Such other information as the chief of police shall deem necessary.
Section 22-510. Revocation.
The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued under this
article, on notice, upon application of the standards for issuance as set forth in this article.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE XII
Page 1 of 13 1
CHAPTER 22. LICENSING; BUSINESSES & SERVICES
ARTICLE XII. Adult Establishments
Section 22-520. Findings.
The Minnesota Attorney General, the American Planning Association, and cities such as
St. Paul and Minneapolis, Minnesota; Indianapolis, Indiana; Cleveland and Bradley
County, Tennessee; Phoenix, Arizona; Austin, Texas; Toledo, Ohio; Bellevue,
Washington; St. Croix County, Wisconsin; Kansas City, Missouri; and Newport News,
Virginia, have studied the impacts that adult establishments have in those communities.
These studies concluded that adult establishments have adverse impact on the
surrounding neighborhoods. Those impacts include increased crime rates, lower property
values, increased transiency, neighborhood blight and potential health risks. Based on
research and review of these studies, the City Council makes the following findings:
(a) Adult establishments have adverse secondary impacts of the types set forth
above.
(b) The adverse impacts caused by adult establishments tend to diminish if adult
establishments are governed by locational requirements, licensing requirements
and health requirements.
(c) It is not the intent of the City Council to prohibit adult establishments from
having a reasonable opportunity to locate in the City.
(d) Minnesota Statutes, § 462.357, allows the City to adopt regulations to promote
the public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
(e) The public health, safety, morals and general welfare will be promoted by the
City adopting regulations governing adult establishments.
(f) Adult establishments can contribute to an increase in criminal activity in the area
in which such businesses are located, taxing City crime-prevention programs
and law enforcement services.
(g) Adult establishments can be used as fronts for prostitution and other criminal
activity. The experience of other cites indicates that the proper management and
operation of such businesses can, however, minimize the risk, provided the
owners and operators of such facilities are regulated by licensing or other
procedures.
(h) Adult establishments can increase the risk of exposure to communicable
diseases including, but not limited to, Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
(AIDS) for which currently there is no cure. Experiences of other cities
indicated that such businesses can facilitate the spread of communicable
diseases by virtue of the design and use of the premises, thereby endangering not
only the patrons of such establishments but also the general public.
(i) Adult establishments can cause or contribute to public health problems by the
presence of live adult entertainment in conjunction with food and/or drink on the
same premises.
(j) The risk of criminal activity and/or public health problems can be minimized
through a licensing and regulatory scheme as prescribed herein.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE XII
Page 2 of 13 1
Section 22-521. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this Ordinance to regulate Adult Establishments to promote the health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the City and to establish reasonable
and uniform regulations to:
(a) Prevent additional criminal activity within the City;
(b) Prevent deterioration of neighborhoods and its consequent adverse effect on real
estate values of properties within the neighborhood;
(c) Locate adult establishments away from residential areas, schools, churches,
libraries, parks and playgrounds; and
(d) Prevent concentration of adult establishments within certain areas of the City.
Section 22-522. Content-Neutral Regulation.
The provisions of this Chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a
limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including adult
oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this Ordinance to restrict
or deny access by adults to adult-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment or
to deny access by distributors and exhibitors of adult-oriented entertainment to their
intended market.
Section 22-523. Definitions.
For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
(a) Adult Establishment. A business engaged in any of the following activities or
which utilizes any of the following business procedures or practices:
(1) Any business that has (a) at least ten percent (10%) of its inventory,
stock and trade or publicly displayed merchandise, or (b) at least ten
percent (20%) of the floor area of the business (not including
storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements or any portion of the
business not open to the public) devoted to items, merchandise or other
materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material
depicting, exposing, describing, discussing or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
(2) Any adult use as defined in Section 22-523(b).
(b) Adult Use. An adult use is any of the activities and businesses described below:
(1) Adult Body Painting Studio. An establishment or business, other than a
massage parlor licensed under City Code that provides the service of
applying paint or other substance, whether transparent or nontransparent,
to the body of a patron when such person is wholly or
partially nude in terms of “specified anatomical areas”.
(2) Adult Bookstore. An establishment or business used for barter, rental or
sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records,
audio tape, videotape, motion picture film, or other visual media if (a)
at least ten percent (10%) of the inventory, stock, and trade or publicly
displayed merchandise or (b) at least ten percent (10%) of the floor area
of the business (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms,
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE XII
Page 3 of 13 1
basements or any portion of the business not open to the public) is
devoted to items, merchandise or other material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
(3) Adult Car Wash. A wash facility for any type of motor vehicle that
allows employees, agents, independent contractors or persons to appear
in a state of partial or total nudity in terms of “specified anatomical
areas.”
(4) Adult Cabaret. A business or establishment that provides dancing or
other live entertainment to patrons if the dancing and live entertainment
is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the presentation,
display, or depiction of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas”.
(5) Adult Companionship Establishment. A business or establishment that
provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or
discussion between an employee of the establishment and a customer, if
such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
(6) Adult Conversation/Rap Parlor. A business or establishment that
provides the services of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk,
or discussion if such service is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas.”
(7) Adult Entertainment Facility. A building or space in which an
admission is charged for the entrance, or food or non-alcoholic
beverages are sold or intended for consumption, and in which may be
observed live presentations of entertainment distinguished by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
(8) Adult Health/Sport Club. A health/sport club that is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas.”
(9) Adult Hotel or Motel. A hotel or motel that presents material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas.”
(10) Adult Massage Parlor, Health Club. A massage parlor or health club
that provides the services of massage, if such service is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas.”
(11) Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater. A business or establishment with a
capacity for less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting material if
such material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities”
or “specified anatomical areas.”
(12) Adult Modeling Studio. A business or establishment that provides
customers figure models who are so provided with the intent of
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE XII
Page 4 of 13 1
providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers
and who engage in “specified sexual activities” or display “specified
anatomical areas” while being observed, painted, painted upon,
sketches, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted by
such customers.
(13) Adult Motion Picture Arcade. Any place to which the public is
permitted or invited where coin or slug-operat4ed or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled or operated still or motion
picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are
maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at
any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
(14) Adult Motion Picture Theater. A motion picture theater with a capacity
of fifty (50) or more persons that as a prevailing practice presents
materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” for observation by
patrons.
(15) Adult Novelty Business. A business or establishment that has (a) at
least ten (10%) of its inventory, stock and trade or publicly displayed
merchandise, or (b) at least ten percent (10%) of the floor area of the
business (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basement
or any portion of the business not open to the public) devoted to items,
merchandise or other material or devices which stimulate human
genitals or devices which are designed for sexual stimulation.
(16) Adult Sauna. A business or establishment that provides a steam bath or
heated bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation or
reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing
agent if the service provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
(c) Adult Use, Accessory. The offering of classified as adult uses, on a limited
scale and which are incidental the primary activity and goods and/or services
offered by the business establishment. Examples of these items include the sale
of adult magazines, the sale and/or rental of adult motion pictures, or the sale of
adult novelties. The following standards shall apply to Adult Use, Accessory:
a. An adult use, accessory shall not involve or include any adult use
activity except the sale or rental of merchandise.
b. The merchandise shall comprise no more than ten percent (10%)
of the business establishment’s inventory, stock, and trade or
publicly displayed merchandise, or (b) ten percent (10%) of the floor
area of the business (not including storerooms, stock areas,
bathrroms, basement, or any portion of the business not open to the
public.)
c. No merchandise or pictures of the products sold or rented on the
premises may be displayed in the window areas or in any area where
they can be viewed from a sidewalk or public space outside of the
building. The window areas may not be covered or made opaque to
disguise or hide the display of the product.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE XII
Page 5 of 13 1
d. The display and display areas for adult use, accessory shall
comply with Minn. Stat. 617.293 and amendments thereto, and shall
comply with all local, state and federal laws regarding the display
and dissemination of harmful materials to minors.
e. Adult use, accessory shall be prohibited from both internal and
external advertising of adult materials and products.
f. An adult use, accessory does not require a license.
(d) Daycare Facility. A facility holding a license from Anoka County or the State
of Minnesota under Minnesota Statutes 245A and/or Minnesota Rules Chapter
9502 or Chapter 9503, as amended.
(e) Employ, Employee, and Employment. These words describe and pertain to any
person who performs any service on the premises of an adult establishment, on a
full-time, part-time, or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated
an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. Employee does not
include a person exclusively on the premise for repair or maintenance of the
premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
(f) Minor. Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(g) Nudity means uncovered, or less than opaquely covered, post-pubertal human
genitals, pubic areas, the post-pubertal human female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola, or the covered human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state. For purposes of this chapter, a female breast is
considered uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and the areola are covered.
(h) Library means any public library that provides free access to all residents of the
City or County without discrimination and is organized under Minnesota Statute
134.
(i) Park Land means a park, playground, beach or recreation area that is owned,
leased, or used wholly or in part by the City of Anoka, Anoka County, the State
of Minnesota, a school district, or the federal government for recreation
purposes.
(j) Person shall mean individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
(k) Place of Worship means a building or space that is principally used as a place
where people of the same faith or religion regularly assemble for worship.
(l) School means a building or space that is principally used as a place where
twenty-five (25) or more persons receive a full course of educational instruction.
Any post-secondary or post high school educational building, including any
college or any vocational-technical college, shall not be deemed a school for the
purposes of this ordinance.
(m) Specified Anatomical Areas means:
(1) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock, anus, or female breast(s) below a point immediately
above the top of the areola; and
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE XII
Page 6 of 13 1
(2) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
(n) Specified Sexual Activities means:
(1) Actual or stimulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal
intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation
of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual
relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual
relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or
conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus,
fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism,
zooerastia; or
(2) Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation,
arousal or turnescence; or
(3) Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or
masturbation; or
(4) Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks,
or female breast(s); or
(5) Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad in
undergarments or sexually revealing costumes, and who are engaged in
activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other
physical restraint of such persons; or
(6) Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually oriented contact
with an animal by a human being; or
(7) Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.
Section 22-524. Compliance with Regulations; Interpretation.
No adult establishments shall engage in any activity or conduct or permit any other
person to engage in any activity or conduct in or about the adult establishment which is
prohibited by any ordinance of the City, the laws of the State of Minnesota, or the United
States of America. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as authorizing or permitting
conduct which is prohibited or regulated by other statutes or ordinances, including, but
not limited to, statutes or ordinances prohibiting the exhibition, sale, or distribution of
obscene materials generally, or the exhibition, sale or distribution of specified materials
to minors.
Section 22-525. License Required; Exemptions.
No adult establishment shall be operated or maintained in the City without first obtaining
a license to operate issued by the City. A license may be issued for only one adult
establishment at a fixed and certain place. Any person, partnership or corporation which
desires to operate more than one adult establishment in the City shall have a separate
license for each such business. All public and private schools located within the City are
exempt from obtaining a license hereunder when instructing pupils in sex education as
part of its curriculum.
Section 22-526. Application for License.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE XII
Page 7 of 13 1
(a) Information Required. Any person, partnership or corporation desiring to secure
a license shall make application to the City Clerk. The application for a license
shall be upon a form provided by the City and shall include the following
information:
(1) If the applicant is an individual, the name, residence, phone number
and birthdate of the applicant. If the applicant is partnership, the name,
residence, phone number, and birthdate of each general and limited
partner. If the applicant is a corporation, the names, residences, phone
numbers and birthdates of all officers and directors of the corporation.
(2) The name, address, phone number and birthdate of the operator and
manager of such operation, if different from the owners.
(3) The address and legal description of the premises where the adult
establishment is to be located;
(4) A statement detailing any gross misdemeanor or felony convictions
relating to sex offenses, obscenity or the operation of an adult
establishment or adult business by the applicant, operator, manager and
whether or not the applicant, operator or manager has ever applied for
or held a license to operate a similar type of business in other
communities. In the case of a corporation, a statement detailing any
felony convictions of the officers and directors of the corporation, and
whether or not those officers of directors have ever applied for or held a
license to operate a similar type of business in other communities.
(5) The activities and type of business to be conducted.
(6) The hours of operation.
(7) The provisions made to restrict access by minors.
(8) A building plan of the premises detailing all internal operations and
activities.
(b) Submission. Upon receipt of a completed application for a license, including the
license fee, the City Clerk shall submit the request for an adult establishment to
the City Council for approval or denial.
(c) False Information Prohibited. Each application shall contain a provision on the
application in bold print indicating that any withholding of information or the
providing of false or misleading information will be grounds for denial or
revocation of a license. Any changes in the information provided on the
application or provided during the investigation shall be brought to the attention
of the City Council by the applicant or the licensee. If said changes take place
during the investigation, said data shall be provided to the Police Chief in
writing and reported to the City Council. Failure to report said changes by the
applicant(s) or the licensee may result in a denial or revocation of a license.
Section 22-527. License Fees and Term; Renewals.
(a) Investigation Fee. Each application for a license shall be accompanied with a fee
as established by the City Council for the costs of investigation of the
application.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE XII
Page 8 of 13 1
(b) License Fee. If the application is approved, a license shall be issued after
payment of the license fee as established by the City Council.
(c) Term of License; Fees Prorated. All licenses shall be issued for a period of one
year and shall expire on December 31 each year. The fees for licenses shall not
be prorated.
(d) Application for renewal of the license must be made at least sixty (60) days prior
to the expiration date. Failure to do so may result in the license being suspended
upon the expiration date, with said suspension continuing until the City Council
has determined to renew or refuse to renew the license.
Section 22-528. Granting of License.
(a) The Police Chief or such other designated person shall complete a background
investigation within thirty (30) days after the City Clerk receives a complete
application and investigative fees.
(b) If the application is for a renewal, and is submitted at least sixty (60) days prior
to the expiration date, the applicant shall be allowed to continue business until
the Council has determined to renew or refuse to renew a license.
(c) If, after such investigation, it appears that the applicant and the place proposed
for the business are eligible for a license under the criteria set forth in this
Chapter, then the license shall be approved by the City Council.
(d) Each license shall be issued to the applicant only and shall not be transferable to
another holder. Each license shall be issued only for the premises described in
the application. No license may be transferred to another premise without the
approval of the City Council. If the licensee is a partnership or corporation, a
change in the identity of any of the principals of the partnership or corporation
shall be deemed a transfer of the license. All adult establishments existing at the
time of the adoption of this Chapter shall be required to obtain an annual license.
Section 22-529. Persons Ineligible for a License.
No license shall be granted to or held by any person:
(a) Under twenty-one (21) years of age;
(b) Who is overdue in payments to the City, County or State of taxes, fees, fines or
penalties assessed against them or imposed upon them;
(c) Who has been convicted of a crime, if such conviction relates to sex offenses,
obscenity offenses or adult establishments;
(d) Who is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the license is to be
issued; or
(e) Who has not paid the license and investigative fees required by this Chapter.
Section 22-530. Places Ineligible for a License.
No license shall be granted to:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE XII
Page 9 of 13 1
(a) Any adult establishment which is not in full compliance with the City Code, the
City’s zoning ordinance, the Building Code, the Fire Code, and all provisions of
state and federal law.
(b) Any establishment that holds an intoxicating liquor, beer or wine license.
Section 22-531. Display of a License.
The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the adult establishment.
Section 22-532. General Requirements.
Adult establishments shall be permitted subject to the following requirements:
(a) Building Standards.
(1) No commercial building, structure or premises or part thereof, or
facilities therein, shall be constructed, used, designed or operated for
the purpose of persons to engage in specified sexual activities.
(2) Booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room or individual rooms
used for the viewing of adult media or other forms of entertainment,
having doors, curtains or portal partitions are prohibited, unless such
booths, stalls, partitioned portions of a room, or individual rooms so
used shall have at least one side wall open to an adjacent public room
or area. Such booth, stall or room shall be illuminated in a manner that
the persons in the area used for viewing the adult media or other forms
of entertainment are visible from adjacent public rooms, but such
lighting shall not be of such intensity as to prevent the viewing of the
offered entertainment.
(3) The above building standards shall not apply to buildings, structures
and premises which are lawfully operating as hotels, motels, apartment
complexes, condominiums or rooming houses.
(4) No merchandise or pictures of the products sold or rented or the
entertainment conducted on the premises may be displayed in the
window areas or in any area where they can be viewed from a sidewalk
or public space outside of the building. The window areas may not be
covered or made opaque in any way.
(5) The display and display areas shall comply with Minn. Stat. § 617.293
and amendments thereto and shall comply with all local, state, and
federal laws regarding the display and dissemination of harmful
materials to minors.
(b) Location.
Adult establishments shall be permitted as indicated in the Chapter of the City
Code relating to zoning. In addition, the following regulations shall apply:
(1) An adult establishment shall not be located within 500 feet (500’),
measured in a straight line from the building or edge of leased building
space to the property line, of any residential zoning district (R-1, R-2,
R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, R-F) boundary or property, or in a planned unit
development which is or projected to be residential.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE XII
Page 10 of 13 1
(2) An adult establishment shall not be allowed within one thousand feet
(1,000’), measured in a straight line from the building or edge of leased
building space of another existing adult establishment.
(3) An adult establishment shall not be located within one thousand feet
(1,000’), measured in a straight line, from the building to the property
line, of any existing school, place of worship, hospital, library, daycare
facility or park land.
(c) Operation.
(1) No adult establishment shall be conducted in any manner that permits
the observation from any property not approved as an adult
establishment of any materials depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas by any visual
or auditory media, including display, decoration, sign, show window,
sound transmission or other means.
(2) All entrances to the business, with the exception of emergency fire
exits which are not usable by patrons to enter the business, shall be
visible from a public right of way.
(3) The layout of the display areas shall be designed so that the
management of the establishment and any law enforcement personnel
inside the store can observe all patrons while they have access to any
merchandise offered for sale or viewing including, but not limited to,
books, magazines, photographs, video tapes, or other visual media.
(4) Illumination of the premises shall be adequate to observe the location
and activities of all persons on the exterior of the premises.
(5) Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of the licensee’s
place of business and shall maintain conditions of order.
(d) Signs. All adult establishments shall prominently display a sign at the entrance
and located within two feet (2’) of the door opening device of the adult use
establishment or section of the establishment devoted to adult books or materials
which states: “This business sells or displays material containing adult themes.
No one under 18 years of age allowed.” Said sign shall have letters at least
three-eighths inch (3/8”) in height and no more than two inches (2”) in height.
No sign may be placed in any window.
(e) Hours of Operation. No adult establishment shall be open to the public from the
hours of 10:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
(f) Sale of Liquor. An adult establishment shall not sell or dispense 3.2 percent malt
liquor or intoxicating liquor.
(g) Additional Conditions for Adult Cabarets. The following additional conditions
apply to adult cabarets:
(1) No owner, operator or manager of an adult cabaret shall permit or allow
an dance or other live entertainer to perform nude.
(2) No dancer, live entertainer, performer, or patron or any other person
shall be nude in an adult cabaret.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE XII
Page 11 of 13 1
(3) No dancer, live entertainer or performer shall be under eighteen (18)
years old.
(4) All dancing or live entertainment shall occur on a platform intended for
that purpose and which is raised at least two (2) feet from the level of
the floor.
(5) No dancer or performer shall perform any dance or live entertainment
closer than six (6) feet to any patron.
(6) No dancer or performer shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron
shall fondle or caress any dancer of performer.
(7) No patron shall pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or performer.
(8) No dancer or performer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any
patron.
Section 22-533. Responsibilities of Operator.
(a) Violations by Employees.
(1) Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization,
knowledge or approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator’s
negligent failure to supervise the employee’s conduct, and the operator
shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if
the operator committed the act or caused the omission.
(2) Any act or omission or any employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
operator for purposes of determining whether the operator’s license
shall be revoked, suspended or renewed.
(b) Minors. No employee of an adult establishment shall allow any minor to loiter
around or to frequent an adult establishment or to allow any minor to view adult
entertainment.
(c) Sanitary Conditions. The operator shall maintain the premises in a clean and
sanitary condition at all times.
(d) Lighting. The operator shall maintain at least ten (10) foot-candles of light in
the public portions of the establishment, including aisles, at all times. However,
if a lesser level of illuminations in the aisles shall be necessary to enable a
patron to view the adult entertainment in a booth, room or cubicle adjoining an
aisle, a lesser amount of illumination may be maintained in such aisles;
provided, however, at no time shall there be less than one foot-candle of
illumination in said aisles as measured from the floor.
(e) Business Transactions. All business transactions shall occur within the licensed
building.
(f) Employee Background. No employees shall have been convicted of any crime
involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual
nature or involving the use of distribution of a controlled substance as defined
by state law, or the use or distribution of a dangerous weapon within the past
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE XII
Page 12 of 13 1
five (5) years). The fact that a conviction may be under appeal shall not affect
the disqualification of the employee.
(g) Compliance with Provisions. The operator shall ensure compliance of the
establishment and its patrons with the provisions of this chapter.
Section 22-534. Inspections.
Members of the City’s police department, the fire marshal or designee, the building
official or designee, and the zoning administrator or designee shall have the authority to
enter an adult use business at reasonable times to inspect the premises for the purposes of
enforcing this chapter and all other applicable state laws.
Section 22-535. Suspension or Revocation of License.
(a) Basis for Revocation. The City Council shall revoke an adult establishment
license for any of the following reasons:
(1) Discovery that false or misleading information or data was given on
any initial or renewal application or material facts were omitted from
any such application.
(2) The operator or an employee of an operator violates any provisions of
this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted by the City Council
pursuant to this chapter; provided, however, that in the case of a first
offense by an operator where the conduct was solely that of an
employee, the penalty shall not exceed a suspension of thirty (30) days
if the City Council finds that the operator had no actual or constructive
knowledge of such violation and could not, by the exercise of due
diligence, have had such actual or constructive knowledge.
(3) The operator becomes ineligible to obtain a license.
(4) Any cost or fee required to be paid by this chapter is not paid.
(5) Any 3.2 percent malt liquor or intoxicating liquor is served or
consumed on the premises of the adult use business.
(6) Any violation of this Chapter.
(b) In the event that the City Council proposes to revoke or suspend the license, the
licensee shall be notified in writing of the basis for such proposed revocation or
suspension. The Council shall hold a hearing for the purpose of determining
whether to revoke or suspend the license. Such hearing shall be held within
thirty (30) days of the date of the notice.
(c) The City Council shall determine whether to suspend or revoke a license within
thirty (30) days after the close of the hearing or within sixty (60) days of the date
of the notice, whichever is sooner, and shall notify the licensee of its decision
within that period. The licensee may continue to operate until the City Council
makes its final decision whether to suspend or revoke the license.
Section 22-536. Right of Appeal
(a) In the event that the Council determines to suspend, or revoke a license, such
suspension or revocation shall not be effective until fifteen (15) days after
notification of the decision to the licensee. If, within that fifteen (15) days, the
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 22;ARTICLE XII
Page 13 of 13 1
licensee files and serves an action in state or federal court challenging the
Council’s action, then the suspension or revocation shall be stayed until the
conclusion of such action.
(b) If the City Council determines not to renew a license, the licensee may continue
the business for fifteen (15) days after receiving notice of non-renewal. If the
licensee files and serves an action in state or federal court within that fifteen (15)
days challenging the Council’s action, the licensee may continue in business
until the conclusion of the action.
(c) Any operator whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to apply for a license
for one year form the date of revocation. No location or premises for which a
license has been revoked shall be used as an adult establishment for six (6)
months from the date of revocation of the license.
(d) If the City Council decides not to grant a license to an applicant, then the
applicant may commence an action in state or federal court within fifteen (15)
days of the denial of the challenging the Council’s action. The applicant shall
not commence doing business unless the action is concluded in its favor.
Section 22-537. Violation; Penalty.
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be punished not more than the maximum penalty for a misdemeanor as
prescribed by state law. Each day a violation occurs shall be considered a separate
offense. Additionally, the City may enforce any provision of this Chapter by mandamus,
injunction or any other appropriate civil remedy in the court of competent jurisdiction.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 30; ARTICLE I
1 of 3
CHAPTER 30. ELECTIONS
Article I. In General
----------
State law references--Charter provisions to prevail over certain state election laws, Minn. Stats. § 410.21;
elections generally, Minn. Stats. chs. 200--211C; municipal elections, Minn. Stats. ch. 205.
----------
Section 30-1. Precinct boundaries.
The city shall be divided into eight precincts as follows:
(a) First precinct. All that part of the area included within the boundaries of the
City of Anoka which lies west of the middle of the Rum River and south and
easterly of the following described line: beginning at the intersection of the
middle of the Rum River and the centerline of U.S. Highway No. 10; thence
westerly along the centerline of U.S. Highway No. 10 to its intersection with the
centerline of West Main Street; thence southeasterly along the centerline of
West Main Street to the intersection of the centerline of Green Avenue; thence
southerly along the centerline of Green Avenue to the intersection of the
centerline of Western Street; thence west and northwesterly along the centerline
of Western Street to the intersection of the centerline of Shaw Avenue; thence
southwesterly along the centerline of Shaw Avenue to the intersection of the
centerline of Park Street; thence northwesterly along the centerline of Park
Street to the intersection of the centerline of the continuation of Shaw Avenue;
thence southwesterly along the centerline of Shaw Avenue to the Mississippi
River and there terminating.
(b) Second precinct. All that part of the area included within the boundaries of the
City of Anoka which lies northeasterly of the centerline of the Mississippi River
and westerly of the line described as follows: beginning at the intersection of the
middle of the Mississippi River and the continuation of the centerline of Shaw
Avenue; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Shaw Avenue to the
intersection of the centerline of Park Street; thence southeasterly along the
centerline of Park Street to the intersection of the centerline of the continuation
of Shaw Avenue; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Shaw Avenue to
the intersection of the centerline of Western Street; thence southeasterly and
easterly along the centerline of Western Street to the intersection of the
centerline of Green Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of Green
Avenue to the intersection of the centerline of West Main Street; thence
northwesterly along the centerline of West Main Street to the intersection of the
centerline of U.S. Highway No. 10; thence continuing northwesterly along the
centerline of U.S. Highway No. 10 to the westerly city limits and there
terminating.
(c) Third precinct. All that part of the City of Anoka lying westerly of the centerline
of the Rum River and lying north and northeasterly of the centerline of U.S.
Highway 10.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 30; ARTICLE I
2 of 3
(d) Fourth precinct. All that part of the City of Anoka lying within the boundaries
of the following described line: beginning at the intersection of the centerline of
the Mississippi River and the centerline of the Rum River; thence northerly
along the centerline of the Rum River to the intersection of the centerline of
Madison Street extended westerly; thence easterly along the westerly extension
of, and the centerline of Madison Street to the intersection of the centerline of
Fifth Avenue; thence southerly along the centerline of Fifth Avenue to the
intersection of the centerline of South Street; thence easterly along the centerline
of South Street to the easterly city limits and there terminating.
(e) Fifth precinct. All that part of the City of Anoka lying within the boundaries of
the following described line: beginning at the intersection of the centerline of
South Street and the easterly city limit; thence westerly along the centerline of
South Street to the intersection of the centerline of South Street to the
intersection of the centerline of Fifth Avenue; thence northerly along the
centerline of Fifth Avenue to the intersection of the centerline of East Main
Street; thence easterly along the centerline of East Main Street to the easterly
city limits and there terminating.
(f) Sixth precinct. All that part of the City of Anoka lying within the boundaries of
the following described line: beginning at the intersection of the northerly city
limits and the centerline of the Rum River; thence southerly along the centerline
of the Rum River to the intersection of the westerly extension of the centerline
of Madison Street; thence easterly along the westerly extension of the centerline
of Madison Street and the centerline of Madison Street to the intersection of the
centerline of Fifth Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of Fifth
Avenue to the intersection of centerline of East Main Street; thence easterly
along the centerline of East Main Street to the easterly city limits; thence
northerly and westerly along the city limit line to the intersection of the
centerline of U.S. Highway No. 10; thence westerly and northwesterly along the
centerline of U.S. Highway No. 10 to the intersection of the centerline of
Seventh Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of Seventh Avenue to the
northerly city limits and there terminating.
(g) Seventh precinct. All that part of the City of Anoka lying within the boundaries
of the following described line: beginning at the easterly city limits and the
intersection of the centerline of U.S. Highway No. 10; thence west and
northwesterly along the centerline of U.S. Highway No. 10 to the intersection of
the centerline of Seventh Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of
Seventh Avenue to the intersection of the centerline of Sunny Lane; thence
easterly along the centerline of Sunny Lane to the intersection of the centerline
of Aldrich Avenue; thence southerly along the centerline of Aldrich Avenue to
the intersection of the centerline of the continuation of Sunny Lane; thence
easterly along the centerline of Sunny Lane to the intersection of the centerline
of 12th Avenue; thence southerly along the centerline of 12th Avenue to the
intersection of the centerline of Roosevelt Street; thence easterly along the
centerline of Roosevelt Street to the easterly city limits and there terminating.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 30; ARTICLE I
3 of 3
(h) Eighth precinct. All that part of the City of Anoka lying northerly and easterly
of the following described line: beginning at the easterly city limits and the
intersection of the centerline of Roosevelt Street; thence westerly along the
centerline of Roosevelt Street to the intersection of the centerline of 12th
Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of 12th Avenue to the intersection
of the centerline of Sunny Lane; thence westerly along the centerline of Sunny
Lane to the intersection of the centerline of Aldrich Avenue; thence northerly
along the centerline of Aldrich Avenue to the intersection of the centerline of the
continuation of Sunny Lane; thence westerly along the centerline of Sunny Lane
to the intersection of the centerline of Seventh Avenue; thence northerly along
the centerline of Seventh Avenue to the northerly city limits and there
terminating.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 34;ARTICLE I
1 of 2
CHAPTER 34. FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE I. Fire Code
Section 34-1. Minnesota Uniform Fire Code.
There is hereby adopted by the City Council for the purpose of prescribing regulations
governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain
code known as the Fire Code, adopted by the state pursuant to Minn. Stats. § 299F.001.
State law references-- Adoption by reference, Minn. Stats. § 471.62.
Section 34-2. Definitions.
Municipality. Wherever the word "municipality" or “city” is used in this Chapter or in
the Fire Code, it shall be held to mean the City of Anoka.
Fire Chief. Wherever the words “fire chief” are used in this Chapter or in the Fire Code,
they shall be held to mean the Fire Chief for the City of Anoka.
Section 34-3. Bureau of fire prevention; reporting.
A report of the bureau of fire prevention shall be made annually and transmitted to the
City Manager. It shall contain all proceedings under this code, with such statistics as the
Fire Chief may wish to include therein; the fire chief shall also recommend any
amendment to the code which, in his judgment, shall be desirable.
Section 34-4. Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of flammable liquids in outside
aboveground tanks is to be prohibited.
(a) The limits referred to in Section 7902.2.2.1 of the Fire Code in which storage of
flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited are hereby
established as follows: All districts other than M-1 Light Industrial and M-2
General Industrial.
(b) New bulk tanks or terminals for flammable and combustible liquids may be
constructed within any fire zone provided they meet fire code and local zoning
requirements. Underground tanks may be permitted in the B-1 Highway
Business District, B-2 Shopping Center District and Main Street Mixed Use
District, West Main Sub-district, provided they meet Fire Code and local zoning
requirements.
Section 34-5. Permit fees.
Wherever this chapter or the Fire Code requires permits for materials, processes,
occupancies, or activities, applicable permit fees shall be determined by the City Council.
Sections 34-6 thru 34-19. Reserved.
Section 34-20. Fee for fireworks permit.
The fee to be paid to the city for a fireworks permit issued pursuant to
Minn. Stats. § 624.21 et seq. shall be as established by the City Council.
Section 34-21. Accumulations of rubbish, boxes, etc., in alleys, sidewalks, etc.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 34;ARTICLE I
2 of 2
No person shall allow to remain longer than twelve (12) hours or overnight, in any alley,
or on any sidewalk or premises, within 30 feet of any building, any empty boxes, barrels,
rubbish, trash, waste paper, excelsior or other combustible materials.
Sections 34-22 thru 34-29. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 34;ARTICLE II
1 of 5
CHAPTER 34. FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE II. Open Burning
----------
*State law reference--Open burning, Minn. Stats. § 88.171.
----------
Section 34-30. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Burning permit is a permit issued by the City Fire Chief or designee authorizing fires exempted
from the general provisions of this article and setting conditions therefore.
Fireplace means an outdoor structure intended to be used to contain an outdoor fire, constructed of
brick, concrete, stone, metal or other non-combustible materials, sufficient in design to adequately
contain a fire, but does not include commercially available portable charcoal or propane grills used
principally for the cooking of food.
Open fire or Open burning means the burning of matter, whether concentrated or dispersed, which
is not contained within a fully enclosed fireplace, structure or vehicle, from with the products of
combustion are emitted directly to the open atmosphere without passing through a stack, duct or
chimney.
Starter fuels means dry, untreated, unpainted wood or charcoal fire starter. Paraffin candles and
alcohols are permitted as starter fuels and as aids to ignition only. Propane gas torches or other
clean gas burning devices causing minimal pollution may also be used to start an open fire.
Wood means dry, clean fuel only such as twigs, branches, limbs, "presto logs," charcoal, cord
wood or untreated dimensional lumber. The term "wood" does not include wood that is green,
contains leaves or needles, or is rotten, wet, oil soaked or treated with paint, glue or preservatives.
Clean pallets may be used for outdoor fireplace burning when cut into three-foot lengths.
Section 34-31. Open Burning
(a) Prohibited. Except as otherwise permitted by this article, all open burning is prohibited in
the City.
(b) Exemptions. The following types of open burning shall be exempt from the prohibition of
subsection (a) of this section:
(1) Outdoor fireplace burning subject to the conditions set forth within this chapter;
(2) Fires purposely set under the supervision of the City fire department for the
instruction and training of firefighting personnel; and
(3) Fires for which a burning permit has been obtained.
Section 34-32. Burning Ban or Air Quality Alert
No fireplace burning or open burn will be permitted when the City or the state department of
natural resources has officially declared a burning ban due to potential hazardous fire conditions or
when state pollution control agency has declared an air quality alert.
State law reference--Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. § 88.171, subd. 9.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 34;ARTICLE II
2 of 5
Section 34-33. Outdoor Fireplace Burning
(a) Outdoor fireplace burning shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Burning shall only be allowed between 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight during any
day of the week.
(2) The fire shall not exceed three feet in diameter and a flame height of
approximately three feet.
(3) Only clean wood or charcoal may be burned. No burning of trash, leaves or
brush is allowed.
(4) Only starter fluids as defined in this chapter may be used to ignite the fire.
(5) The fire must be constantly attended and supervised by a person knowledgeable
in the use of fire-extinguishing until the fire has been totally extinguished.
(6) Fire-extinguishing equipment such as buckets, shovels, or garden hoses, are
must be readily available.
(7) Burning may not be conducted within fifteen (15) feet of a structure, property
line or combustible materials.
(8) Any conditions that could cause a fire to spread to within 15 feet of a structure
or property line shall be removed or eliminated prior to ignition. Any
accumulation of combustible materials shall be removed to a location at least 15
feet up-wind from the fire.
(9) Outdoor fireplace burning must be contained in a fireplace.
Sections 34-34 thru 34-49. Reserved.
Section 34-50. Issuance.
Except for permits issued by the State Department of Natural Resources for fire training
and permanent burn sites, the City Fire Chief or designee may issue a burning permit for
any of the following:
(a) Fires set for the elimination of a fire hazard which cannot be abated by any other
practical means.
(b) Fires purposely set for forest and game management purposes when no other
alternative methods are practical.
(c) The burning of trees, brush, grass and other vegetable matter in the clearing of
land, the maintenance of street, roadway, highway or railroad right-of-way and
in accepted agricultural land management practices where chipping, composting,
landscaping or other alternative methods are not practical.
(d) The disposal of diseased trees generated on-site, diseased or infected nursery
stock or diseased beehives.
(e) Ground thawing for utility repair and construction.
Section 34-51. Procedure for Permit Issuance.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 34;ARTICLE II
3 of 5
(a) Application for a burning permit shall be submitted to the City Fire Chief on a
form prescribed by the City.
(b) The Fire Chief, or designee, shall review the application to ensure compliance
with the provisions of this section and any applicable state laws and/or
regulations.
(c) The Fire Chief, or designee, may inspect the proposed burn site on such
occasions and at such time as is deemed necessary to adequately review the
application. Submission of the application shall constitute authorization for the
Fire Chief, or designee, to enter the premises for this purpose.
(d) Within five (5) business days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays,
after receipt of the application, the Fire Chief, or designee, shall either grant or
deny the application.
Section 34-52. Denial of Permit.
(a) Application for a burning permit may be denied for any one of the following
reasons:
(1) The proposed fire or burn site does not meet the requirements of this
section.
(2) The Fire Chief, or designee, determines that there is a practical
alternative method of disposal of the material.
(3) The Fire Chief, or designee, determines that the fire would result in a
pollution or nuisance condition.
(4) The Fire Chief, or designee, determines that the burn cannot be safely
conducted and no plan has been submitted to adequately address the
safety concerns.
(b) The denial of any application shall be in writing and shall state the reasons for
the denial.
(c) Any person aggrieved by the denial of a burning permit may appeal that
decision to the City Council by submitting a written request or appeal to the Fire
Chief's office within ten days after the date of the denial. The Fire Chief's office
shall submit the appeal request to the City Manager for placement on the next
available agenda.
Section 34-53. Prohibited Materials.
(a) No permit may be issued for the open burning of oils, petrol fuels, rubber,
plastics, chemically treated materials or other materials which produce excessive
or noxious smoke such as tires, railroad ties, treated, painted or glued wood,
composite shingles, tar paper, insulation, composition board, sheetrock, wiring,
paint or paint fillers.
(b) No permit shall be issued for the open burning of hazardous waste or salvage
operations, solid waste generated from an industrial or manufacturing process or
from a service or commercial establishment, or building material generated from
demolition of commercial or industrial structures, or discarded material resulting
from the handling, processing, storage, preparation, serving or consumption of
food.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 34;ARTICLE II
4 of 5
State law reference--Prohibited materials, Minn. Stats. § 88.171, subd. 2.
Section 34-54. Responsibilities of Permit Holder.
The holder of any permit shall be responsible for the following:
(a) Having a valid permit in possession at the burn site at all times during the burn.
(b) Prior to starting the burn, confirming that no burning ban or air quality alert is in
effect.
(c) Constant attendance by the permit holder or competent representative during a
burn event.
(d) Availability at the burn site of appropriate communication and fire suppression
equipment as required by the permit or any fire safety plan approved by the City
as part of the permit process.
(e) Not allowing the fire to smolder.
(f) Being sure that the fire is completely extinguished before the permit holder or
representative leaves the site.
(g) All costs incurred as a result of the burn including, but not limited to, fire
suppression, administrative fees, property damage and personal injuries.
Section 34-55. Revocation of Permit.
An officer of the state department of natural resources, the City Fire Chief or designee
may revoke any burning permit for appropriate reasons including, but not limited to:
(a) A fire hazard exists or develops during the course of the burn.
(b) Pollution or nuisance conditions develop during the course of the burn.
(c) The fire smolders with no flame present.
(d) Any of the conditions of the permit are violated during the course of the burn.
Section 34-56. Penalties.
(a) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the Fire Code adopted in
this chapter or fail to comply therewith, or shall violate or fail to comply with
any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed
statement of specification or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken
or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the
City Council or by a Court competent jurisdiction within the time fixed herein,
shall for each and every such violation and non-compliance, respectively be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(b) The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violations or
permit it to continue and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy
such violations or defects within a reasonable time and when not otherwise
specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions exist or are maintained
shall constitute a separate offense.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 34;ARTICLE II
5 of 5
(c) The application of the penalties set forth in this chapter shall not prevent the
forced removal of prohibited conditions based upon other City ordinance
provisions.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 38;ARTICLE I
1 of 4
CHAPTER 38; ENVIRONMENTAL
ARTICLE I. In General
Section 38-1. Unreasonable noise.
Purpose. It is the intent of the City Council by means of this section to protect the public health, safety,
and general welfare by restricting activities which emit noise that unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures, or
endangers the comfort, health, peace, safety, or welfare of any person or persons, or precludes their
enjoyment of property, or adversely affects their property's value.
(b) Definitions. Words and phrases defined in this section have, when used in this ordinance, the
meanings given below. Any other word or phrase used in this ordinance, and defined in
regulations of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency Noise Pollution Control Rules Chapter
7030, has the meaning given in those regulations.
(1) L10. Means the sound level, expressed in decibels (dBA) which is exceeded 10 percent
of the time for a one-hour period, as measured by a sound level meter having
characteristics as specified in the latest standards, S1.4, of the American National
Standards Institute and using test procedures approved by the police department.
(2) L50. Means the sound level, expressed in decibels (dBA) which is exceeded 50 percent
of the time for a one-hour period, as measured by a sound level meter having
characteristics as specified in the latest standards, S1.4, of the American National
Standards Institute and using test procedures approved by the police department.
(3) Person. Means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, trustee, associate, the state
and its agencies and subdivisions, or any body of persons whether incorporated or not.
With respect to acts prohibited or required herein, “person” shall include employees and
licensees.
(c) Noise Restrictions.
(1) Night Restrictions. The following shall be prohibited between the hours of 10 p.m. and
7 a.m.
a. Participation in noisy parties or gatherings. No person shall participate in any party
or gathering of people giving rise to noise, unreasonably disturbing the peace, quiet
or response of another person at any time. When a police officer determines that a
gathering is creating such a noise disturbance, the officer may order all persons
present, other than the owner or tenant of the premises where the disturbance is
occurring, to disperse immediately. No person shall refuse to leave after being
ordered by a police officer to do so. Every owner or tenant of such premises who
has knowledge of the disturbance shall make every reasonable effort to see that the
disturbance is stopped.
b. Domestic Power Equipment. No person shall operate a power lawn mower, power
hedge clipper, chain saw, mulcher, garden tiller, edger, drill or other similar domestic
power maintenance equipment. Snow removal equipment is exempt from this
provision.
c. Heavy Machinery Use. No person or persons shall engage in or permit heavy
machinery activity involving the use of any kind of electric, diesel or gas-powered
machine or other power.
d. Construction Activity. No person shall engage in or permit construction activities
involving any type of equipment, mechanical or non-mechanical.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 38;ARTICLE I
2 of 4
(2) Day Restrictions. The following shall be restricted between the hours of 7 a.m. and
10 p.m.
a. No person shall operate or cause or permit to be operated any source of noise in
such a manner as to create a noise level exceeding the limit set in Table 1 for the
receiving land usage category specified when measured at a point of normal
human activity of the receiving land use.
(d) Permitted Noise. The following acts or noises are permitted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. daily:
(1) Equipment used in connection with special events or activities which are authorized,
sponsored, permitted or approved by the city council or City Manager, so long as the
activity is conducted pursuant to the conditions of the license, permit or contract
authorizing such activity;
(2) Church bells, chimes or carillons, school bells, or emergency civil defense warning
signals;
(3) Anti-theft devices;
(4) Machines or devices for the production of sound on or in authorized emergency vehicles.
(5) Situations wherein immediate work is necessary to restore property to a safe condition or
when immediate work is required to protect persons or property from eminent exposure
to danger are exempt from operational limits.
(6) Equipment used in connection with maintenance, repair, restoration and construction
activities at Green Haven Golf Course; including, but not limited to, lawnmowers and
leaf blowers.
(e) Procedure to Measure Sound. When measuring sound between the hours of 7 a.m. and 10 p.m.,
the following procedure shall be followed to accurately measure the sound.
(1) Measurement location. Measurement of sound must be made at or within the applicable
NAC at the point of human activity which is nearest to the noise source. All
measurements shall be made outdoors.
(2) Equipment specifications. All sound level measuring devices must meet Type O, I, II, or
S specifications under American National Standards Institute S1.4-1983.
(3) Calibration. All sound level measuring devices must, at a minimum, be externally field
calibrated before and after monitoring using a calibration device of known frequency and
sound pressure level.
(4) Measurement procedures. The following procedures must be used to obtain
representative sound level measurements:
a. Measurements must be made at least three feet off the ground or surface and
away from natural or artificial structures which would prevent an accurate
measurement.
Table 1. Sound Level by Receiving Land Use (dBA)
Land Use Districts Day (7:00 a.m.- 10:00 p.m.)
L10 L50
Residential 65 60
Commercial 70 65
Industrial 80 75
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 38;ARTICLE I
3 of 4
b. Measurements must be made using the A-weighting and fast response
characteristics of the sound measuring device as specified in American National
Standards Institute S1.4-1983.
c. Measurements must not be made in sustained winds or in precipitation which
results in a difference of less than ten decibels between the background noise
level and the noise source being measured.
d. Measurements must be made using a microphone which is protected from
ambient conditions which would prevent an accurate measurement.
(5) Data documentation. A summary sheet for all sound level measurement
shall be completed and signed by the person making the measurements. At a minimum,
the summary sheet shall include:
a. date;
b. time;
c. location;
d. noise source;
e. wind speed and direction;
f. temperature;
g. humidity;
h. make, model, and serial number of measuring equipment;
i. field calibration results;
j. monitored levels; and
k. site sketch indicating noise source, measurement location, directions, distances,
and obstructions.
(f) Public Nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, permit or cause to be made
or continued any loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise or any noise within the City which would be
likely to annoy, disturb, injure, or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of a
reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities.
(1) The following acts constitute a presumptive public nuisance.
a. Horns, signaling devices, etc. The continual sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle for a period of at least 15
seconds even if interrupted by short gaps in sound, on any street, public place, or
private property within the City except as a danger warning;
b. Radios, phonographs, etc. The use, operation, or permitting the playing, use, or
operation of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other
machine or device for the amplification, production or reproduction of sound at
any time in such manner as to be likely to annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the
comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of a reasonable person of ordinary
sensibilities who might be in its vicinity or between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and
7:00 A.M. at such a volume so as to be plainly audible at the real property
boundary of the building, structure, residence or other area in which the device
is located.
c. Amplified sound from a motor vehicle. The use, operation or permitting the
playing, use or operation of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, or other
machine or device for the amplification, production or reproduction of sound
within a motor vehicle at a volume where it is audible by any person from a
distance of fifty (50) feet or a distance of five (5) motor vehicle lengths or more
from the source. Where the motor vehicle’s owner is present that person is
responsible for any violation of this subsection. If the owner is not present, the
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 38;ARTICLE I
4 of 4
driver or person in control of the vehicle is responsible for any violation of this
subsection. In addition to an owner or driver, any person who controls or assists
with the amplification, production or reproduction of the sound in violation of
this subsection is an additional responsible party.
d. Loud speakers, amplifiers for advertising, etc. The use, operation, or permitting
the playing, use, or operation of any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the
production or reproduction of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the
purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any
building or structure.
e. Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or loud singing on
the public streets within fifty (50) feet of a residential dwelling unit or sleeping
facility, between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M.
f. Defective vehicle, loads or noisy vehicle operation. The non-emergency use or
operation of any automobile, motorcycle, scooter, recreational vehicle, or other
type of motor vehicle, which by its out-of-repair condition, manner of loading or
operation at such speeds or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary
grating, grinding, squealing of tires, rattling, or other noise so as to be likely to
annoy, disturb, injure, or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of
a reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities in its vicinity.
g. Engine-braking. The use of a compression engine brake device in nonemergency
situations to slow the speed of an internal combustion engine
powered motor vehicle on City streets or highways without an exhaust muffler
in good working order or other device that is effective in preventing loud engine
roaring, staccato popping or growling resulting from the use of the compression
engine brake.
(g) Enforcement. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor as defined by State law.
Section 38-2 through 30-29. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 38; ARTICLE II
1 of 4
CHAPTER 38; ENVIRONMENTAL
ARTICLE II. Nuisances
----------
State law reference--Power to define, prevent and abate nuisances, Minn. Stats. §§ 410.33, 412.231, subd. 23.
----------
Section 38-30. Definitions.
No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained any of the following public nuisances:
(a) Any condition which unreasonably annoys, injures, or endangers the safety, health,
morals, comfort, or repose of any considerable number of members of the public; or
(b) Any condition which interferes with, obstructs, or renders dangerous for passage, any
public highway or right-of-way, or waters used by the public; or
(c) Any other act or omission declared by law or this Code to be a public nuisance.
Section 38-31. Public nuisances affecting morals and decency.
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public morals and decency:
(a) All gambling devices, slot machines and punchboards or gambling activity not licensed
or otherwise authorized by City Ordinance.
(b) All places where intoxicating liquors are manufactured, sold, bartered, possessed or given
away in violation of the law.
(c) Knowingly and intentionally urinating or defecating on or into any street, sidewalk, lane,
alley, parking lot/ramp or any other public ground, or upon any private ground exclusive
of structures containing toilet facilities.
Sec. 38-32. Public nuisances affecting peace and safety--Enumeration.
The following are public nuisances affecting peace and safety:
(a) All trees, hedges, billboards, or other obstructions, which prevent persons from having a
clear view of traffic approaching an intersection from cross streets in sufficient time to
bring a motor vehicle driven at a reasonable speed to a full stop before the intersection is
reached.
(b) All limbs of trees which are less than eight feet above the surface of any street, as
provided by this Code or other Ordinance.
(c) All wires which are strung less than 15 feet above the surface of the ground.
(d) All buildings, walls, and other structures which have been damaged by fire, decay, or
otherwise, which are so situated as to endanger the safety of the public.
(e) All explosives, inflammable liquids and other dangerous substances stored in any manner
or in any amount other than that provided by this Code or other ordinance.
(f) All use or display of fireworks, except as provided by this Code or other Ordinance or as
authorized by the City.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 38; ARTICLE II
2 of 4
(g) All unnecessary noises and annoying vibrations.
(h) Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary use by the public of streets, alleys,
right-of-ways, sidewalks or public grounds, except under such conditions as are provided
by this Code or other Ordinance.
(i) Communication aerials or antennae erected or maintained in any manner except as
provided by this Code or other law, or as authorized by the City
(j) Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use of a public street or
sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use
of the streets or sidewalks, except as authorized by the City.
(k) All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over the streets or sidewalks, not
constructed and maintained as provided by this Code or other Ordinance, or so situated as
to endanger public safety.
(l) The accumulation of rainwater, ice or snow, escaping from any private property upon and
entering upon or across any street or sidewalk or other public property.
(m) All barbed wire fences which are located within three feet of any public sidewalk.
(n) All dangerous, unguarded machinery, in any public place or so situated or operated on
private property as to attract the public.
(o) The distributing of handbills, flyers, or solicitation materials, except as provided by this
Code or other Ordinance.
(p) All buildings or businesses carried on within the City contrary to the provisions of the
zoning regulations or amendments thereof.
(q) The accumulation of papers, boxes, trash or rubbish, unless kept in a closed receptacle.
(r) The accumulation of any litter or garbage upon the premises or permitting the same to
remain on the premises.
(s) All other conditions or things which are liable to cause injury to the person or property of
anyone.
(t) The keeping of any offensive, nauseous substance or liquid at any place from whence the
stench thereof may reach the street, avenue, alley, lane or public land or any dwelling.
Permitting any litter or garbage to remain upon the premises.
(u) The accumulation of discarded or unused machinery, household appliances, automobile
bodies, lumber, wood, trash, debris or other material, or the rank growth of vegetation
among the items so accumulated, in a manner conducive to the harboring of rats, mice,
snakes, mosquitoes or vermin, or in a manner creating fire, health, or safety hazards.
(v) Any well, hole or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in such other condition as
to constitute a hazard to any child or any other person coming on to the premises where it
is located.
(w) The obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or public street drain,
gutter, or ditch through accumulation of trash or other materials.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 38; ARTICLE II
3 of 4
(x) The placing, depositing, or throwing of any litter, debris, garbage, refuse or trash upon
any public property, public right-of-way, or upon adjacent private property without using
a proper receptacle or without proper authority.
(y) The parking, keeping, storage or accumulation of junk motor vehicles upon any private
land or premises owned, occupied or controlled by any person or legal entity unless
authorized by this Code or other Ordinance. No person s hall park, keep or place any
such junk vehicle upon land not owned by such person. For purposes of this section, a
junk vehicle means any motor vehicle as defined in Minn. Stat. § 169.011, subd 42, part
of a motor vehicle, or former motor vehicle stored in the open which is (1) unusable or
inoperable because of lack of or defects in component parts; (2) unusable or inoperable
because of damage from collision, deterioration, or otherwise; (3) beyond repair, and
therefore, not intended for future use as a motor vehicle; (4) being retained on the
property of possible use of salvageable parts; or (5) is not properly and currently licensed
for operation within the State of Minnesota.
(z) The existence of any structure or part of any structure which due to fire, wind, other
natural disaster, physical deterioration, or any other cause, is no longer habitable as a
dwelling or is no longer useful for any other purpose for which it may have been
intended.
(aa) The existence of any vacant dwelling, garage, or other outbuilding, or structure, that is
not securely locked, windows glazed, securely boarded up or otherwise protected to
prevent entry.
(bb) The existence of any noxious or poisonous vegetation such as poison ivy, ragweed or
other poisonous plants, or any weeds, grass, brush or plants which are a fire hazard or
which are otherwise detrimental to the health or appearance of the neighborhood.
Section 38-33. Same--Prohibited.
Any person who shall knowingly cause, create, permit or maintain any nuisance, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor.
State law reference--Public nuisances prohibited, Minn. Stats. § 609.74.
Sec. 38-34. Public nuisances affecting health.
The following are public nuisances affecting health:
(a) Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable matter.
(b) All diseased animals.
(c) Pools of stagnant water.
(d) Animal carcasses not buried or destroyed.
(e) The accumulation of trash, ashes, refuse, manure, or debris of any nature or description.
(f) Privy vaults or garbage cans which are not rodent-free or fly-tight or which are so
maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to emit foul or disagreeable odors.
(g) The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal or body of water by
sewage, industrial waste, or other substances and sources.
(h) All noxious weeds, including all weeds defined by the State Commissioner of
Agriculture, to be injurious to public health, roads, crops, livestock, and other property.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 38; ARTICLE II
4 of 4
(i) Dense smoke, noxious fumes or odors, gas and soot, or cinders, in unreasonable or
unlawful quantities.
(j) Intentional public exposure of persons having a contagious disease.
(k) The placing of the contents of any cesspool, septic tank, privy vault, or garbage can upon
the surface of any public or private property.
Section 38-35. Enforcement.
The police department, building department, and other such officers, employees, or agents as the
City Council or City Manager may designate, shall enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. Such
officers shall have the power to inspect private premises and take all reasonable precautions to
prevent the commission and maintenance of public nuisances.
Section 38-36. Notice.
Upon ascertaining that a public nuisance may exist, authorized City officers, employees or agents,
shall serve a notice upon a person suspected or known to have caused or permitted the nuisance
and/or upon the owner of the property upon which the nuisance is located. The notice shall be
given according to Chapter 1, Article II, Administrative Citations and Penalties.
Section 38-37. Hearing; abatement order; collection of costs.
(a) General abatement. Whenever the designated officer charged with enforcement
determines that a public nuisance is being maintained or exists on premises in the city,
the officer shall notify the owner and any occupant of the premises according to Chapter
1, Article II of this Code and shall proceed with abatement under the same provisions.
(b) Emergency abatement. When the designated officer charged with enforcement
determines that a nuisance constitutes a serious and imminent danger to the public safety
or health, the officer may summarily abate the nuisance after a reasonable attempt to
notify the owner and any occupant of the property. The officer shall immediately
thereafter notify in writing the owner or occupant of the premises of the action taken. The
notice shall be served in person or by registered or certified mail.
(c) Costs of abatement. All costs of a general or emergency abatement may be assessed and
collected as an unpaid special assessment against the subject property pursuant to Minn.
Stat. § 429.101. The City may also seek to recover such costs in an action against the
owners, occupants or other responsible parties. The sanctions and remedies herein are not
exclusive and the City may also proceed by any other legal remedy including injunction,
declaratory action, criminal penalties or otherwise.
Section 38-38 through 30-60. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 38; ARTICLE III
1 of 6
CHAPTER 38; ENVIRONMENTAL
ARTICLE III. Subsurface Sewage Treatment Systems (SSTS)*
----------
*State law references--Individual sewage treatment systems, Minn. Stats. § 115.55 et seq.; local ordinances regulating
individual sewage treatment systems, Minn. Stats. § 115.55, subd. 2.
----------
Section 38-91. Purpose, Applicability, and Structure.
(a) Purpose: The purpose and intent of this article is to establish standards for the design, location,
construction, operation, and maintenance of Subsurface Sewage Treatment Systems. For the
purposes of this Article, “Subsurface Sewage Treatment System” or “System”(both of which
referred to interchangeably herein as “SSTS”) means a sewage treatment system, or part thereof,
that uses subsurface soil treatment and disposal, or a holding tank, serving a dwelling, other
establishment, or a group thereof.
(b) Applicability. This ordinance shall apply to those sites or facilities that are licensed, permitted or
otherwise regulated by City Ordinance. The sewer provisions of this ordinance shall also apply to
any premises in the City that are not served by a sewage treatment system permitted by the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
(c) Authority. This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authorization and requirements contained in
Minnesota Statutes Chapters 145.A.05; 115.55, and Minnesota Rules Chapter 7082.
Section 38-92. General Provisions.
(a) Treatment Required. All sewage generated, in unsewered areas, shall be treated and dispersed by
an approved SSTS or a system permitted by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
(b) Administrative Policy and Procedures. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II of the City Code
apply to the administration and enforcement of this Article, unless otherwise expressly provided
for in this Article.
(c) Administration. This Article shall be administered by the Anoka City Building
Inspections Department, or its designee. The term “Department,” where used in this ordinance shall
mean the Anoka City Building Inspections Department and/or its designee.
(d) Compliance. No person shall cause or permit the location, construction, alteration, extension,
conversion, operation or maintenance of an SSTS, except in full compliance with the provisions
of this Article.
(e) Conditions. Violations of any condition imposed by the City on a license, permit or variance, shall
be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in this Article.
(f) Site Evaluation, System Design, Construction, Inspection, and Servicing. Site evaluation, and
System design, construction, inspection and System services shall be performed by Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency licensed SSTS businesses or qualified employees of local governments,
or persons exempt from licensing pursuant to Minnesota Rules 7083.0700. For lots platted after
April 1, 1996, a design shall evaluate and locate space for a second soil treatment area.
(g) Inspection. No part of an SSTS shall be covered until it has been inspected and approved by the
Department. If any part of the System is covered before being inspected and approved as herein
provided, it shall be uncovered upon the direction of the Department. The Department shall cause
such inspections as are necessary to determine compliance with this Article. It shall be the
responsibility of the permittee to notify the Department that the System is ready for inspection. If
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 38; ARTICLE III
2 of 6
the integrity of the System is threatened by adverse weather if left open, and the Department is
unable to conduct an inspection, the permittee may, after receiving permission from the
Department, document compliance with this Article by photographic means that show said
compliance and submit that evidence to the Department prior to final approval being sought.
(h) Compliance Inspection Required. An SSTS compliance inspection is required:
(1) For a new or replacement SSTS.
(2) When altering an existing structure to add a bedroom.
(3) When a parcel having an existing System undergoes development, subdivision or split.
(i) Imminent Public Health and Safety Threat; Failing System; and Surface Discharge.
(1) An SSTS which poses an imminent threat to public health and safety shall be
immediately abated according to instructions by the Department and be brought into
compliance with this Article in accordance with a schedule established by the
Department, which schedule shall not exceed ten (10) months.
(2) A failing System, or an SSTS that is not protective of the groundwater, shall be brought
into compliance within twenty-four (24) months after receiving notice from the
Department.
(3) An SSTS discharging raw or partially treated wastewater to ground surface or surface
water is prohibited unless permitted under the National Pollution Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES).
(j) Conflict Resolution. For SSTS systems regulated under this Article, conflicts and other technical
disputes over new construction, replacement and existing Systems will be managed in accordance
with Anoka City Code.
(k) Septic Tank Maintenance. The owner of a sewage (septic) tank, or tanks, shall regularly, but not
less frequently than every three (3) years (unless approved by the Department due to limited use),
inspect the tank(s) and measure the accumulations of sludge and scum. If the System is pumped,
measurement is not needed. The owner shall remove and sanitarily dispose of septage whenever
the top of the sludge layer is less than twelve (12) inches below the bottom of the outlet baffle or
the bottom of the scum layer is less than three (3) inches above the outlet baffle. Removal of
septage shall include complete removal of sludge and scum.
(l) Non-Complying Systems. Existing Systems which are non-complying, but not an imminent
health or safety threat, failing, or discharging to surface, may continue in use so long as the use is
not changed or expanded. If the use changes or is expanded, the non-complying elements of the
existing System must be brought into compliance.
(m) Non-Complying Work. New SSTS construction that is non-compliant, or other work on a
System that is non-complying, must be brought into compliance with this Article in
accordance with a schedule established by the Department, which schedule shall not exceed seven
(7) days unless the Department finds extenuationg circumstances.
(n) Change in Use. A Certificate of Compliance may be voided if, subsequent to the issuance of the
certificate, the use of the premises or condition of the System has been changed or altered.
(o) Setback Reduction. Where conditions prevent the construction, necessary alteration and/or repair
of an SSTS on an existing developed parcel of real property, the Department may reduce property
line and building setbacks and System sizing requirements, provided said reduction does not
endanger or unreasonably infringe on adjacent properties and with the concurrence of the
affected properties.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 38; ARTICLE III
3 of 6
(p) Floodplain. An SSTS shall not be located in a floodway or floodplain. Location within the flood
fringe is permitted provided that the design complies with this Article and all of the rules and
statutes incorporated by reference.
(q) Class V Injection Wells. All owners of new or replacement SSTS that are considered to be Class
V injection wells, as defined in the Code of Federal Regulations, title 40, part 144, are required
by the Federal Government to submit SSTS inventory information to the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA).
Section 38-93. Standards adopted.
(a) Minnesota Rules Adopted. Minnesota Rules, Chapters 7080 and 7081 that are in effect on the date
of passage of this Article, related to SSTS, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of
this ordinance as if fully set forth herein.
(b) Rules Amended. The rules adopted in Section 38-93(a) are amended as follows:
1. Compliance Inspection – 15 Percent Vertical Separation Reduction. Minnesota Rules
7080.1500 Subp. 4D is amended to allow fifteen (15) percent reduction of vertical
separation (separation distance no less than 30.6 inches) which may be determined to be
compliant for existing Systems to account for settling and variable interpretation of soil
characteristics.
(c) Holding Tanks. Holding tanks may be allowed for the following applications: as replacement to a
failing existing System, an SSTS that poses an imminent threat to public health and safety, or for
an existing lot in which an SSTS cannot feasibly be installed and the Department finds extenuating
circumstances.
(d) System Abandonment. An SSTS, or component thereof, that is no longer intended to be used,
must be abandoned in accordance with the adopted standards of this Article.
Section 38-94. Permits.
(a) Permit Required. No person shall cause or allow the location, construction, alteration, extension,
conversion, or modification of any SSTS without first obtaining a permit for such work from
the Department. No person shall construct, alter, extend, convert, or modify any structure that is
or will utilize an SSTS without first obtaining a permit.
(1) All work performed on an SSTS shall be done by an appropriately licensed business,
qualified employees or persons exempt from licensing. Permit applications shall be
submitted by the person doing the SSTS construction, repairs and maintenance on forms
provided by the Department, and accompanied by required site and design date, and
permit fees.
(2) Permits shall only be issued to the person doing the SSTS construction, repairs and/or
maintenance.
(3) Permit applications for new and replacement SSTS shall include a management plan for
the owner that includes a schedule for septic tank maintenance.
(4) A permit is not required for minor repairs or replacement of damaged or deteriorated
components that do not alter the original function, change the treatment capacity, change
the location of System components, or otherwise change the original System’s design,
layout or function.
(b) Operating permit. An operating permit shall be required of all owners of new holding tanks, Type
IV and V systems; MSTS and other SSTS that the Department has determined requires operational
oversight.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 38; ARTICLE III
4 of 6
(1) Application. Application for an operating permit shall be made on a form provided by the
Department.
(2) Holding Tanks. The owner of holding tanks installed after the effective date of this Article
shall provide the Department with a copy of a contract with a licensed sewage
maintenance business for monitoring and removal of holding tank contents.
State law reference--Time limits to approve or deny written requests relating to septic system,
MS. § 15.99.
Section 38-95. Violations and penalties.
(a) Misdemeanor. Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this Article may be charged
with a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties for such an offense
as provided by law. Each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
(b) Injunctive Relief. In the event of a violation or a threat of a violation of this Article, the
Department may institute appropriate actions or proceedings to include injunctive relief to
prevent, restrain, correct, or abate such violations or threatened violations; and the City attorney
may institute a civil action.
(c) Civil Action. In the event of a violation of this ordinance, the City may institute appropriate
actions or proceedings to include injunctive relief to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate such
violations, or threatened violations, and the City attorney may institute such action.
State law reference--Licensing of septic tank contractors,Minn. Stats. § 115.56.
Section 38-96. Fees.
Fees for permits required under this section shall be according to a fee schedule adopted by ordinance of
the City Council.
Section 38-97. Unlawful Discharges.
(a) Discharge of human and animal wastes. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or
permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or
in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or
objectionable waste.
(b) Discharges to natural outlets. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted waters.
Section 38-98. Required Connection to Public Sewer.
(a) Connection to sewer system required. The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for
human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and
abutting any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be
located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required, at the owner’s expense, to install
suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer
in accordance with the provisions of this Article within one year after the date of due notice to do
so.
1. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
nonconforming private sewage treatment system, a direct connection shall be made to the
public sewer within thirty (30) days.
2. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a conforming
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 38; ARTICLE III
5 of 6
private sewage treatment system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer
when a replacement private sewer system is required or upon site development.
3. Failure to connect to public system. If such connection is not made pursuant to this
Article, the city shall enter into a contract with a licensed contractor to have the
connection made, and the cost shall be assessed to the property taxes, unless authorized
by the City Council to do otherwise.
(b) Private systems permitted. Where a public sewer is not available under Section 38-97 (c) of this
Article, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage treatment system as regulated
by this Article and the State Plumbing code.
State law reference--Inspections,Minn. Stats. § 115.55, subd. 5.
Section 38-99 through 38-129. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 38; ARTICLE V
1 of 14
CHAPTER 38; ENVIRONMENTAL
ARTICLE V. Surface Water Management
Section 38-173. Purpose and Findings.
These regulations are adopted for the following purposes:
(a) To promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Anoka without
preventing the reasonable development of land;
(b) To encourage site development on public and private land including clearing, excavation,
and filling in such a manner as to minimize hazards to life, health and property;
(c) To preserve and enhance the City’s physical and aesthetic character by preventing
untimely and indiscriminate removal or destruction of trees and ground cover;
(d) To minimize surface water runoff and diversion which may contribute to flooding;
(e) To reduce siltation in the City’s rivers, ponds, storm sewer systems, and public roadside
improvements;
(f) To promote building and site planning practices that are consistent with the City’s natural
topography, soils, and vegetative features while at the same time recognizing that certain
factors such as disease, danger of fallings, proximity to existing and proposed structures
and improvements, interference with utility services, protection of scenic views, and the
realization of a reasonable enjoyment of property may require the removal of certain
ground trees and ground cover;
(g) To ensure prompt development, restoration and replanting and effective erosion control
of property after clearing and grading; and
(h) To implement the goals and policies of the City’s Surface Water Management Plan and
the City’s National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit.
Section 38-174. Statutory Authority.
This Chapter is adopted pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 462.351, as amended.
Section 38-175. Definitions.
The following definitions of words, terms, and phrases apply in this Chapter of the Code.
References hereinafter to “Section” are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections of this
Chapter.
Applicant means any person who wishes to conduct land disturbing activities.
Best Management Practices (BMPs) means the most effective and practicable means of erosion
prevents and sediment control, water quality management practices that are the most cost effective
and practicable means to control, prevent, and minimize degradation of surface water.
Clearing means any activity, which removes the vegetative cover and/or trees, including, but not
limited to, root mat material and/or topsoil removal.
Earth Material means any rock and/or natural soil exclusive of any decomposable material.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 38; ARTICLE V
2 of 14
Earthwork means excavation, filling, compaction and grading.
Erosion means the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of movement of wind, water,
and/or ice.
Excavation means the removal by any means whatsoever of soil, rocks, minerals, mineral
substances, or organic substances, other than vegetation, from water or land, on or beneath the
surface thereof, or beneath the land surface, whether exposed or submerged.
Fill or backfill means a depositing or stockpiling of earth material.
Finish or final grade means the final elevation of the ground level after development.
Grade means the vertical location of the ground surface to a predetermined elevation datum (feet
above sea level).
Grading means any stripping, cutting, filling, or stockpiling of earth or land, including the land in
its cut or filled condition, to create new grades.
Ground cover means trees less than six inches in diameter, measured four and ½ feet above the
ground (DBH – diameter at breast height) and other grasses or other plants and landscaping grown
to keep soil from being blown or washed away.
Land disturbing activity means any land change, including but not limited to, clearing, grading,
excavating, transporting and filling of land, which may result in soil erosion from water or wind
and the movement of sediments into waters or onto adjacent properties.
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private
corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative or
any other legal entity.
Redevelopment means any construction activity where, prior to the start of construction, the areas
to be disturbed have 15 percent (15%) or more of impervious surface(s).
Rough grade means the stage of construction at which the grade approximately conforms to the
approved plan.
Sediment means deposited silt that is being or has been moved by water or ice, wind, gravity, or
other means of erosion.
Significant Tree means any existing, healthy, living tree eight (8) inches DBH (diameter at breast
height) or greater in size.
Site means a specific location on which land disturbing activities are being conducted.
Subdivision means the division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts,
parcels, or other divisions of land.
Structure means anything manufactured, constructed or erected which is normally attached to or
positioned on land, including portable structures, earthen structures, roads, parking lots, and paved
storage areas.
Surface water or storm water means that portion of precipitation (rain falling or snow melting)
that flows across a surface to the storm water system or receiving waters.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 38; ARTICLE V
3 of 14
Tree means any self supporting woody plant characterized by one main stem or trunk of at least
six inches in diameter or a multi-stemmed trunk system with a definite crown, maturing at a height
of at least six feet above ground level.
Total Suspended Solids (TSS) is the measure of the amount of particulate material in suspension in
a water column.
Water Appropriation Permit means a permit required from the MNDNR for all users withdrawing
more than 10,000 gallons of water per day or 1 million gallons per year.
Wetlands means lands that are transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water
table is usually at or near the surface of the land or is covered by shallow water. For purposes of
this Ordinance, wetlands must have the following three attributes:
(a) Have a predominance of hydric soils;
(b) Are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soil conditions; and
(c) Under normal circumstances, support a prevalence of such vegetation.
Section 38-176. Applicability.
This Chapter applies to all land, public or private, located within the City of Anoka.
Section 38-177. Land Disturbance Permit (LDP) and Land Disturbance and Erosion Control Plan (LDECP).
(a) Land Disturbance Permit.
(1) Permit required. A Land Disturbance Permit (LDP) shall be required before
any land disturbing activity occurs in connection with any of the following:
a. Projects with land disturbance of 10,000 square feet or more in size;
b. Any land disturbing activity that changes the existing or natural contour
of the land which affects drainage or natural resources, such as slopes,
trees or water bodies; and
c. Any alteration of land that changes the elevation by more than five (5)
feet from the existing contour of the ground on any contiguous one
thousand (1,000) or more square feet of ground.
(2) Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter:
a. Minimal land disturbing activities such as house gardens and individual
home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work and other related
activities;
b. Excavation or grading for agricultural purposes located no closer than
three hundred feet (300’) from any edge or delineated boundary of any
water body;
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 38; ARTICLE V
4 of 14
c. Below finished grade elevations for basements and footings of a
building, retaining wall, or other structure authorized by a valid
building permit;
d. Excavations for wells, tunnels or utilities;
e. Exploratory excavations under the direction of soil engineers or
engineering geologists;
f. Individual service connections;
g. Installation of posts or poles;
h. Emergency work and emergency repairs;
i. Road reconstruction that does not increase impervious area by more
than one acre or alter drainage patterns;
j. Utility construction/reconstruction within the road right-of-way;
k. Road milling/overlay, demolition, and routine vegetation management
activites;
l. Land disturbing activities that require a permit from the Watershed
Management Organization and said permit has been granted, shall not
be required to obtain a separate Land Disturbance Permit from the City.
(3) Approval Standards.
a. Surface Water Management Plan. All construction, land disturbing
activity and development shall comply with the City’s Surface Water
Management Plan. All persons performing any grading operations shall
put into effect all safety precautions which are necessary in the opinion
of the Engineering Dept and provide adequate erosion and sediment
control as per the NPDES Program, including anti-erosion and/or
drainage devices, debris basins, silt fence, or other safety devices to
protect the life, limb, health, and welfare and private and public
property of others from damage of any kind.
b. Compliance with Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act. No approval
to allow wetland-disturbing activities shall be issued until approval of a
wetland replacement plan or a certificate of exemption has been
obtained in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and the
Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act of 1999. The Minnesota Wetland
Conservation Act of 1991, as amended from time to time, is hereby
incorporated into this Chapter by reference.
c. Erosion Control Sediment Standards. Every applicant for a LDP must
adhere to erosion and sediment control measure standards and
specifications as published by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
or as approved by the City of Anoka.
d. Tree Preservation. Removal or loss of significant trees shall be in
accordance with Section 74-489 of this Code.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 38; ARTICLE V
5 of 14
e. City Plans and Ordinances. Every applicant for a LDP shall comply
with all applicable adopted City plans and ordinances.
(4) Permit Application. The application for a LDP permit shall be made in writing
to the City on such form as the City may, from time to time, designate. The
application shall include three (3) copies of the submittal materials and email an
electronic copy to publicservcies@ci.anoka.mn.us .
(5) Fees. The processing and approval fee shall be adjusted annually within the
Master Fee Schedule by the City Council. In addition, the applicant will be
responsible for all reasonable costs incurred by the City in review of the
proposed plan. Fees may vary based on the complexity of the plan review
process.
(6) Submittal. Any application for a Land Disturbance Permit (LDP) shall be
submitted to the City with required fees. All applications shall also include the
following information:
a. A Land Disturbance and Erosion Control Plan (LDECP) which
indicates compliance with this Chapter, including:
1. Erosion and Sedimentation Controls.
i. Identification and use of the “best management
practices” for temporary erosion and sedimentation
control, including but not limited to: Perimeter
erosion control devices, including but not limited to
silt fencing; phased grading; temporary seeding; rock
construction entrance; storm drain inlet protection
devices; removal of all debris, dirt and soil from
impervious ground surfaces including abutting public
or private roadways and sidewalks in connection with
the subject property; sediment basins and flow
diversions; and any other erosion control and
sedimentation device deemed necessary by the City.
ii. Identification of all permanent erosion control
measures and a completion schedule.
iii. Stabilization of all exposed soil within seven (7) days
after construction activity has ceased in areas
adjacent to surface water. All other areas require
stabilization within fourteen (14) days after
construction activity has ceased.
2. Drainage and Grading.
i. Identification of all measures to protect water bodies
and wetland areas.
ii. If applicable, the plans must be consistent with any
approved subdivision grading plan.
iii. Methods of controlling dust.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 38; ARTICLE V
6 of 14
iv. Plans for controlling site runoff.
v. The plan shall not adversely impact neighboring
properties.
vi. The plan shall minimize any irreparable adverse
impacts to natural resources upon the subject
property.
vii. The plan shall provide for and include any of the
following temporary safety requirements if the City
determines that all, or a combination thereof, of the
following requirements are necessary for the
protection of public safety, health and welfare:
aa. Any slope of 3:1 or greater that is adjacent
to a project property line and which is
deemed dangerous by the City must be
properly fenced;
bb. Banks, fill, or any depression or mound
must be sloped or leveled off or otherwise
placed in such condition at any time as not
to be dangerous because of sliding or caving
banks, and so as to minimize or stop erosion
or dust during or after the grading operation;
and
cc. Any graded or ungraded area must be
properly drained, filled, or leveled off so as
to make the same safe and healthful, unless
otherwise approved by the City.
viii. The plan must include proper waste controls for solid
and hazardous wastes per the NPDES permit.
Designated concrete washout areas shall be required
for all construction sites in which on-site concrete
washout are proposed.
3. Stormwater Standards. A Stormwater Management Plan must
be prepared, incorporating the following:
i. The post-development peak discharge rates must be
the same or lower than the pre-development peak
discharge rates for the 2-year, 10-year, and 100-year
return frequency storm events.
ii. For new development projects with land disturbances
greater than or equal to one acre, a volume of 1 inch
of runoff from all impervious surfaces on the site
shall be infiltrated on-site.
iii. For redevelopment projects with land disturbances
great than or equal of once acres, a volume of 1 inch
or runoff from the new impervious surfaces on the
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 38; ARTICLE V
7 of 14
site shall be infiltrated on-site. In cases of
redevelopment in which greater than 50 percent
(50%) of the project area (as defined by LRRWMO)
is disturbed, a volume of 1 inch from all impervious
surfaces shall be infiltrated on-site.
iv. Prohibit use of infiltration for sites, where:
aa. Industrial facilities are not authorized under
NPDES permit.
bb. Vehicle fueling and maintenance occur.
cc. There is less than 3 feet to saturated soils or
top of bedrock.
dd. High levels of contaminants could be
mobilized.
v. Restrict the use of infiltration techniques in areas:
aa. Within a Drinking Water Supply
Management Area.
bb. Where soil infiltration rates are more than
8.3 inches per hour.
vi. Linear projects, where the lack of right-of-way
precludes the installation of volume control practices,
may allow exceptions as described in the NPDES
permit, as long as a reasonable attempt is made to
obtain right-of-way during the project planning
process.
vii. Mitigation in the cases where infiltration is infeasible
or inappropriate due to the circumstances as
described above is allowed in accordance with the
LRRWMO standards.
4. Compliance with NPDES Construction Permit. All projects
disturbing one acre or more of land shall be in conformance
with the General permit to Discharge Stormwater Associated
with Construction Activity under the NPDES permit as issued
by Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, including but not
limited to the following:
i. Dewatering.
aa. The plan shall provide a means to treat water
that is pumped from a construction site
through appropriate controls.
bb. Water may not be discharged in a manner
that causes erosion or flooding of the site,
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 38; ARTICLE V
8 of 14
off-site property, receiving channels, or a
wetland.
ii. Site Inspections and Maintenance.
aa. The plan shall include a schedule for
inspections, the purpose of which will be to
determine the overall effectiveness of the
control plan and the need for additional
control measures.
bb. Inspections must be performed by a trained
person at least once every seven (7) days
during active construction and within
twenty-four (24) hours after a rainfall event
great than 0.5 inches as per the NPDES
Construction Permit requirements.
cc. Inspections shall be documented in written
form and submitted to the Public Works
Director upon request.
dd. All nonfunctional BMPs shall be repaired,
replaced, or supplemented within twentyfour
(24) hours of discovery.
ee. Sediment tracked onto a public street,
private street, or parking lot must be cleaned
by the close of each business day.
iii. Temporary Sediment Basins.
aa. For site with more than 5 acres disturbed at
one time, the contractor must construct one
or more temporary or permanent
sedimentation basins in accordance with the
NPDES permit.
iv. Final stabilization. The plan shall include, upon
completion of construction activity, perennial
vegetative cover on all exposed soils or other
equivalent means as specified in the NPDES permit.
5. Wetland Protection Standards. Unless eligible for an
exemption, all projects with land disturbance of one acre or
more must comply with the Wetland Protection Standards as
set forth by the LRRWMO, including but not limited to:
i. A temporary wetland buffer of 16.5 feet from the
wetland boundary must be protected during
construction.
ii. A permanent buffer of 16.5 feet from the wetland
boundary shall be established following construction.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 38; ARTICLE V
9 of 14
The following activities are prohibited with the
permanent wetland buffer:
aa. Structures, with the exception of fences.
bb. Paving, with the exception of project with a
public purpose such as public trails.
cc. Retaining walls.
dd. Filling, dumping or yard waste disposal.
ee. Fertilization.
ff. Septic systems.
iii. Drainage and utility easement required. The entire
wetland buffer shall be within a drainage and utility
easement.
iv. Stormwater discharge. For new development or redevelopment
proposals, stormwater discharge into
wetlands must be pre-treated in accordance with
LRRWMO stormwater standards.
v. Wetland Management Standards. All projects shall
be in compliance with Table 2-4 – city of Anoka
Wetland Management Standards as discussed in the
City of Anoka Local Surface Water Management
Plan.
b. General Information, including a site plan that includes the following:
1. The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and fax numbers
of the applicant, owner, developer, engineer and contact
person.
2. The section, township and range, north point, date and scale
of drawing, and number of sheets.
3. Plat names and block, lot, and outlot boundaries for
adjacent platted properties and full property identification
numbers for adjacent unplatted properties.
4. Delineation of the subject property and the location of
existing and proposed buildings, structures and impervious
surfaces on the subject property.
5. Location and indication of demolition, relocation or
abandonment of existing structures, driveways, septic
systems and wells.
6. Existing underground and overhead utilities, easements and
rights-of-way.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 38; ARTICLE V
10 of 14
7. Topographical data, including existing (dashed) and
proposed (solid) contours at vertical intervals of not more
than two (2) feet, except that contour lines shall be no more
than one hundred (100) feet apart.
8. The location and size of all existing sanitary sewer, water
or storm sewer, and services on or adjacent to the property.
9. Identification of all water bodies located on or within thirty
(30) feet of the subject property’s boundaries, including the
Normal Water Level (NWL), the High Water Level (HWL),
and the Ordinary High Water (OHW) elevations.
10. The location and direction of natural drainage patterns on
and immediately adjacent to the site.
11. A description of the soils at the site.
12. If applicable, the location of the ten (10) year and one
hundred (100) year flood plains, flood fringes, and flood
ways.
13. Delineation of all areas to be graded or excavated, and the
limits of land disturbing activity.
14. Identification of the location of dirt or soil storage or
stockpile area to be utilized on the subject property.
15. The estimated time required to complete the proposed work
and the amount of material to be moved on the site and the
amount to be removed from the site.
16. A landscape plan, drawn to appropriate scale, including
dimensions and distances, and the location, type, size, and
description of all proposed landscape materials that will be
added as part of the development.
17. Location and dimensions of permanent erosion control
measures.
18. Location of any proposed septic system.
19. Any other information pertinent to the particular project
which in the opinion of the applicant or the City is
necessary for the review of the project.
(7) Plan and Permit Review Procedure.
a. Process. Review of the submitted plan and permit will be
coordinated with other necessary approvals.
b. Plan and Permit Approval. Projects that are regulated by this
Chapter shall be approved administratively by City staff, unless
City staff presents it to the City Council for its review and approval.
Upon finding that the requirements of this Chapter have been met
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 38; ARTICLE V
11 of 14
and after approval of the Land Disturbance and Erosion Control
Plan, the City will issue a permit in accordance with the provisions
of this Chapter.
c. Conditions of Approval. In granting any land disturbance permit,
the Public Works Director may attach such conditions as may be
reasonably necessary to prevent creation of a nuisance or hazard to
public or private property. Such conditions may include, but are not
limited to:
1. Requirements for fencing of excavations.
2. Improvements of any existing site condition for compliance
with the standards of this chapter.
3. Requirements to slope banks and keep the excavation in
such condition as not to be dangerous from caving or
sliding banks.
4. Requirements to properly drain, fill or level the excavation,
after it has been created, to make the excavation safe.
5. Requirements to remove excavated/graded material from
the excavation away from the premises upon and along
such highways, streets, or other public way as directed by
the City.
6. Requirements to retain and store top soil from the subject
site and to utilize such material in restoration of the site.
7. Requirements to limit the hours of operation.
(8) Security. The City shall require either the applicant or the owner for which
the land disturbance permit is issued to post a security in such form and sum
as determined by the Public Works Director. The amount of the security
shall be sufficient to cover the City’s extraordinary cost and expense of
repairing, from time to time, any highways, streets, or other public ways
where such repair work is made necessary by the special burden resulting
from hauling and travel in transporting fill or excavated material. The
amount of the security shall also be sufficient to ensure compliance with all
requirements of this Chapter, and the particular permit, and to pay the
expense the City may incur as a result of the permit.
(9) Expiration of Permit and Plan. Any Land Disturbance Permit issued
pursuant to the requirements of this Chapter shall expire two (2) years from
the date of approval if significant progress of the work covered by the
Permit is not accomplished, unless an extension of the permit is requested by
the applicant and approved by the City Council.
(10) Revocation of Permit. Failure to comply with the approved terms and
conditions of a Land Disturbance and Erosion Control Plan shall be grounds
for revocation of the Land Disturbance Permit, or other permit or approval
issued in lieu thereof, by the City Council following a public hearing.
Written notice of the public hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10) days
prior to said hearing to the current holder of the Permit. Such notice shall
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 38; ARTICLE V
12 of 14
outline the violation(s) considered by the City to be grounds for revocation
and inform the current holder of the permit of the opportunity to be heard at
such public hearing.
(11) Other permit or approval in lieu of Land Disturbance Permit. When a
building permit is issued in connection with a project, or a new development
project is approved by the City as required by the City Code, the building
permit or other new development approval may be in lieu of the land
disturbance permit required hereunder, provided the applicant shall comply
with all other regulations herein, including but not limited to compliance
with a Land Disturbance and Erosion Control Plan.
(12) Appeal of Decisions. Except the decision to revoke a land disturbance
permit under Section 42.05, subsection 10, the applicant may appeal any
requirement, decision or determination by the City in connection with any
provision of this Section pursuant to the procedures as set forth in the City
Code under zoning regulations as related to the Board of Appeals and
Adjustments.
(13) Compliance with Plan. The applicant shall implement and comply with a
City-approved Land Disturbance and Erosion Control Plan (LDECP) prior to
and during any construction or land disturbing activity under the Land
Disturbance Permit (LDP). All erosion and sedimentation control and tree
preservation measures required under the Plan shall be properly installed and
remain in place until all grading and construction activity is completed or
until a written request for removal of the protection measures is made to and
approved by the City. No construction or land disturbing activity to which
this Chapter applies or removal of any significant trees may occur until the
LDECP is approved by the City and except in accordance with the approved
LDECP. Failure to comply with the approved terms and conditions of the
LDECP shall constitute a violation of this Chapter.
a. Determination of Compliance. The City shall have the right to enter
and inspect the subject property in order to determine compliance
with the approved LDECP. The City shall have the right to order the
suspension of any grading or construction activity on the subject
property until compliance with the LDECP has occurred.
b. Finding of Noncompliance. Upon a finding of noncompliance, the
City shall use the following procedure with respect to notification
and corrective measures:
1. The City shall personally serve upon the project manager,
or other responsible person, and by certified U. S mail upon
the property owner, if different than the project manager, a
written notification of the violation of the approved
LDECP.
2. If remedial work is not completed and compliance with the
LDECP has not occurred within forty-eight (48) hours of
service of the violation notification, the City may complete
remedial or corrective work and any costs incurred in
connection with taking remedial action or installing
corrective measures may be recovered from the applicant.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 38; ARTICLE V
13 of 14
The City may recover costs by certifying them for
collection with real estate property taxes. In the alternative,
the City may revoke a construction-related permit and order
the termination of all construction activity on the subject
property until the subject site is in compliance with the
LDECP.
(14) Emergency Corrective Actions. In the event circumstances exist that
noncompliance poses an immediate danger to the public health, safety and
welfare, as determined by the City, the City may take emergency corrective
action to prevent such danger. The City shall take reasonable action to
contact and direct the owner of the subject property to take any necessary
action. Any costs incurred by the City in connection with any emergency
action may be recovered from the applicant. The City may elect to recover
costs by certifying them for collection with real estate property taxes.
Section 38-178. Conflict with Other Laws.
If the requirements of this Chapter are in conflict with any other federal, state or local law,
the stricter requirements shall be enforced.
Section 38-179. Heritage Preservation.
No land disturbing activities shall be performed on any significant historic site in any manner
that affects the historic value of the site prior to preparation of an inventory and analysis of
the site being prepared by a professional historian or archeologist. The inventory and analysis
shall be deposited with the Minnesota Historical Society or other suitable repository approved
by the City Council.
Section 38-180. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Public Works Director, or his designee, to enforce the provisions of
this Chapter. Land Disturbance Permits may be issued by the City Building Official following
approval of the Land Disturbance and Erosion Control Plan by the Public Works Director.
Issuance of a Land Disturbance Permit does not represent approval of a final plat, site plan, or
other required permit or approval of the City, and all land disturbance permits are subject to
amendment based on future approvals or permits.
Section 38-181. Violations and Penalties.
(a) Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) In the event of a violation of this Chapter, the City may institute appropriate
proceedings, including bringing criminal charges, or seeking civil or injunctive relief,
to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate such violations. The City, in any court of
competent jurisdiction, may recover all costs incurred for corrective action. Any
violator of this Ordinance shall be responsible for the City’s cost of prosecution,
including attorney’s fees.
Section 38-182. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Chapter is, for any
reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 38; ARTICLE V
14 of 14
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent
provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 42;ARTICLE I
1 of 1
CHAPTER 42. LAW ENFORCEMENT
ARTICLE I. In General
Sections 42-1 thru 42-30. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 42;ARTICLE II
1 of 1
CHAPTER 42. LAW ENFORCEMENT
ARTICLE II. Police Department
----------
*State law reference--Peace officer training, Minn. Stats. § 626.84 et seq.
----------
Sections 42-31 thru 42-45. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 42;ARTICLE III
1 of 2
CHAPTER 42. LAW ENFORCEMENT
ARTICLE III. Unclaimed Property
----------
*State law reference--Unclaimed property, Minn. Stats. ch. 345.
----------
Section 42-46. Custody of found property.
The chief of police shall make provisions for receiving and safekeeping found property
and money delivered to him and coming into his possession in the course of municipal
operations. A receipt shall be issued to the person delivering such property or money to
the city. Such property shall be stored in a safe place for 90 days and such money
deposited with the city treasurer in a special account for found money for a period of six
months unless claimed by the true owner. It shall then be subject to disposal under this
article as unclaimed property or money.
Section 42-47. Claims by owner generally.
During the 90-day period described in section 42-46 for the storing of property and the
holding of such money for a period of six months, the chief of police may deliver such
property or order such money paid to the true owner upon proof of ownership satisfactory
to the chief, after ten days' notice by mail directed to the last known address of the person
who delivered such property and of any other person who has asserted a claim of
ownership. The clerk shall not issue any order for the disbursement of such money
without the written order of the chief of police. If ownership cannot be determined to his
satisfaction, the chief of police may refuse to deliver such property or order the payment
of such money to anyone until ordered to do so by the court.
Section 42-48. Claim by founder.
If the true owner does not claim the property within the 90-day period or the money
during the six-month period, the chief may deliver the property or order the money to be
paid to the person who delivered it to the police chief if at the time of delivery such
person indicated in writing that he wished to assert a claim to the property or money as a
finder.
Section 42-49. Transfer of found money to general fund.
If any such money is not claimed by the true owner or finder within the six-month period,
the chief of police shall so notify the clerk and the money shall then be transferred to the
general fund of the city.
Section 42-50. Sale authorized.
After the 90-day period described in section 42-46, property not delivered to the true
owner or finder shall be sold by the chief of police at public auction or appropriated to
the use of the city. The chief of police shall give one week's published notice of the
auction in the official newspaper. The notice shall describe the articles to be disposed of
and announce the date, time, and place of the auction. Instead of being sold at auction,
any article or property may be appropriated to the use of the city by any department in
need thereof upon approval of such appropriation by the city council.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 42;ARTICLE III
2 of 2
Section 42-51. Disposition of proceeds of sale.
After the auction has been completed, the chief of police shall remit the proceeds of the
auction to the city treasurer for deposit in the general fund. Any property offered for sale
but not sold and not suitable for appropriation to the use of the city shall be deemed to be
of no value and shall be disposed of in such manner as the chief of police directs.
Section 42-52. Claim by owner after auction.
The true owner of property sold at auction under section 42-50 shall, upon application to
the clerk within six months of the auction and upon satisfactory proof of ownership, be
paid the sale price from the general fund.
Section 42-53. Summary disposal.
The chief of police may, without notice and in such manner as he determines to be in the
public interest, dispose immediately of any property coming into his possession which he
determines to be dangerous or perishable. The chief of police shall make a record of the
pertinent facts of the receipt and disposal of such property.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 42;ARTICLE IV
1 of 3
CHAPTER 42. LAW ENFORCEMENT
ARTICLE IV. Social Host
Section 42-65. Purpose and Findings.
The Anoka City Council intends to discourage underage possession and consumption of
alcohol, even if done within the confines of a private residence, and intends to hold
persons criminally responsible who host events or gatherings where persons under 21
years of age possess or consume alcohol regardless of whether the person hosting the
event or gathering supplied the alcohol. The Anoka City Council finds that:
(a) Events and gatherings held on private or public property where alcohol is
possessed or consumed by persons under the age of 21 are harmful to those
persons and constitute a potential threat to public health requiring prevention or
abatement.
(b) Prohibiting underage consumption acts to protect underage persons, as well as
the general public, from injuries related to alcohol consumption, such as alcohol
overdose or alcohol-related traffic collisions.
(c) Alcohol, if used irresponsibly, could have drastic effects on those who use it as
well as those who are affected by the actions of an irresponsible user.
(d) Often, events or gatherings involving underage possession and consumption
occur outside the presence of parents. However, there are times when the
parent(s) is/are present and, condone the activity, and in some circumstances
provide the alcohol.
(e) Even though giving or furnishing alcohol to an underage person is a crime, it is
difficult to prove, and an ordinance is necessary to help further combat underage
consumption.
(f) A deterrent effect will be created by holding a person criminally responsible for
hosting an event or gathering where underage possession or consumption
occurs.
Section 42-66. Definitions.
For purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings:
(a) Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine,
whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including dilutions and
mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
(b) Alcoholic beverage means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid
or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of
one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes
either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.
(c) Event or gathering means any group of three or more persons who have
assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
(d) Host means to aid, conduct, sponsor, allow, entertain, organize, supervise,
control, or permit a gathering or event.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 42;ARTICLE IV
2 of 3
(e) Parent means any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
1. As [a] natural, adoptive parent, or step-parent;
2. As a legal guardian; or
3. As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of a court.
(f) Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, corporation, or any
association of one or more individuals. "Person" does not include a city, county,
or state agency.
(g) Residence or premises means any location, including a home, yard, farm, field,
land, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a
hall or meeting room, park, or any other place of assembly, public or private,
whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a
dwelling or specifically for a party or other social function, and whether owned,
leased, rented, or used with or without permission or compensation.
(h) Underage person means an individual under 21 years of age.
Section 42-67. Prohibited Acts.
A. It is unlawful for any person(s) to host or allow an event or gathering at any
residence or premises where alcohol or alcoholic beverages are present when the
person knows or reasonably should know that an underage person will or does:
1. Consume any alcohol or alcoholic beverage; or
2. Possess any alcohol or alcoholic beverage with the intent to consume it;
and
3. The person fails to take reasonable steps to prevent possession or
consumption by the underage person(s).
B. A person is criminally responsible for violating Section 42-67 A., above if the
person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels, or conspires with or otherwise
procures another to commit the prohibited act.
C. A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be present at the
event or gathering to be criminally responsible.
Section 42-68. Exceptions.
A. This section does not apply to conduct solely between an underage person and
his or her parents while present in the parent's household.
B. This section does not apply to legally protected religious observances.
C. This section does not apply to retail intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor
licensees, municipal liquor stores, or bottle club permit holders who are
regulated by Minn. Stat. § 340A.503, Subd.1(a)(1).
D. This section does not apply to situations where underage persons are lawfully in
possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during the course and scope of
employment.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 42;ARTICLE IV
3 of 3
E. This Chapter does not apply to a landlord, mortgagee, college, university, hotel
or motel owner, or operator who has not actually participated in hosting or
allowing an event of gathering where alcohol is present.
Section 42-69. Enforcement.
This Article may be enforced by any police officer or sheriff's deputy in Anoka county.
Section 42-70. Severability.
If any subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, word, or other portion of this section is, for
any reason, held to be unconstitutional or invalid, in whole, or in part, by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed severable, and such
unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
this law, which remaining portions shall continue in full force and effect.
Section 42-71. Penalty.
Violation of this Article is a misdemeanor.
Sections 42-72 thru 79. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 46; ARTICLE I
1 of 1
CHAPTER 46. OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
ARTICLE I. In General
Section 46-1. False alarms by alarm system.
(a) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
Alarm system means any assembly of equipment or devices, either mechanically
or electronically operated, which signals either audibly or in any other manner
so as to be seen, heard, or otherwise detected outside the protected area for the
purpose of summoning a response by public safety personnel.
Alarm users means a person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind in control of any building, residence,
structure, vehicle, or facility where an alarm system is maintained.
False alarm means an alarm signal eliciting a response by public safety
personnel when a situation requiring a response does not, in fact, exist and
which is caused by the activation of the alarm system through mechanical
failure, alarm malfunction, improper installation, or the inadvertence of the
alarm user, or employees or agents of the alarm user. A false alarm does not
include an alarm caused by climatic condition or utility line mishaps or other
conditions determined to be beyond the control of the alarm manufacturer,
installer, or user.
Police response means whenever a police department employee or designee
arrives at the location of the false alarm in response to it.
(b) Service fee for false alarms. Any alarm under whose alarm system reports more
than three false alarms in a calendar year which result in police response, shall
pay service fees as determined by the council. Notice of false alarm charges
shall be sent to the user of the alarm system and the owner of the property where
the system is installed, if different from the user. Payment of such charges shall
be made to the city within 30 days of the date of notice. Unpaid charges shall be
annually certified to the county auditor and shall be collected in the same
manner as special assessments against the property. No licenses, permits, or
other city approval shall be granted to any person, firm, or company which has
unpaid false alarm charges.
Sections 46-2 thru 46-30. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 46; ARTICLE II
1 of 1
CHAPTER 46. OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
ARTICLE II. Offenses Involving Property Rights
----------
*State law reference--Offenses involving property rights, Minn. Stats. § 609.556 et seq.
----------
Sections 46-31 thru 46-60. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 46; ARTICLE III
1 of 4
CHAPTER 46. OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
ARTICLE III. Offenses Involving Public Safety
----------
*State law reference--Offenses involving public safety, Minn. Stats. § 609.66 & 609.02et seq.
----------
Section 46-61. Firearms and Dangerous Weapons Discharge.
No person shall fire, discharge, or explode any gun, pistol, or other dangerous weapon in
the City. Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to prohibit the firing of guns,
pistols, or any species of firearms:
(a) When done in the lawful defense of person, property, or family;
(b) When done in the necessary enforcement of the law;
(c) By members of the Armed Forces of the United States or the National Guard, or
by a licensed Peace Officer, while engaged in the performance of official duties
as such.
(d) When done as law enforcement training, at the ATK Federal Gun Range as
research & development or quality control, or at the Anoka Police Gun Range.
(e) As approved under a special permit to allow hunting.
(f) When done at a City approved commercial indoor gun range under a
Conditional Use Permit.
(g) As allowed during Minnesota Waterfowl hunting season, within the designated
Waterfowl Hunting Zone along Kings Island on the Mississippi River, applying
only to properly licensed individuals for the purpose of harvesting waterfowl.
State law reference--Dangerous weapons, Minn. Stats. § 609.66 & 609.02 Subd. 6.
Section 46-62. Exception.
The City Council may provide for an exception to Section 46-61, under the following
conditions: (1) for publicly or privately owned schools offering archery classes and
training, (2) for City approved archery ranges, to allow the discharge and use of bows and
arrows, and the use of crossbows by individuals that hold a valid Minnesota Department
of Natural Resources Crossbow Disability permit, or (3) if the firearm discharge is
classified by the City as an authorized historical, exhibition or entertainment performance
which is in conjunction with an event sponsored by the State of Minnesota, County of
Anoka or City of Anoka. Under either condition, the following must be provided to the
City prior to Council approval.
(a) Successful background investigation by the Anoka Police Department.
(b) Successful staff review and investigation of premises and performance detail.
(c) A current Certificate of Insurance, approved by the City, which provides coverage
for the archery range and/or performance/event and names the City as an additional
insured party.
Section 46-63. Predatory Offender Residency Restriction Ordinance.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 46; ARTICLE III
2 of 4
(a) Findings and Purpose.
Repeat predatory offenders present an extreme threat to the public safety of a
community as a whole, and especially to children. Predatory offenders are
likely to use physical violence and to repeat their offenses. Most predatory
offenders commit many offenses, have many more victims than are ever
reported, and are prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. This makes the
cost of predatory offender victimization to society at large, while incalculable,
unmistakably steep.
It is the intent of this Section to serve the City’s compelling interest to promote,
protect and improve the health, safety, and welfare of citizens of the City of
Anoka by creating areas around locations where children regularly congregate in
concentrated numbers, and where certain predatory offenders are prohibited
from establishing temporary or permanent residence.
(b) Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, the following definitions will apply
unless the context or intent clearly requires a different meaning:
Day Care. Any facility, public or private, licensed by the State of Minnesota or
Anoka County, in which care, training, supervision, habilitation or
developmental guidance for children is provided on a regular basis and for
periods less than 24 hours per day.
Child or children. Any person or persons under 18 years of age, or individuals
under age 21 who are in foster care.
Facilities for Children. All public parks, parkways, park facilities, parkland,
public or private schools, designated public school bus stops, libraries, group
homes, foster homes, day care and child care facilities, public recreation centers,
non-profit or commercial recreation centers, public or private playgrounds,
public or commercial swimming pools, public beaches, youth centers, athletic
fields used by children, crisis centers or shelters, care facilities for children’s
skate park or rink, movie theaters, bowling alleys, facilities for children’s clubs,
e.g. scouting, public recreational areas and trails including conservation areas,
jogging trails, hiking trails, walking trails, bicycle trails, Offices for Child
Protective Services, places of assembly, and specialized schools for children,
including but not limited to, tutoring, gymnastics, dance and music schools.
Designated Predatory Offender. Any person who has been categorized as a
Level III predatory offender under Minnesota Statutes 244.052, a successor
statute, or a similar statute from another state in which that person’s risk
assessment indicates a high risk of re-offense.
Licensed Child Care Facility. Any facility, center, home or institution licensed
by the State of Minnesota pursuant to Minn. Stat. 245A, where children are
cared for pursuant to the requirements of a license issued by the Minnesota
Department of Human Services.
Permanent Residence. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for 14
or more consecutive days. An ownership interest by the person in such
residence is not required.
Place of Assembly. A place of assembly, synagogue, temple, mosque, or other
facility that is used for prayer by persons of similar beliefs or a special purpose
building that is designated or particularly adapted for the primary use of
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 46; ARTICLE III
3 of 4
conducting, on a regular basis, religious services and associated accessory uses
by a religious congregation.
School. Any public or non-public educational institution providing instructional
services to children, which shall include any structure, land, or facility owned,
leased or used for operation of the school or school activities.
Temporary Residence. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a
period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year, and which
is not the person’s permanent residence, or a place where the person routinely
abides, lodges, or resides for a period of four or more consecutive or
nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person’s permanent
residence.
(c) Prohibitions; Measurement of Distance; Penalties; Exceptions.
(1) Prohibited location of residence. It is unlawful for any designated
predatory offender to establish a permanent residence or temporary
residence within 2,000 feet of any school, day care, licensed child care
facility, place of assembly, or facility for children.
(2) Prohibition present in safety zone. It is unlawful for any designated
predatory offender to be present within 100 feet of any facility for
children or day care facility.
(3) Prohibited activity. It is unlawful for any designated predatory
offender to participate in a holiday event involving children such as
distributing candy or other items to children on Halloween, wearing a
Santa Claus costume on or proceeding Christmas or wearing an Easter
Bunny costume on or preceding Easter. Holiday events in which the
offender is the parent or guardian of the children involved, and no nonfamilial
children are present, are exempt from this paragraph.
(4) Measurement of distance. For purposes of determining the minimum
distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a
straight line form the property line of the permanent residence or
temporary residence to the nearest outer property line of the school, day
care, licensed child care facility, place of assembly, facility for
children, or park.
(5) Violations. A designated predatory offender who violates this Section
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day a designated
predatory offender maintains a residence in violation of this Section
constitutes a separate violation.
(6) Exceptions. A designated predatory offender residing within a
prohibited location, as herein described, does not commit a violation of
this Section if any of the following apply:
A. The designated predatory offender established the permanent
or temporary residence and reported and registered the
residence pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Sections 243.166
and 243.167, or a successor statute, prior to May 16, 2016.
B. The designated predatory offender was a minor when he/she
committed the offense and was not convicted as an adult.
C. The designated predatory offender is a minor.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 46; ARTICLE III
4 of 4
D. The school, day care, licensed child care facility, place of
assembly, or facility for children within 2,000 feet of the
designated predatory offender’s residence was opened after
the designated predatory offender established their permanent
or temporary residence, and reported and registered the
residence pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Sections 243.166
and 243.167, or a successor statute.
E. The residence is also the primary residence of the designated
predatory offender’s parents, grandparents, siblings or spouse.
F. The residence is a property purchased, leased, or contracted
with and licensed by the Minnesota Department of Corrections
prior to May 16, 2016.
G. The designated predatory offender is in residence at the Anoka
County Jail or AMRTC (Anoka Metro Regional Treatment
Center).
(d) Official map of prohibited locations. The City Manager, or designee, shall
maintain an official map showing prohibited locations of residences as defined
by this Section. The City Manager, or designee, shall review annually, and if
appropriate, update the map to reflect any changes in the prohibited locations.
The map shall not be deemed conclusive or all-encompassing since some
prohibited locations change from time to time including, but not limited to, other
places where children are known to congregate.
(e) Restrictions Relating to Rental Property; Penalties.
(1) It is unlawful for a property owner to let or rent any place, structure, or
part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, with the knowledge that it will
be used as a permanent or temporary residence by any person
prohibited from establishing such permanent or temporary residence
pursuant to this Section if such place, structure, or part thereof, trailer
or other conveyance, is located within a prohibited location as set forth
in Section 46-64 (d).
(2) A property owner violating Section 46-63 (e) shall be guilty of a petty
misdemeanor. Each day a property owner violates Section 46-63 (e)
constitutes a separate violation.
(3) If a property owner discovers or is informed that a tenant is a
designated predatory offender after signing a lease or otherwise
agreeing to let the designated predatory offender reside on the property,
the owner or property manager may evict the offender without further
liability to the offender.
(4) Violation of Section 46-63 (e) may be cause to suspend or revoke the
property owner’s rental license.
(f) Severability. Should any section, subdivision, clause, or other provision of this
section be held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity of this Section as a whole, or of any part thereof,
other than the part held to be invalid.
Sections 46-64 – 46-90. Reserved
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 46;ARTICLE IV
1 of 4
CHAPTER 46. OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
ARTICLE IV. Offenses Involving Public Peace and Order
Section 46-91. Breach of the peace.
No person shall use any language in a public place that is reasonably calculated to cause
an immediate breach of the peace.
Section 46-92. Loitering.
(a) Whoever commits any of the following acts is guilty of a petty misdemeanor:
(1) Lingering about the doorway of any building, or sitting or lingering
upon the steps, windowsills, railing, fence, or parking area adjacent to
any building in such a manner so as to obstruct or partially obstruct
ingress to or egress from such building or in such a manner to annoy
the owner or occupant.
(2) Remaining for more than five minutes on any private business premise
which is posted with a conspicuous sign containing the words "No
Loitering" when: (i) the business establishment is closed; or (ii) the
person charged does not visibly demonstrate any intent to conduct
business at the establishment or to leave the premise after having
conducted such business.
(3) Remaining for more than five minutes on any public business premise
which is posted with a conspicuous sign containing the words "No
Loitering" when such premise neither has been nor will be open for
business within 30 minutes.
(4) Remaining for more than five minutes on any public or private nonbusiness
premise which is posted with a conspicuous sign containing
the words "No Loitering."
(5) Lingering for any length of time upon any public or private premises or
move in a slow and deliberate manner without purpose or otherwise
interfere with, obstruct, or render dangerous or unreasonable for
passage, any public highway, sidewalk, parking area or right-of-way
after having been warned within the preceding four months, either
orally or in writing, by the owner, agent, manager, or person in charge
thereof, or by any law enforcement agent or official, that such conduct
will result in a charge under this section. The provisions of this
subsection shall be applicable only along any street designated as a "No
Cruising Zone" and only between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m.
(b) Whoever commits any of the following acts is guilty of a misdemeanor:
(1) Failing or refusing to vacate or leave any premises after being
requested or ordered, either orally or in writing, to do so by the owner,
agent, manager or person in charge thereof, or by any law enforcement
agent or official or returning at any time thereafter to any such premise
after having been so requested or ordered to vacate such premise.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 46;ARTICLE IV
2 of 4
(2) Any of the acts described in this Article within one (1) year of being
found guilty of any violation of this Article.
(c) For purposes of this section, premises shall include any yard, lot, parcel,
sidewalk, boulevard, street, highway, alley, park, playground, restaurant, cafe,
church, school, any car or other motor vehicle, parking lot, drive-in, building
used for business, commercial or industrial purposes, washroom or lavatory,
apartment hallway or other location whether public or private in the city.
Business premises include all premises, whether public or private, which include
a facility that has established open and closed hours. Non-business premises
include all other premises in the city.
Section 46-93. Aggressive Solicitation.
(a) Definitions.
(1) Solicitation, as used in this section, means any plea made in person
where:
a. A person by vocal appeal requests an immediate donation of
money or other item from another person;
b. A person verbally offers or actively provides an item or
service of little or no value to another in exchange for a
donation, under circumstances where a reasonable person
would understand that the transaction is in substance a
donation.
However, solicitation shall not include the act of passively standing,
sitting, or engaging in a performance of art with a sign or other
indication that a donation is being sought, without any vocal request
other than in response to an inquiry by another person.
(2) Convenience store, as used in this section, means a retail establishment
offering for sale prepackaged food products, household items, and other
goods commonly associated with them, with a gross floor area of less
than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet.
(3) Public entertainment venue means a place that is open to the public
(whether or not upon payment of a fee for admission and whether or
not the management reserves the right to exclude individual members
of the public) for entertainment but does not include a shop. The term
includes, but is not limited to, cinemas, theatres, concert halls,
electronic games centers, indoor sports centers (including a bowling
alley), art galleries, museums, and premises upon which any display or
exhibition promoted such as is conducted.
(b) Prohibitions.
(1) It shall be unlawful in a public place to engage in an act of solicitation
when the person being solicited is present at any of the following
locations:
a. In a restroom.
b. At a bus stop or shelter or the North Star station.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 46;ARTICLE IV
3 of 4
c. At or within ten (10) feet in any direction from a crosswalk.
d. In any public transportation vehicle or public street or alley.
e. In a vehicle which is parked or stopped on a public street or
alley.
f. In a sidewalk café.
g. In a line waiting to be admitted to a commercial or
governmental establishments.
h. Within eighty (80) feet in any direction from an automatic
teller machine or entrance to a bank, other financial
institutions, or check cashing business.
i. On any park land, or in any park, playground, or public
entertainment venue, including within fifty (50) feet of entry
ways or exits thereto.
j. At or within ten (10) feet in any direction of the property on
which is located a gasoline filling station.
k. At or within ten (10) feet in any direction of the property on
which is located a liquor store, including any establishment
with an off-sale license.
l. At or within ten (10) feet in any direction of the property on
which a convenience store is located.
(2) It shall be unlawful in a public place to engage in an act of solicitation
in a manner that incorporates any of the following methods:
a. Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with the
solicited person without that person's consent.
b. Intentionally blocking the path of the solicited person, or the
entrance to any building or vehicle.
c. Following behind, ahead or alongside a person who walks
away from the solicitor after being solicited, with the intent to
intimidate or continue solicitation.
d. Using obscene, profane, or abusive language or gestures
toward the solicited person.
e. Approaching the solicited person in a manner that:
1. Is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable
person to fear imminent bodily harm or the
commission of a criminal act upon property in the
person's possession; or
2. Is intended to or is likely to intimidate a reasonable
person into responding affirmatively to the
solicitation.
f. Solicitation while under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 46;ARTICLE IV
4 of 4
g. Soliciting in a group of two (2) or more persons.
(3) It shall be unlawful in a public place to engage in an act of solicitation
on any day after sunset, or before sunrise.
(c) Penalties. Each act of solicitation prohibited by this section shall constitute a
separate violation of this section. Each violation shall be punishable as a
misdemeanor.
Sections 46-94 thru 46-120. Reserved.
\
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 46;ARTICLE V
1 of 1
CHAPTER 46. OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
ARTICLE V. Offenses Involving Public Morals
Section 46-121. Consumption of alcohol in public.
Except by permit, no person shall consume, drink, or have in his possession in an opened
container of any intoxicating liquor, intoxicating malt liquor, non-intoxicating malt
liquor, or alcoholic beverage of any kind whatsoever, while upon the public streets, lanes,
alleys, sidewalks, rights-of-way, parking lots, or parking ramps, unless the alcohol is
merely being transported in a vehicle in compliance with state statutes.
State law reference--Open bottles in motor vehicles, Minn. Stats. § 169.122.
Section 46-122. Public Drunkenness-Intoxication.
No person shall be found drunk or intoxicated in any street, public or private place within
the City.
Sections 46-123 thru 46-139. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 46;ARTICLE VI
1 of 1
CHAPTER 46. OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
ARTICLE VI. Offenses - Miscellaneous
Section 46-140. Curfew.
(a) Persons under fifteen (15) years of age. It shall be unlawful for any person
under the age of fifteen (15) years to be on or present in any public street,
avenue, alley, park or other public place in the City between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, unless accompanied by his parent or
guardian, or person having legal custody and control of the person, or unless
there exists a reasonable necessity therefore. The fact that such child,
unaccompanied by parent, guardian or other person having legal custody, is
found upon any street, alley, or public place after 10:00 p.m. or before 5:00 a.m.
of the following day, shall be evidence that such child is there unlawfully and
that no reasonable excuse exists therefore.
(b) Persons over fifteen (15) years of age and under eighteen (18) years of age. It
shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years and over
the age of fourteen (14) years to be on any public street, avenue, alley, park or
other public place in the City between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m.
of the following day unless accompanied by his parent or guardian, or person
having legal custody ad control of the person, or unless there exists a reasonable
necessity therefore. The fact that such child, unaccompanied by parent,
guardian or other person having legal custody, is found upon any street, alley or
public place after 12:00 midnight or before 5:00 a.m. of the following day, shall
be evidence that such child is there unlawfully and that no reasonable excuse
exists therefore.
(c) Responsibility of Parent(s), Guardian(s), Person(s) having legal custody. It
shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the legal
custody and control of a minor under the age of eighteen years to knowingly or
negligently permit such minor to violate the provisions of the curfew regulations
as stated in this Article.
(d) Responsibility of Operator of Place of Entertainment, etc. It shall be unlawful
for any person operating or in charge of any place of amusement, entertainment
or refreshment, or any other place of business to permit any minor under the age
of eighteen (18) year to loiter, loaf or idle in such place during the prohibited in
this Article.
Whenever the owner or person in charge or in control of any place of
amusement, entertainment, refreshment, or other place of business shall find
persons under the age of eighteen (18) years loitering, loafing, or idling in such
place of business, he shall immediately order such person to leave, and if such
person refuses to leave the place of business, the operator shall immediately
notify the police department and inform them of the violation.
This section shall not be construed as permitting the presence at any time of any
person under the age of eighteen (18) years in any place where his presence is
no prohibited by an existing law or ordinance.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 46;ARTICLE VII
1 of 3
CHAPTER 46. OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
ARTICLE VII. Offenses Related to Drug Paraphernalia
Section 46-160 Drug Paraphernalia.
Pursuant to authority granted by Minnesota Statutes, Section 152.205
(a) Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Drug Paraphernalia. All equipment, products, and materials of any kind which are used,
primarily used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating,
growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, enhancing, converting, producing,
processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of M.S. Ch. 152, as it may be amended from time to
time. Drug paraphernalia does not include the possession, manufacture, delivery, or sale
of hypodermic needles or syringes. The term drug paraphernalia includes, but is not
limited to:
(1) Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite,
dextrose, and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting
controlled substances;
(2) Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in
removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana;
(3) Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing or harvesting any species of plant which is a controlled
substance or from which controlled substances can be derived;
(4) Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substances;
(5) Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or. designed for use in increasing
the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;
(6) Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying or
in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of controlled substances;
(7) Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or
measuring controlled substances;
(8) Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, grinders, and mixing devices used,
intended for use, or designed for use in compounding, manufacturing,
producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances;
(9) Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used, intended for use, or
designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances;
(10) Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in
storing or concealing controlled substances or products or materials used or
intended for use in manufacturing, producing, processing, or preparing
controlled substances;
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 46;ARTICLE VII
2 of 3
(11) Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human
body, which shall include, but not be limited to the following:
a. Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or
without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal
bowls;
b. Water pipes;
c. Carburetion tubes and devices;
d. Smoking and carburetion masks;
e. Objects commonly referred to as roach clips, meaning objects used to
hold burning materials, such as a marijuana cigarette, which has
become too small or too short to be held in the hand;
f. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
g. Chamber pipes;
h. Carburetor pipes;
i. Electric pipes;
j. Air-driven pipes;
k. Chillums;
l. Bongs;
m. Ice pipes or chillers; and
(12) Ingredients or components to be used or intended or designed to be used in
manufacturing, producing, processing, preparing, testing, or analyzing a
controlled substance, whether or not otherwise lawfully obtained, including
anhydrous ammonia, nonprescription medications, methamphetamine precursor
drugs, or lawfully dispensed controlled substances.
(b) Factors to be considered in determining if an object is drug paraphernalia. In
determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority shall
consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following:
(1) Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use;
(2) Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone in control of the object under
any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance and/or drag
paraphernalia;
(3) The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this
section;
(4) The proximity of the object to any controlled substance;
(5) The existence of any residue of a controlled substance on the object;
(6) Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in
control of the object, to deliver it to any person whom he or she knows, or
should reasonably know, intends to use the object to facilitate a violation of this
section. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a
direct violation, of this act shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended
for use or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;
(7) Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use;
(8) Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use;
(9) National and local advertising concerning its use;
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 46;ARTICLE VII
3 of 3
(10) The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
(11) Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object or objects to
the total sales of the business enterprise;
(12) The existence and scope of any legitimate use for the object in the community;
(13) Expert testimony concerning its use;
(14) Whether the owner, or any one in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier
of like or related items to the community, for example, a licensed distributor or
dealer of tobacco products; and
(15) The actual or constructive possession by the owner or a person in control of the
object or the presence in a vehicle or structure where the object is located of
written instructions, directions, or recipes to be used, or intended or designed to
be used, in manufacturing, producing, processing, preparing, testing, or
analyzing-a controlled substance.
(c) Possession of drug paraphernalia prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to use, or to
possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow,
harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of M.S. Ch. 152, as it may be amended
from time to time. Any violation of this section is a petty misdemeanor.
(d) Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia prohibited. It is unlawful for any person
to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, sell, possess with intent to sell, or manufacture
with intent to deliver or sell, drug paraphernalia, if that person knows, or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know that the drug paraphernalia will be
used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, enhance,
convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal,
inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance
in violation of M.S. Ch. 152. Any violation of this section is a misdemeanor.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48;ARTICLE I
CHAPTER 48. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS
ARTICLE 1 In General
Section 48-1. Purpose and Scope.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to protect the public health, safety, and the
general welfare of the people of the city. These general objectives include, among others,
the following:
(1) To establish the minimum regulations governing the conditions and maintenance
of all property, buildings, and structures within the City;
(2) To protect the character and stability of residential areas within the City;
(3) To correct and prevent housing conditions that adversely affect or are likely to
adversely affect the life, safety, general welfare, and health;
(4) To provide standards for heating and sanitary equipment and for light and
ventilation necessary to protect the health and safety of occupants of buildings;
(5) To prevent the overcrowding of dwellings;
(6) To provide standards for the maintenance of existing residential buildings and
accessory structures and to thus prevent substandard housing and blight;
(7) To preserve the value of land and buildings throughout the city.
With respect to disputes between tenants and landlords, and except as otherwise
specifically provided by the terms of this ordinance, it is not the intention of the City
Council to intrude upon the contractual relationship between the tenant and landlord. The
City Council does not intend to intervene as an advocate of either party, nor to involve
itself in rent disputes, nor to act as an arbitrator, nor to hear complaints from tenant or
landlord which are not specifically and clearly relevant to the provisions of this Chapter.
(b) Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential
structures and all existing premises. This Chapter shall constitute the
minimum standards for premises, structures, and facilities for light, ventilation, life
safety, safety from fire, and other hazards and for safe and sanitary maintenance.
Section 48-2. Definitions.
The definitions contained in Section 74-2 of this Code apply herein. Additionally, the following
definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this Chapter. In the event of a
conflict between the definitions contained in Section 74-2 and this Section, the definitions
contained in this Section shall control.
(a) Blended Family. A family in which one or both parents have children from a previous
relationship. Blended family includes, households with a combination of biological and
adopted children, foster children, stepchildren and half siblings. Children who are being
raised by family members other than parents may also be considered a blended family.
(b) Building Official. The designated agent authorized by the City Council to administer and
enforce the State Building Code.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48;ARTICLE I
(c) Dwelling. A building or one or more portions thereof, occupied or intended to be
occupied for residential purposes, including at least one dwelling unit or rooming unit,
but not including rooms in motels, hotels, nursing homes, trailers, tents, cabins, or trailer
coaches.
(d) Flush Water Closet. A toilet with a bowl and trap made in one piece, which is connected
to the city water and sewer system or other approved water supply and sewer system.
(e) Garbage. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparing,
cooking, marketing, or processing of food, or the non-consumed waste resulting from
animals or humans consuming food.
(f) Habitable Building. Any building or part thereof that meets minimum standards for use
as a home or place of abode by one or more persons.
(g) Habitable Room. A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living,
sleeping, or eating purposes, excluding kitchens, bathrooms, water closet compartments,
laundries, furnace rooms, unfinished basements (those without required ventilation,
required electric outlets and required exit facilities), pantries, utility rooms of less than 50
square feet of floor space, foyers, communicating corridors, stairways, closets, storage
spaces, workshops, and hobby and recreation areas in parts of the structure below ground
level or in attics.
(h) Heated Water. Water heated to a temperature of not less than 110 degrees Fahrenheit, or
such lesser temperature required by government authority, measured at faucet outlet.
(i) Kitchen. A space which contains a sink with counter working space, space for installing
cooking and refrigeration equipment, and space for the storage of cooking utensils.
(j) Lease. Awritten or oral agreement to rent. For use as a verb, see rent.
(k) Let. To lease a premises or any portion thereof.
(l) Maintenance. Upkeep of property and equipment in a safe working condition for which
it was installed and/or constructed.
(m) Occupancy. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied.
(n) Occupant. Any person (including owner operator) who lives, sleeps, cooks, and eats in a
dwelling unit or lives and sleeps in a rooming unit.
(o) Operate. As used in this ordinance, the term "operate" means to charge rent or other
considerations resulting in financial benefit for the use of a dwelling or a rooming unit.
(p) Operator The owner or his/her agent who has charge, care, control, or management of a
building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
(q) Owner. Any person, firm, or corporation who alone, jointly, or severally with others has
title to any dwelling, or who has charge of, care of, or control of such property on behalf
of the title holder. Any person representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply
with the provisions of this ordinance to the same extent as the owner.
(r) Permissible Occupancy. The maximum number of persons permitted to reside in a
dwelling unit or rooming unit.
(s) Person. An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or joint
venture or organization of any kind.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48;ARTICLE I
(t) Plumbing. All of the following supplied facilities and equipment in a dwelling: gas
pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, steam pipes, garbage disposal units, waste
pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths,
installed clothes washing machines, bath basins, drains, vents, and any other similar
fixtures and the installation thereof, together with all connections to water, sewer, and gas
lines.
(u) Premises. A property identifiable by address or legal description, including all associated
structures. A lot, plot or parcel of land including any structures thereon.
(v) Property Maintenance Coordinator. The designated agent authorized by the City Council
to administer and enforce this ordinance.
(w) Public Hall. A hall, corridor, or passageway for providing egress from a dwelling unit
to a public way.
(x) Relative. A personal owner's parent, stepparent, child, stepchild, grandparent,
grandchild, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, nephew or niece.
(y) Rent. Consideration paid for the use of premises, including, but not necessarily limited to,
money, services and property. As a verb, the term ‘rent’ means to receive or allow the use
of premises in return for such consideration or any combination thereof. The term ‘rent’
does not include arrangements whereby a relative occupies a dwelling and which
arrangement is detailed and sworn to in affidavits filed by each adult occupant of the
dwelling and each person who is an owner of the dwelling
(z) Refuse. Means ashes, non-recyclable glass, crockery, cans, paper, boxes, rags, and
similar non-putrescible non-recyclable wastes but excluding sand, earth, brick, stone,
concrete, trees, tree branches and wood.
(aa) Rental Dwelling. Any dwelling unit(s) let. Single family residential properties occupied
by a relative shall not be considered a rental dwelling.
(bb) Repair. The construction or renewal of any part of an existing building or its utilities,
facilities, or equipment for the purpose of its maintenance.
(cc) Rodent Harborage. A place where rodents commonly live, nest, or establish their habitat.
(dd) Rooming Unit. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or
intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking and eating purposes.
(ee) Safety. The condition of being reasonably free from danger and hazards which may
cause accidents or disease.
(ff) Substandard Dwelling. Any dwelling which does not conform to the minimum standards
established by city ordinances.
(gg) Supplied. Paid for, furnished by, provided by, or under the control of the owner,
operator, or agent of a dwelling.
(hh) Meaning of certain words. Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "premises,"
or "structure" are used in this ordinance, they shall be construed as through they were
followed by the words "or any part thereof."
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48;ARTICLE I
Section 48-3. Responsibilities of Owners and Occupants.
No owner or other person shall occupy or let to another person any dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming unit, building, or structure unless it and the premises are fit for human occupancy and
comply with all applicable legal requirements of the State of Minnesota, and the City of Anoka as
set forth specifically in the following subsections.
(a) Maintenance of Shared or Public Areas. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or
more dwelling units shall maintain or shall provide for maintenance of the shared or
public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
(b) Housekeeping of Occupied Areas. Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit, or
rooming unit shall properly housekeep that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit, and
premises thereof that he/she occupies and controls.
(c) Storage and Disposal of Refuse. Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming
unit, building or structure shall store and dispose of all his/her refuse and garbage and any
other organic waste which might provide food for insects and/or rodents as required by
Chapter 13 of this Code.
(d) Responsibility for Storage and Disposal of Garbage and Refuse. Every owner of a
multiple-family dwelling shall supply facilities for the storage and/or disposal of refuse,
garbage, and recycling materials. All garbage, waste material, debris, and recyclables
shall be kept in an enclosed building or contained in a closed container designed for such
purposes.
Owners shall provide refuse enclosures to screen all containers that are visible from a
public street or alley. Such enclosure shall have a concrete floor base. Gates may not be
required if properly oriented on the site. The design of such enclosures shall be reviewed
and approved by city staff prior to issuance of a building permit.
Provisions for storage and disposal of garbage and refuse consistent with this chapter
must be provided for multifamily buildings upon obtaining a building permit costing
more than $5,000.00. In the case of single-family and duplex dwellings, it shall be the
responsibility of the occupant to adequately provide for the storage and disposal of
garbage and refuse.
(e) Responsibility for Storm and Screen Doors and Windows. The owner of any dwelling
unit shall be responsible for providing, maintaining and hanging all screen and storm
doors and storm windows whenever the same are required under the provisions of this
ordinance.
(f) Responsibility for Pest Extermination. Every occupant of a single-family dwelling shall
be responsible for the extermination of vermin infestations and/or rodents on the
premises. Every occupant of a dwelling unit in a building containing more than one
dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his/her dwelling unit
is the only one infested, except when infestation is caused by the failure of the owner to
maintain a dwelling in a reasonably rodent-proof condition; then, extermination shall be
the responsibility of the owner. When infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling
units in any building or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or
more dwelling units, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.
(g) Rodent Harborage Prohibited in Occupied Areas. No occupant of a dwelling shall
accumulate boxes, firewood, lumber, scrap metal, or any other similar materials in such a
manner that may provide rodent harborage in or about any dwelling. Outside stored
materials shall be stacked neatly in piles at least four inches off bare soil or ground.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48;ARTICLE I
(h) Rodent Harborage Prohibited in Public Areas. No owner or occupant of a dwelling shall
accumulate or permit the accumulation of boxes, lumber, scrap metal, or any other
similar materials in such a manner that may provide rodent harborage in or about shared
or public areas of a dwelling or premises. Materials stored outside by the owner or
permitted to be stored by the owner shall be stacked neatly in piles at least four inches
above bare soil or ground.
(i) Prevention of Food for Rodents. No owner or occupant of a dwelling unit shall store,
place, or allow to accumulate any materials that may serve as food for rodents in a site
accessible to rodents.
(j) Maintenance of Plumbing Fixtures and Facilities. The owner of a dwelling unit, rooming
unit, building or structure shall maintain all supplied plumbing fixtures and facilities
therein in good working order.
(k) Minimum Heating Capability and Maintenance. In every dwelling unit or rooming unit
when the control of the supplied heat is the responsibility of a person other than the
occupant, a room temperature of at least 68 degrees Fahrenheit shall be maintained from
October 15th through April 15th.
(l) Removal of Snow and Ice. The owner of any building or structure shall be responsible
for the removal of snow and ice from parking lots, driveways, steps, and walkways on the
premises, as well as from abutting sidewalks. The owner of any building or structure
shall additionally be responsible for ice control measures. Individual snowfalls of three
inches or more or successive snowfall accumulations to a depth of three inches shall be
removed from walkways, steps and public sidewalks within 48 hours after cessation of
the snowfall. The City’s policy to assist in snow removal does not exempt any property
owner from meeting these requirements.
(m) Minimum Exterior Lighting. The owner of a rental dwelling or dwellings shall be
responsible to provide and maintain effective illumination in all exterior parking areas
and walkways.
(n) Maintenance of Driveway and Parking Areas. The owner of a multiple-family dwelling
or dwellings shall be responsible to provide and maintain in good condition paved and
delineated parking areas and driveways for tenants. Each driveway and parking area on
any multiple-family property existing on or before April 8, 1994, shall be paved with
asphalt, concrete, brick, or similar dust-free surface at such time as a building permit may
be taken for either remodeling or improvements costing more than $5,000.00.
Section 48-4. Minimum Standards for Basic Equipment and Facilities.
No person shall occupy, rent or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the
purposes of living, sleeping, cooking, and eating therein which does not provide the following:
(a) Kitchen Sink. A sink in good working condition and properly connected to an approved
water supply system and which provides at all times an adequate amount of heated and
unheated running water under pressure and which is connected to an approved sewer system
per Anoka City Code.
(b) Food Storage. Cabinets and/or shelves for the storage of eating, drinking, and cooking
equipment and utensils, and of food that does not require refrigeration for safekeeping and a
counter or table for food preparation. The cabinets and/or shelves and counter or table shall
be of sound construction furnished with surfaces that are easily cleanable and that will not
impart any toxic or deleterious effect to food.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48;ARTICLE I
(c) Stove and Refrigerator. A stove for cooking food and a refrigerator for the safe storage of
food at or below forty (40) degrees Fahrenheit, which are properly installed with all necessary
connections for safe, sanitary, and efficient operation. Such stove and refrigerator need not
be installed when a dwelling unit is not occupied or when the occupant is expected to provide
same on occupancy, in which case sufficient space and adequate connections for the
installation and operation of the stove and refrigerator must be provided.
(d) Toilet Facilities. Within every dwelling unit there shall be a non-habitable room which is
equipped with a flush water closet in compliance. Such room shall have an entrance door
which affords privacy. Said flush water closet shall be equipped with easily cleanable
surfaces, shall be connected to an approved water system that at all times provides an
adequate amount of running water under pressure to cause the water closet to be operated
properly, and all shall be connected to a sewer system in compliance with Anoka City Code.
(e) Lavatory Sink. Within every dwelling unit there shall be a lavatory sink. The sink may be in
the same room as the flush water closet, but if located in another room, the lavatory sink shall
be located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which said water
closet is located. The lavatory sink shall be in good working condition and shall be properly
connected to an approved water system and shall provide at all times an adequate amount of
heated and unheated running water under pressure and shall be connected to a sewer system
which complies with Anoka City Code.
(f) Bathtub or Shower. Within every dwelling unit there shall be a non-habitable room which is
equipped with a bathtub or shower in good working condition. Such room shall have an
entrance door which affords privacy. Said bathtub or shower may be in the same room as the
flush water closet, or in another room, and all shall be properly connected to an approved water
supply system and shall provide at all times an adequate amount of heated and unheated water
under pressure and shall be connected to a sewer system which complies with Anoka City
Code.
Section 48-5. Stairways, Porches and Balconies.
The owner shall keep every stairway, inside or outside of a building, and every porch or balcony
shall be kept in safe condition and sound repair, including but not limited to the following: stairs
and handrails; every porch, balcony, or deck which is 30 inches or more above grade shall have a
guardrail; every handrail and guardrail shall be firmly fastened and maintained in good condition;
no flight of stairs shall have settled out of its intended position or have pulled away from the
supporting or adjacent structures enough to cause hazard; no flight of stairs shall have rotting,
loose, or deteriorating support; excepting spiral and winding stairways, the treads and risers of
every flight of stairs shall be essentially uniform in width and height; stairways shall be capable of
supporting a live load of l00 pounds per square foot of horizontal projection.
Section 48-6. Access to Dwelling Units.
Access to or egress from each dwelling unit shall be provided without passing through any other
dwelling unit.
Section 48-7. Door Locks.
No owner shall let or rent to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit unless all
exterior doors of the dwelling or dwelling units are equipped with safe, functioning locking
devices. Rental dwelling shall be furnished with door locks as follows:
(a) Building Access. For the purpose of providing a reasonable amount of safety and general
welfare for persons occupying multiple-family dwellings with common areas, an
approved security system shall be maintained for each multiple-family building to control
access. The security system shall consist of locking building entrance or foyer doors, and
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48;ARTICLE I
locked door leading from hallways into individual dwelling units. Dead-latch type door
locks shall be provided with releasable lever knobs (or doorknobs) on the inside of
building entrance doors and with locking devices on the outside of the building entrance
doors. Building entrance door latches shall be of a type that are permanently locked.
(b) Unit Access. Every door that provides ingress or egress for a dwelling unit within a
multiple-family building shall be equipped with an approved lock that has a deadlocking
bolt that cannot be retracted by end pressure, provided however, that such door shall be
openable from the inside without the use of a key or any special knowledge or effort.
(c) Existing Buildings. All multiple-family dwellings in existence at the time this ordinance
is adopted, which were not previously required to have an approved security system, shall
not be subject to the requirements of Section “Building Access” of this Chapter.
Section 48-8. Minimum Standards for Light and Ventilation.
No person shall occupy as owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
rooming unit which does not comply the following requirements:
(a) Habitable Room Ventilation. Except where there is supplied some other device affording
ventilation and approved by the Building Official, every habitable room shall have at
least one window facing directly outdoors which can be opened easily.
(b) Electric Service, Outlets, and Fixtures. Every dwelling and rooming unit and all public and
common areas shall be supplied with electric service, functioning over-current protection
devices, electric outlets, and electric fixtures which are properly installed, which shall be
maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be connected to a source of electric power
in a manner prescribed by ordinances, rules, and regulations of the City of Anoka and by
the laws of the State of Minnesota. The minimum capacity of such electric service and the
minimum number of electric outlets and fixtures shall be as follows:
(1) A dwelling containing one or two dwelling units shall have at least the
equivalent of 100 ampere, three-wire electric service per dwelling unit.
(2) Every habitable room shall contain one (1) electrical convenience outlet.
(3) Every water closet compartment, bathroom, kitchen, laundry room, and furnace
room shall contain at least one (1) supplied ceiling-type or wall-type electric
convenience outlet.
(4) Every public hall and public stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be
adequately lighted to provide at least ten (10) foot candles of illumination of all
parts thereof at all times by means of properly located electric light fixtures;
provided that such electrical lighting may be omitted from sunrise to sunset
where there are windows or skylights opening directly to the outside and where
the total window or skylight area is at least one-tenth (1/10) of the combined
horizontal area of the floor and stairway of each such public hallway and where
such windows or skylight provide adequate natural light to all parts of each
public hallway. Every public hall and stairway in dwellings containing two (2)
dwelling units shall be supplied with convenient light switches, controlling an
adequate lighting system that will provide at least ten (10) foot candles of
illumination on all parts thereof, which may be turned on when needed.
(5) A convenient switch or equivalent device for turning on a light in each dwelling
unit shall be located near the point of entrance to such unit.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48;ARTICLE I
Section 48-9. Minimal Thermal Standards.
(a) No person shall occupy as owner, or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
rooming unit, for the purpose of living therein which does not have heating facilities
which are properly installed and maintained in a safe and working condition and which
are capable of safely heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and water closet
compartments in every dwelling unit located therein to a room temperature of at least 68
degrees Fahrenheit to be maintained from October 15th through April 15th.
(b) Gas or electric appliances designed primarily for cooking or water heating purposes shall
not be considered as heating facilities within the meaning of this section.
(c) Portable heating equipment employing flame and the use of liquid fuel does not meet the
requirement of this section and is prohibited.
(d) No owner or occupant shall install, operate, or use a space heater employing a flame that
is not vented outside the structure in an approved manner.
Section 48-10. General Requirements.
No person shall occupy as owner, occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
rooming unit for the purpose of living therein which does not comply with the following
requirements.
(a) Foundations, Exterior Walls, and Roofs. The foundation, exterior walls, and exterior roof
shall be substantially water tight and protected against vermin and rodents and shall be
kept in sound condition and repair. The foundation element shall adequately support the
building at all points. Every exterior wall shall be free of structural deterioration or any
other condition which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portion of the walls or
to the interior spaces of the dwelling. The roof shall be tight and have no defects which
admit rain and roof drainage and shall be adequate to prevent rain water from causing
dampness in the walls. All exterior surfaces, other than decay resistant materials, shall be
protected from the elements and decay by paint or other protective covering or treatment.
If the exterior surface is unpainted or lacks protective coating or is determined by the
Building Official to be deteriorated, the surface shall have a protective covering applied.
If the exterior surface of the pointing of any brick, block, or stone wall is loose or has
fallen out, the surface shall be repaired.
(b) Windows, Doors, and Screens. Every window, exterior door, and hatchway shall be
substantially tight and shall be kept in repair. Every window, other than a fixed window
or storm window, shall be capable of being easily opened. Every window, door, and
frame shall be constructed and maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall
construction as to completely exclude rain, vermin and rodents from entering the
building.
(c) Floors, Interior Walls, and Ceilings. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling shall be
protected against the passage and harborage of vermin and rodents and shall be kept in
sound condition and good repair. Every floor shall be free of loose, warped, protruding,
or rotting flooring materials. Every interior wall and ceiling shall be maintained in a tight
waterproof condition. Toxic paints or materials with a lasting toxic effect shall not be
used. Every toilet room and bathroom floor surface shall be capable of being easily
maintained.
(d) Rodent Proof. Buildings found to be rodent infested shall be made rodent resistant. All
opening in the exterior walls, foundations, basements, ground, or first floors, and roofs
which have 1/4" diameter or larger opening shall be rodent proofed in an approved
manner. Interior floors or basements, cellars, and other areas in contact with the soil shall
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48;ARTICLE I
be paved with concrete or other rodent-impervious material.
(e) Fence Maintenance. All fences supplied by the owner on the premises and all fences
erected by an occupant on the premises shall consist of metal, wood, masonry, or other
decay-resistant material. Fences shall be maintained in good condition. Materials, other
than decay resistant varieties, shall be protected against decay by use of paint or other
preservatives.
(f) Accessory Structure Maintenance. Accessory structures shall be structurally sound and
be maintained in good repair. The exterior of such structures shall be made weather
resistant through the use of decay-resistant materials such as paint or other preservatives.
(g) Safe Building Elements. Every foundation, roof, floor exterior and interior wall, ceiling,
inside and outside stair, porch and balcony, and appurtenance thereto shall be safe to use
and capable of supporting normal structural loads.
(h) Facilities to Function. All equipment or utilities required under city ordinances and every
chimney and flue shall function effectively in a safe and working condition.
(i) Grading and Drainage. Every yard, court, or passageway on the premises on which a
dwelling stands shall be graded and drained so as to be free of standing water that
constitutes a detriment to health and safety.
(j) Yard Cover. Every yard of a premises on which a dwelling stands shall be maintained to
prevent dust and erosion.
Section 48-11. Construction Standards.
All new construction and repair/renovation of existing structures within the City shall conform to
the Minnesota State Building Code as the building code for the City.
Section 48-12. Maximum Density, Minimum Space, For Rental Units.
No person shall permit or let to be occupied any rental dwelling or rooming unit for the purpose of
living therein which does not comply with the following requirements:
(a) Permissible Occupancy of Dwelling Unit. The maximum permissible occupancy of any
rental dwelling or rooming unit shall be determined as follows:
(1) For the first occupant, 150 square feet of habitable floor space and for every
additional occupant thereof, at least 100 square feet of habitable room floor
space.
(2) In no event shall the total number of occupants exceed two times the number of
habitable rooms, less kitchen, in the dwelling or rooming unit.
(b) One Family Per Dwelling Unit. Not more than one family, except for temporary guests,
shall occupy a dwelling unit.
Section 48-13. Enforcement and Inspection Authority.
(a) The Property Maintenance Coordinator or his/her designee shall administer and enforce
the provisions of this Chapter. Inspections shall be conducted during reasonable hours
and the Property Maintenance Coordinator shall present evidence of his/her official
capacity to the owner or occupant in charge of the property.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48;ARTICLE I
(b) The identities of individuals who register complaints with the City concerning violations of
State law or local ordinance concerning the use of real property shall be classified as
confidential data pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Section 13.03, Subd. 3., which states that
such data is not public and is not accessible to the individual subject of the data. All other
code violation records pertaining to a particular parcel of real property and the buildings,
improvements, and dwelling units located on that property that are kept by the City shall be
public data unless collected as part of an active civil investigation or legal action pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes Section 13.99, or collected as part of an active criminal investigation
pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Section 13.82, Subd. 7.
Section 48-14. Inspection Access.
If any owner, occupant, or other person in charge of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit,
multiple dwelling or building fails or refuses to permit free access and entry to the structure or
premises under his control, or any part thereof for purpose of an inspection authorized by this
chapter, the Property Maintenance Coordinator may petition the court for an order for such
inspection.
Section 48-15. Unfit for Human Habitation.
(a) Any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building or portion thereof which is damaged,
decayed, dilapidated, moldy, unsanitary, unsafe, vermin or rodent infested, or which
lacks provision for basic illumination, ventilation, or sanitation facilities, or has been
used for the clandestine manufacture of illegal substances, to the extent that the
conditions of the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building or portion thereof poses
a hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of the occupants or to the public may be declared
unfit for human habitation. Whenever any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or
building has been declared unfit, the Property Maintenance Coordinator shall order same
vacated within a reasonable time and shall post a placard on same indicating that it is
unfit for human habitation, and any operating license previously issued for such dwelling
shall be revoked.
(b) It shall be unlawful for such dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit, or portion thereof,
to be used for human habitation until the defective conditions have been corrected and
written approval has been issued by the Property Maintenance Coordinator. No person
other than the Building Official or his/her designee shall deface or remove the declaration
placard from any such dwelling unit.
Section 48-16. Secure Unfit and Vacant Dwellings.
The owner of any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or building which has been declared unfit
for human habitation or which is otherwise vacant for a period of sixty (60) days or more
immediately shall make the same safe and secure so that it is not hazardous to the health, safety,
and welfare of the public and does not constitute a public nuisance. Any vacant dwelling open at
doors, windows, or wall opening, if unguarded, shall be deemed to be a hazard to the health,
safety, and welfare of the public and is a public nuisance within the meaning of this ordinance.
Section 48-17. Hazardous Building Declaration.
In the event that a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or building has been declared unfit for
human habitation and the owner has not remedied the defects within a prescribed reasonable time,
the dwelling may be declared a hazardous building and may be removed, razed, or corrected
pursuant to the provisions of Minnesota Statutes.
Section 48-18. Compliance Order.
Whenever the Property Maintenance Coordinator determines that any dwelling, dwelling unit, or
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48;ARTICLE I
rooming unit, or portion thereof, is in violation of this or any other ordinance, he/she may issue a
Compliance Order according to the City of Anoka Property Code Violation Procedure.
Section 48-19. Right to Appeal.
Any person who believes that a compliance order issued under this chapter is based upon
erroneous interpretation of this chapter, or upon a misstatement or mistake of fact, such person
may appeal the Compliance Order to the City Council. Such appeals must be in writing, must
specify the grounds for the appeal, and must be accompanied by a filing fee as determined by the
City Council and be submitted to the City Manager within ten (10) business days after service of
the Compliance Order. The filing of an appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the
action appealed from unless such stay would cause imminent peril to life, health, or property.
Section 16-20. City Council’s Decision.
Upon at least five (5) business days' notice to the appellant of the time and place for hearing the
appeal and within thirty (30) days after appeal is filed, the City Council shall hold a hearing
thereon at which the City Council shall modify or affirm the order in whole or in part.
Section 48-21. Restrictions or Transfer of Ownership.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or building upon
whom a pending Compliance Order has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, or lease, or
otherwise dispose thereof to another person until the provisions of the Compliance Order have
been complied with, unless such owner shall furnish to grantee, lessee, or mortgagee a true copy
of any notice of violation or Compliance Order and shall obtain and possess a receipt of
acknowledgment. Anyone with an interest in the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or
building who has received notice of the existence of a Compliance Order shall be bound by same
without further service of notice upon him/her and shall be liable for all penalties and procedures
provided by this ordinance.
Section 48-22. Penalties.
Any person who fails to comply with a Compliance Order after a right of appeal has expired and
any person who fails to comply with a modified Compliance Order within the time set therein,
upon conviction thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to
the penalties set forth in Minnesota Statutes.
Section 48-23. Execution of Compliance Orders of Public Authority.
Upon failure to comply with a Compliance Order within the time set therein, and no appeal having
been taken, or upon failure to comply with a modified Compliance Order within the time set
therein, the criminal penalty established hereunder notwithstanding, the City Council may by
resolution cause the cited deficiency to be remedied as set forth in the Compliance Order. The
cost of such remedy shall be a lien against the subject real estate and may be levied and collected
as a special assessment in the manner provided by Minnesota Statutes, for any of the reasons set
forth in Minnesota Statutes, and specifically for the removal and elimination of public health or
safety hazards from private property, but the assessment shall be payable in a single installment. It
is the intent of this section to authorize the City to utilize Minnesota Statutes to promote the
public's health, safety, and general welfare.
Sections 48-24 thru 39. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48;ARTICLE II
CHAPTER 48. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS
ARTICLE II. Rental Licensing and Crime Free Housing.
Section 48-40. Purpose and Intent.
(a) Purpose. The operation of rental residential properties is a business enterprise that gives
rise to certain responsibilities. Operators are responsible to take reasonable steps, as may
be necessary, to assure that the citizens of the City who occupy such units, and those
residing near such units, may pursue the quiet enjoyment of the normal activities of life in
surroundings that are:
(1) Safe, secure and sanitary;
(2) Free from crimes and criminal activity, noise, nuisances or annoyances; and
(3) Free from reasonable fears about safety of persons and security of property.
Further, it is the intent of this Article to regulate and provide for the inspections of rental
housing to assure that such housing does not become a nuisance or blight to the
neighborhood and does not create a disincentive to investment in the community.
This Article establishes standards that are applicable to all rental dwellings in the City. It
does not apply to the portion of a rental dwelling that is occupied by a personal owner or
relatives of the personal owner.
Finally, the City Council finds that repeated police calls to certain rental dwellings in the
City occupied by persons with criminal histories have taxed law enforcement resources.
The City Council also finds that persons residing in rental dwelling who engage in
disorderly conduct or cause nuisance conditions create a hostile environment for others
living in close proximity, thereby threatening the public safety. In order to preserve and
protect the City’s neighborhoods and to promote public safety, the City Council enacts a
Crime Free Rental Program into the City Code.
Section 48-41. Definitions.
The following definitions, and those contained in Article I will be used in interpreting and
enforcing this Article.
Agent. A person designated by the Owner of a rental property to act on behalf of the Owner.
City. The City of Anoka, Minnesota.
Disorderly Conduct. For the purposes of this section, disorderly conduct may include, but is not
limited to the following:
1. Drug related illegal activity.
2. Acts of violence or threats of violence including but not limited to, discharge of firearms,
intimidation or any other act that otherwise jeopardizes the health, safety, or welfare of
the owner, manage, agent, other tenants, tenant’s family members, guests or neighboring
property owners.
3. Creating, or allowing to continue, any hazardous or physically offensive condition which
serves no legitimate purpose.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48;ARTICLE II
4. Repeated unfounded calls to police.
5. Violation of M.S. § 609.72 (Disorderly conduct), as it may be amended from time to
time.
6. Violation of M.S. §§ 609.66, subd.1a, 609.67 or 624.713 (Unlawful use or possession of
a firearm or weapon), as they may be amended from time to time.
7. Violation of M.S. § 609.50 (Obstructing legal process), as it may be amended from time
to time.
8. Violation of M.S. § 609.74 and 609.745 (Public nuisance), as they may be amended from
time to time.
9. Violation of M.S. § 145A.02, subd. 17 (Public health nuisance), as it may be amended
from time to time.
10. Violation of M.S. § 609.321, 609.322, and 609.324, (Solicitation, inducement, and
promotion of prostitution, housing individuals engaged in prostitution) as they may be
amended from time to time.
11. Violation of M.S. § 609.282, 609.283, 609.284, (Labor and sex trafficking crimes), as
they may be amended from time to time.
12. Violation of M.S. § 609.33, relating to owning, leasing, operating, managing, maintaining
or conducting a disorderly house or inviting or attempting to invite others to visit or
remain in a disorderly house.
13. Violation of M.S. § 609.713, (Threats of violence), as they may be amended from time to
time.
14. Violation of M.S. § 609.715, (Unlawful Assembly), as it may be amended from time to
time.
15. Violation of M.S. § 609.71, (Riot), as it may be amended from time to time.
16. Violation of Chapter 10 of the Anoka City Code pertaining to restrictions on animals.
17. Violation of Anoka City Code 38.1 (Unreasonable Noise).
18. Violation of Anoka City Code 42.65 (Social Host).
10 Violation of Anoka City Code 46.-61 (Firearms Discharge).
Drug Related Illegal Activity. Means the illegal possession or constructive possession,
manufacture, sale, distribution, purchase, use or possession with intent to manufacture, sell, or
distribute a controlled substance as defined in the Controlled Substance Act [21 U.S.C. 802], or
possession of drug paraphernalia per Minnesota Statutes.
Licensee. A person, firm or corporation that obtains a rental license from the City. For the
purposes of this Article, “Licensee” and “Property Owner” may be considered one-in-the-same,
and the terms “Licensee” and “Property Owner” may be used interchangeably when it makes
sense to do so.
Major Life/Safety Issues. Hazardous conditions that pose a risk to the life and safety of occupants
including, but not limited to, faulty or malfunctioning smoke detectors, handrails, guardrails and
egress.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48;ARTICLE II
Nuisance call. Any instance where law enforcement officers are called to a property in response
to a valid complaint related to disorderly conduct.
Rental Lease. A written contract between an owner, agent, or manager and a tenant(s), whereby
the tenant makes rent payments or other form of compensation in order to occupy the rental
dwelling. The rental lease also includes language that relates to the obligations of both parties to
the contract and has the same meaning as a rental agreement.
Rental License. A permit granted by the City that grants the property owner the right to rent.
Tenant(s). A person or persons who rent a rental dwelling.
Valid complaint. A violation that is visible at the time of inspection or proven by credible,
substantial evidence to the satisfaction of the City.
Meaning of certain words. Wherever the terms “dwelling,” “dwelling unit,” “premises,” and
“structure,” are used in this Article, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the
words “or any part thereof”.
Section 48-42. License Required.
(a) License. No person, firm or corporation shall operate a rental dwelling unit without first
having obtained a license to do so from the City as provided for in this Article. Each
license shall be issued triennially and expire on December 31st, three (3) years following
the issuance thereof. License renewal applications for the following three (3) years shall
be filed on or before November 1st of the year prior to the license expiring. On or before
October 1st, the City shall notify the operator of the upcoming November 1st deadline
within which to file the License renewal application by November 1st.
(b) Exceptions from rental licensing.
(1) Rental property which is licensed as a Nursing Home, Assisted Living, or
Boarding Care home by the State of Minnesota Department of Health shall be
exempt from the license required under this Article. This exception shall not
apply if no services are provided to the occupants, or the services are incidental
to, or independent of, the landlord/occupant relationship. Notwithstanding the
licensure requirements of such facilities, said facilities must register with the
City.
(2) State licensed residential facilities that do not provide overnight residential
services. Notwithstanding the licensure requirements of such facilities, said
facilities must register with the City.
(3) A single family dwelling or a dwelling unit in a duplex occupied by a Property
Owner for a minimum of six (6) consecutive months per calendar year.
(4) A residential property owned by a ‘snowbird’ where the property is rented to
another person for a period of less than 120 consecutive days while the Owner is
residing out of the State of Minnesota. The Property Owner must occupy the
property during the remainder of the year.
(5) Unoccupied dwelling units that have been issued a vacant building registration.
(6) A single family residential property that has been sold on a contract for deed or
has been sold as "rent to own" so long as the purchaser occupies the property
and the sale document used to memorialize the sale is in the form of a uniform
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48;ARTICLE II
conveyancing blank or is recorded with the Anoka County Recorder’s office and
a copy is provided to the City upon request.
(7) A single family residential property that is occupied by the Owner and two or
less occupants where the Owner and the occupants share all living space within
the dwelling.
(8) Single family residential property that is owned by a member of the armed
services who is on active duty and the property is rented to another person
during the time of active duty. The Owner must provide the City with a copy of
the Owner’s military orders and must occupy the property when not on active
duty as the Owner’s primary residence.
(c) Owner/Manager Training Required. Prior to receiving or renewing a license, Operators
of rental dwellings must attend, at a minimum, the Phase I crime-free housing
educational course or similar course as approved by the City Manager, designated
employee, or agent, as a condition of receiving or renewing a license. The cost of
attending the educational requirements under this section shall be paid by the Operator, in
addition to any license and inspection fees. The City may require an Operator to reattend
the course if their rental property produces nuisance calls in a number that would
violate this Article or if repeated criminal activity is documented at the property. The
City may allow an Operator to attend the course within six (6) months of receiving or
renewing a license, provided that the Operator submit documentation of course
registration for a date within the following six (6) months.
Section 48-43. Rental Density for Detached Single-Family Rental Dwellings.
(a) Purpose. The limitation of rental licenses issued to detached single family residential
dwelling units located on single family lots.
(b) In any R-1, R-2, R-3- R-4, MS Zoning District, no more than 10% of the singlefamily
lots on any block shall be eligible to obtain a rental license, unless a
temporary license is granted by the City Council as provided herein. Table 1
indicates how many single-family lots per block are able to be licensed as a rental
property based on the number of lots that exist in a block.
Table 1
Lots/Block Rental Units Allowed
1-14 1
15-24 2
25-34 3
35-44 4
45-54 5
55-64 6
65-74 7
75-84 8
85-94 9
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48;ARTICLE II
(c) The following guidelines shall apply to determine eligible blocks and lots.
(1) For the purposes of this section, a block shall be defined as an area of land
enclosed within the perimeter of streets, watercourses, public parks,
municipally owned lots and city boundaries and further defined by an official
map maintained by the City.
(2) This section shall apply to legally conforming lots of record and legally
nonconforming lots of record. For the purposes of this section, lots of record
may also be referred to as properties, property or lots.
(3) If a block contains more than one type of zoning district, only R-1, R-2, R-3,
R-4, MS Zoning District lots shall be included in the calculation of the total
number of lots per block.
(4) Business/Commercial, Institutional, Industrial uses located in an R-1, R-2, R-
3, R-4, MS Zoning District shall not be included in the calculation of the total
number of lots per block.
(d) If the number of rental properties meets or exceeds the permitted number of rental
properties per defined block on the effective date of this section, no additional rental
licenses shall be approved for the block, unless a temporary license is granted by the
City Council as provided herein. Existing rental licenses may be renewed; however,
should a rental license not be renewed, terminated due to the sale of a property by the
current license holder, transfer of property ownership occurs, or if the rental license
is revoked or lapses, the rental license shall not be reinstated unless it is in
conformance with this section and other applicable sections of the city code.
(e) If the number of rental properties meets or exceeds the permitted number of rental
properties per defined block on the effective date of this section, a property owner
may request a temporary license to allow an additional rental property for that block.
The City Council may grant or deny a temporary license in its sole discretion.
Circumstances justifying consideration of a temporary license may include such
situations as the homeowner’s deployment for military purposes or temporary
relocation out of state for employment related reasons, where the homeowner’s
absence from the state is expected to last for at least one (1) year. Persons requesting
a temporary license must make an annual application to the City. No property owner
shall hold a temporary rental license for the same property for more than two
consecutive years, and it is expected that the homeowner will reestablish their
residency in the property upon the termination of the temporary license.
(f) For the purposes of this Section, sober house licenses issued to single family homes
pursuant to City Code Chapter 48, Article VI, Section 48-143 shall be considered a rental
dwelling license when determining the number of eligible licenses available per block as
regulated by this Section. If the number of licensed rental properties meets or exceeds
the permitted number of rental properties per defined block, no additional sober house
licenses shall be approved for the block.
Section 48-44. Application for License.
(a) The rental Property Owner or the Owner’s designated agent shall submit a written
application for a rental license on forms provided by the City.
(b) Prior to issuance or renewal of a rental license, the following information shall be
submitted:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48;ARTICLE II
(1) Name, address, email address, and phone number of the Property Owner.
(2) Name, address, email address, and phone number of the Property Manager if
different from the property owner.
(3) Name, address, email address, and phone number of the designated agent.
(4) The street address and property identification number of the property.
(5) Description of the number of units and number of bedrooms in each unit offered
for rent.
(6) An acknowledgement that the Owner or designated agent has received a copy of
this Ordinance.
(7) A description of the procedure through which occupant inquiries and complaints
are to be processed.
(8) Certification to the City that there are no delinquent utility fees due upon the
parcel of land to which the rental housing license application relates.
(9) A blank copy of any written lease to be used for occupants including the
following lease addendums:
a. Crime Free/Drug Free Addendum.
b. Lead Free informational materials for pre-1978 properties, including all
information as may be required by Federal law.
(10) Documentation showing that criminal background checks are conducted on
prospective occupants prior to letting of a property.
Section 48-45. Agent Required.
Any Property Owner who does not live in the state shall appoint, on the license application, an
agent residing within fifty (50) miles of the rental property upon whom the City may serve notices
pertaining to the licensed dwelling unit(s).
Section 48-46. Initial License Issuance.
No license shall be issued under this Ordinance unless the rental dwelling and its premises
conform to the Ordinances of the City and laws of the State. An inspection of the dwelling unit
shall be conducted prior to issuance of an initial rental license.
Section 48-47. Renewal of License.
(a) All renewed and new rental licenses shall be valid for a period of up to three (3) years.
(b) All rental license renewal applications and required fees shall be submitted to the City on
a triennial basis and prior to the issuance of a renewed rental license.
(c) Information on the rental license renewal form must be updated to reflect current
conditions.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48;ARTICLE II
(d) No license shall be renewed under this Ordinance unless the rental dwelling and its
premises conform to the Ordinances of the City and laws of the State. An inspection of
the dwelling unit may be conducted prior to issuance of a renewed rental license.
Section 48-48. Transfer of License.
A rental license is nontransferable and shall automatically terminate within thirty (30) days of
closing on the sale of the licensed building unless, within thirty (30) days of said closing, the new
Owner applies for and is granted a rental license for said building in accordance with this Article.
Section 48-49. Inspections of Dwellings – generally.
(a) New licenses. Upon receipt of a properly executed new application for licensing and
receipt of the appropriate fee, the Property Maintenance Coordinator or his/her designee
shall conduct an initial inspection of the premises to assure compliance with the City
Code.
(b) License renewal. Any rental dwelling may be re-inspected after a renewal application is
filed to determine compliance. The Property Maintenance Coordinator, or his/her
designee, at his/her discretion, may determine that a renewal inspection of a premise may
be deferred based on results of previous inspections, in conjunction with criteria and
processes as established by the Property Maintenance Coordinator and approved by the
City Manager. Previous inspections must indicate the premise (1) has not received notice
of City Code violations for property maintenance; (2) meets or exceeds rental compliance
criteria; and (3) has not required corrections for major life/safety issues.
(c) Additional inspections. The City shall inspect every rental unit at least once every three
(3) years. The City may inspect any rental unit if it falls within one or more of the
following criteria:
(1) The unit has been abandoned by the Owner or the Owner of such unit cannot be
found.
(2) Water, gas, or electric services to such unit has been discontinued as a result of
nonpayment for more than 30 continuous days.
(3) The unit is on a parcel of land that is on the County’s delinquent tax list.
(4) The City has probable cause to believe that there exists within such unit one or
more violations of the requirements of this Chapter.
(5) The property owner of the rental unit has, within the preceding six (6) months,
renewed a license after suspension or revocation.
(6) The unit is the subject of a pending notice of the City’s intent to suspend or
revoke the rental license.
(7) An occupant or neighboring Property Owner files a formal complaint with the
City relative to the condition of the unit or premises.
(8) The unit has not been inspected in the preceding three (3) years.
(d) Access for Inspections.
(1) The Property Maintenance Coordinator, or his/her designee, shall be authorized
to make or cause to be made inspections to determine the condition of dwellings,
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48;ARTICLE II
multiple dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units, and premises
in order to safeguard the health, safety, morals, and welfare of the public.
(2) The Property Maintenance Coordinator, or his/her designee, shall be authorized
to enter any dwelling, multiple dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming
unit, or premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of performing his/her
duties under this Article.
(3) The owner, operator, or occupant of every dwelling, multiple dwelling, dwelling
unit, rooming house, rooming unit, and premises, or the person in charge
thereof, shall give the Property Maintenance Coordinator, or his/her designee,
free access to such dwelling, multiple dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house,
rooming unit and premises on which it is located at all reasonable times for the
purpose of such inspection, examination and survey.
(e) Refusal of access for inspection. If the owner, operator, person in charge, or occupant
shall refuse to consent to the inspection, an administrative search warrant may be
obtained:
(1) Where there is probable cause to believe a violation exists within the particular
structure; or
(2) Where a determination has been made to conduct periodic inspections of certain
areas of the City to assure ongoing compliance with this Chapter relative to
major life/safety issues.
(f) Emergency Conditions. No administrative search warrant is needed where an emergency
condition exists which endangers persons or property and insufficient time is available to
obtain the warrant and protect such endangered persons or property.
(g) Police and Fire Access. The owner of any multi-family rental property shall install police
and fire lock boxes near exterior entrance doors. This requirement shall only apply to
multi-family properties that are required by the Chapter to maintain security systems on
building entrances.
(h) Subject to Occupant’s Right to Privacy. Entry under this Section is subject to Minnesota
Statutes, Section 504B.211 (Residential Tenant’s Right to Privacy) as amended.
(i) Costs of Obtaining Warrant. If the City finds it necessary to obtain an administrative
search warrant to enter the property for inspection due to the Property Owner, operator,
person in charge, or occupant’s lack of cooperation, said person or persons may also be
charged with all costs of obtaining the warrant, including court costs and attorney’s fees.
Section 48-50. License Suspension, Revocation, Denial and Non-Renewal.
(a) Process for consideration of license suspension, revocation, denial or non-renewal.
(1) No action will be taken by the City Council to revoke, suspend, deny, or not
renew a rental license without a public hearing and written notice of that hearing
is sent to the property owner and affected occupants a minimum of ten (10) days
prior to the hearing.
(2) The Council shall give due regard to the frequency and seriousness of the
violations, the ease with which such violations could have been cured or avoided
and good faith efforts to comply.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48;ARTICLE II
(3) The Council shall issue a decision to revoke, suspend, deny or not renew a rental
license only upon written findings.
(4) Upon a decision to revoke, suspend, deny or not renew a license, no new
application for the same facility will be accepted for a period of time specified in
the Council’s written decision, not exceeding one (1) year. Such new
applications shall be accompanied by a reinstatement fee as required by this
Article.
(5) The Council may suspend, revoke, deny or not renew a license for part or all of
a facility.
(6) A written decision to revoke, suspend, deny or not renew a license or application
for part of a facility shall specify the part or parts of the facility to which it
applies. Thereafter, and until a license is reissued or reinstated, no rental units
becoming vacant in such part or parts of the facility may be re-let or occupied.
a. Revocation, suspension, denial or non-renewal of a license shall not
excuse the owner from compliance with all terms of this Article for as
long as any units in the facility are occupied.
b. Failure to comply with all terms of this Article during the term of
revocation, suspension, denial or non-renewal is a misdemeanor and
grounds for extension of the term of such revocation or suspension or
continuation of non-renewal, or for a decision not to reinstate the
license, notwithstanding any limitations on the period of suspension,
revocation, denial or non-renewal specified in the City Council’s
written decision.
(b) Suspension.
1. The City Council may suspend a rental license under the following
circumstances:
a. Failure to correct deficiencies noted in notices of violation within the
time specified in the notice.
b. Failure to pay any license, inspection or reinstatement fee required by
this Article.
c. Any other violation of the Building Code or the property maintenance,
zoning, environmental or utility chapters of the City Code.
d. Any specific provisions of the City ordinances that include suspension
as a remedy (i.e. nuisance calls, etc.).
2. Additional standards related to suspension of a rental license:
a. A reinstatement fee as established by the City Council shall be paid
prior to reinstatement of a rental license that has been suspended.
b. In addition to the reinstatement fee, the City may issue a citation for the
applicable violations.
c. While under suspension, the Property Owner cannot lease the affected
unit and/or facility to a new occupant.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48;ARTICLE II
d. The suspension shall be for a period of up to six (6) months unless
otherwise regulated by this Article.
(c) Revocation.
1. The City Council may revoke a rental license under the following
circumstances:
a. When a Property Owner has not complied with reinstatement criteria.
b. When it is found that a Property Owner has given false statements on
any application or other information or report required by this Article to
be given by the applicant or licensee.
c. When it has been determined through an inspection that major
life/safety issues exist on the property.
d. When the Property Owner or designated agent has been convicted of a
crime related to the type of business licensed and failure to show, by
competent evidence, rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the
duties of the business.
e. Operating or allowing the rental property to be used in such a manner
as to constitute a breach of the peace, a menace to health, safety and
welfare of the public or a disturbance of the peace or comfort of the
residents of the City, upon recommendation by the Police Chief.
f. Failure to schedule and/or allow rental or building inspections of the
licensed premises, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with rental
licensing requirements, City Code requirements, State building codes,
or other applicable State or Federal law.
g. Real estate or personal property taxes on the business have become
delinquent and the Property Owner and the applicant are the same
person or entity, or have any common ownership where they are a
different person or entity.
h. Failure to actively pursue the eviction of occupants who have violate d
the provisions of the Crime Free Lease Addendum.
i. Any specific provisions of the City Ordinances that include revocation
as a remedy (i.e. nuisance calls, etc.)
j. Other good cause as determined by the City Council.
2. Additional standards related to revocation of a rental license:
a. A reinstatement fee as established by the City Council shall be paid
prior to reinstatement of a rental license that has been revoked.
b. In addition to the reinstatement fee, the City may issue a citation for the
applicable violations.
c. While under revocation, the Property Owner cannot extend the lease of
an existing occupant and cannot lease the affected unit to a new
occupant.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48;ARTICLE II
d. The revocation shall be for a period of up to one (1) year.
Section 48-51. Display of License.
Licenses issued under this Article must be conspicuously posted in a frame with a transparent
cover in a public corridor or front entrance of rental dwellings with four or more units. All rental
Property Owners must produce a copy of the rental license upon demand of a prospective
occupant or City official.
Section 48-52. Fees.
(a) License Fees.
(1) Fees Established and Due Date. Rental license fees and reinstatement fees shall
be set by the City Council and shall be due with submission of a new or renewal
application. Upon request by the Property Owner, license fees may be rebated
on a pro-rated basis if a property ceases to operate as a rental dwelling before
the end of the license period.
(2) Filing Due Date and Penalty. If a renewal application is made less than sixty
(60) days before the beginning date of the renewal license period applied for,
then the fee shall be accompanied by an additional amount equal to one hundred
percent (100%) of such license fee. The additional amount shall be a penalty for
a late application. In no case shall there be a lapse in the license period.
(b) Reinspection Fees.
(1) An initial inspection shall be required at the time of application, the cost of
which shall be included in the license application fee. A reinspection to verify
compliance will be conducted at no charge. A fee, as set by the City Council,
may be charged for any subsequent reinspection necessitated by receipt of a
valid complaint or as a result of a previous unsatisfactory inspection.
(2) The reinspection fee shall be billed directly to the Owner or contact person/agent
of the property. Reinspection fees shall be increased by fifty percent (50%) to
cover administrative costs if not paid within thirty (30) days after initial billing.
Section 48-53. Tenant Background Checks and Roster.
As a condition of the license, the Licensee must, as a continuing obligation, conduct criminal
background checks on all prospective tenants and maintain a current roster of tenants and other
persons who have a lawful right to occupy the rental dwelling or rental dwelling units. If the
criminal background check results in the discovery of an active warrant, the Licensee must notify
the Anoka Police Department. The Licensee must designate the name of the person or persons
who will have possession of the roster and must promptly notify the Property Maintenance
Coordinator, or his/her designee, of any change in the identity, address or telephone numbers of
this person or persons. The roster must be available for inspection by City officials upon request.
If a person under investigation by the City claims a lawful right to occupy a rental dwelling unity
or be present on the rental property, the Property Maintenance Coordinator, or his/her designee,
may request to inspect the lease for the unit in which the person claims to reside. Upon such
request, the Licensee, or his/her designee, shall provide the lease for inspection.
Section 48-54. Conversion of a Single-Family Residential Property From Owner-Occupied to Rental.
(a) Conversion Fee. A one-time fee, in addition to the annual rental license fee, will be
charged for a single family dwelling or single family attached dwelling (townhouse) that
is converted from owner-occupied to rental property. A conversion fee will not be
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48;ARTICLE II
required for single-family rentals that are managed by a professional property
management company that is licensed by the City of Anoka. The City must be notified
of any change in management during the license term.
Section 48-55. Disorderly Conduct and Nuisance Police Calls for Service.
During the term of the rental license, and any re-licensure, whereby nuisance calls related to the
property occur in any consecutive twelve (12) month period following the first nuisance call, the
following shall apply:
(a) First Nuisance Call: Upon determination by the Police or Building Official that a rental
dwelling was the location in violation, the property owner or agent may be notified of the
violation.
(b) Second Nuisance Call: If a second instance of disorderly conduct or nuisance conditions
occur at the same unit, the property owner or agent will be notified of the violation.
(c) Third Nuisance Call. Upon a third nuisance call, the property owner will be notified of
the violation. Notification may occur through acknowledged email correspondence or
by mail, with a copy to the occupant. The property owner must respond within ten (10)
days from the date of the letter with a written report of actions taken to abate further
nuisances on the property. If the Property Owner fails to respond, the Property Owner
will be assessed a nuisance fee.
(d) Fourth Nuisance Call. Upon a fourth nuisance call, or if the nuisance fee is not paid from
the third call within ten (10) days of being issued, the City Council may consider
suspension of the rental license.
(1) If the City Council suspends the rental license, the Property Owner must pay a
reinstatement fee as established by the City Council.
(2) The suspension may be for a period of up to three (3) months.
(e) Additional Nuisance Call. If another nuisance call occurs, following the action taken in
subpart (c), the City Council may consider revocation of the license.
(1) The revocation may be for a period of up to one (1) year.
(f) The nuisance fee shall be as established by the City Council.
(g) For purposes of this Section, second, third and subsequent nuisance calls shall be those
which:
(1) Occur at the same rental dwelling unit; or
(2) Involve occupants at the same rental dwelling unit; or
(3) Involve guests or invitees at the same rental dwelling unit; or
(4) Involve guests or invitees of the same occupant; or
(5) Involve the same occupant.
(h) Postponing License Action. No adverse license action shall be imposed where:
(1) the nuisance calls occurred during pending eviction proceedings (unlawful
detainer) or within thirty (30) days of notice given by the Licensee to an
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48;ARTICLE II
occupant to vacate the rental dwelling unit. However, adverse license action
may proceed when the Licensee fails to diligently purse the eviction process; or
(2) the calls are placed by a residential occupant for police or emergency assistance
in response to medical calls, domestic abuse or any other conduct.
(i) An action to deny, revoke, suspend, or not renew a license based upon violation of this
section may be postponed or discontinued at any time if it appears that the Licensee has
taken appropriate measures which will prevent further nuisance calls.
Section 48-56. Trash Removal for Rental Properties.
(a) Rental properties must have regularly scheduled recycling and trash pick-up.
(b) If the trash and/or recycling has not been removed within seven (7) days of the normally
scheduled pick-up, the trash will be removed under emergency abatement procedures.
(c) If the lack of trash and/or recycling removal becomes a recurring problem, refuse service
will be authorized by the City and will be assessed on the property’s utility bill.
Section 48-57. No Retaliation.
No Licensee shall evict, threaten to evict, or take any other punitive action against any occupant
who, by reason of good faith, calls City officials related to public safety or property maintenance
concerns. This Section shall not prohibit the eviction of occupants from a rental dwelling for
unlawful conduct of an occupant or invitee for violations of any rules, regulations, or lease terms
other than a prohibition against contacting City officials.
Section 48-58. Summary Action.
When the conduct of any Licensee or their agent, representative, employee or lessee or the
condition of their dwelling is detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare as to
constitute a nuisance, fire hazard, or other unsafe or dangerous condition and thus give rise to an
emergency, the City shall have the authority to summarily condemn or post for no occupancy such
area of the rental dwelling.
Section 48-59. Severability Clause.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Article is for any reason held to be
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Article.
Section 48-60. Violations and Penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this Article is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Minnesota Statutes.
Sections 48-61 through 48-69. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48;ARTICLE IV
1 of 3
CHAPTER 48. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS
ARTICLE IV Condition of Premises
Section 48-100. Causes of Blight or Blighting Factors.
(a) It is hereby determined that the uses, structures and activities and abuses of blight or
blighting factors described in this article, if allowed to exist, will tend to result in
blighted and undesirable neighborhoods so as to be harmful to the public welfare,
health and safety. No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained any of these
causes of blight or blighting factors upon any property in the city owned, leased, rented
or occupied by such person.
(1) In any area, the storage or accumulation of junk motor vehicles, trash, junk,
rubbish, or refuse of any kind; is prohibited.
For the purpose of this section, the term "junk" shall include parts of
machinery or parts of motor vehicles; unused stoves or other appliances stored
in the open; remnants of wood; decayed, weathered, or broken construction
materials no longer suitable for safe, approved building materials; metal or any
other material or cast off material of any kind whether or not the same could
be put to any reasonable use.
For the purpose of this section, the term "junk motor vehicle" shall include
any automobile, snowmobile, truck, motorcycle, or any motor vehicle as
defined in Minnesota Statute 169.01, Subdivision 3, part of a motor vehicle or
former motor vehicle stored in the open which is (1) unusable or inoperable
because of lack of or defects in component parts; (2) unusable or inoperable
because of damage from collision, deterioration, or having been cannibalized;
(3) beyond repair, and, therefore, not intended for future use as a motor
vehicle; or (4) being retained on the property for possible use of salvageable
parts; or (5) is not properly and currently licensed within the State of
Minnesota..
(2) In any area the existence of any structure or part of any structure which
because of fire, wind, or other natural disaster, or physical deterioration is no
longer habitable as a dwelling, nor useful for any other purpose for which it
may have been intended.
(3) In any area, the existence of any vacant dwelling, garage or other out-building,
unless such buildings are kept securely locked, windows kept glazed or neatly
boarded up and otherwise protected to prevent entrance thereto by vandals.
(4) In any area the existence of any noxious or poisonous vegetation such as
poison ivy, ragweed or other poisonous plants, or any weeds, grass, brush or
plants, which are a fire hazard or otherwise detrimental to the health or
appearance of the neighborhood.
Section 48-101. Outdoor Storage.
(a) In any area zoned as a residential district (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5) or in any other
zone on a lot which is occupied by a dwelling unit all personal property shall be stored
within a building, or within a rear yard, shall be screened with vegetation or a fence to
serve as a buffer between adjoining properties and public streets.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48;ARTICLE IV
2 of 3
(1) For the purpose of this section, the term "outdoor storage" shall include, but
not be limited to the following items; toys, bikes, bike/skate ramps, canoes,
paddleboats, fishing boats, truck toppers, snowmobiles, fish houses,
lawnmowers, snow blowers, lawn/garden equipment, hunting blinds/stands, 4-
wheelers and ATV’s.
(2) Items stored within the rear yard shall be stored at a minimum of five (5) feet
from the property line.
(3) Outdoor storage of the following items shall be limited to two (2) in number
and such items shall not be stored in the same location for a period of more
than one (1) year; canoes, paddleboats, fishing boats, truck toppers,
snowmobiles, fish houses, lawnmowers, snow blowers, hunting blinds/stands,
4-wheelers and ATV’s.
(4) Outdoor storage shall be permitted in the front and side yards during times of
use, not to exceed a period of 48 hours.
(5) The following items are exempt from the foregoing outdoor storage
prohibitions;
a. clothesline poles and lines
b. patio furniture
c. barbecue grills
d. permanent recreational equipment
e. ornamental yard enhancements (landscaping, light poles, trellises,
benches designed for exterior use and other permanent improvements
designed to enhance the appearance of the yard),
f. trampolines
g. construction and landscaping material, which shall be consumed or
used on the property within thirty (30) days of initial storage and kept
in a neat, workman like pile, stacked a minimum of four (4) inches
above ground surface.
(6) Stacked firewood is permitted in the side or rear yard a minimum for five (5)
feet from the property line, stacked a minimum of four (4) includes above
ground surface, and the stack shall be no higher than six (6) feet.
(7) All stored vehicles and recreation equipment shall be currently licensed as
required by Minnesota State Statutes.
(8) Carports must be attached to the dwelling or garage. If the carport consists of
one or more sides (excluding the common wall of the carport and house or
garage), each side shall be constructed of materials that are similar or
complementary to the building that the carport is attached to (fabric or tart-like
material is not permitted). The carport shall be used only for stored vehicles,
trailers, and recreational equipment.
Section 48-102. Notice to Remove Violations, Effect of Failure to Comply with Notice.
(a) The owner and occupant of any property upon which any of the causes of blight or
blighted factors set forth in this Chapter is found to exist shall be notified in accordance
with Chapter 1, Article II. Failure to comply with such notification shall be processed
according to Chapter 1, Article II.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48;ARTICLE IV
3 of 3
Section 48-103. Removal of Weeds, etc., by City.
(a) In case of failure to remove any blight as defined in this Chapter, within the time
prescribed, the City Manager may order the appropriate employee(s) to cut down and
remove or otherwise destroy all such noxious, inflammable or detrimental vegetation;
and in case of failure to remove junk, trash, rubbish or refuse as defined in this
Chapter, the City Manager may order the appropriate employee(s) to remove and
dispose of such junk, trash, rubbish or refuse; and in each of the foregoing instances
the cost of the work shall be certified to the City Assessor, who shall certify such cost
to the County Auditor as a special assessment against the property involved for
collection in the same manner as other special assessments. As an additional or
alternative remedy, the owners of any interest in the land and the occupant shall be
jointly and severally liable for such costs and the costs shall be recoverable in any
action brought against any of them in the name of the City.
Section 48-104. Violations and Penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this Article is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be subject to the penalties set forth in the Minnesota Statutes.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48; ARTICLE VI
1 of 6
CHAPTER 48. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS
Article VI. Sober House Licensing.
Section 48-141. Purpose and Intent.
It is the purpose of this Article to assure that sober housing in the City of Anoka is habitable, safe,
and sanitary and is so operated and maintained as not to detract from the neighborhood or to
become an influence that fosters blight and deterioration or creates a disincentive to reinvestment in
the community.
It is the intent of this Article to establish uniform standards that are applicable to all sober house
dwellings in the City.
To the extent not otherwise inconsistent with this Article, Chapter 48, Article II of the City of
Anoka City Code shall be applicable to sober houses. Any inconsistencies between Article II and
this Article shall be resolved in favor of this Article.
Section 48-142. Definitions.
The definitions contained in Article I, of this Chapter apply herein. Additionally, the following
definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this Article.
Agent. A person designated by the owner of a sober house to act on behalf of the owner.
Multiple Dwelling. A building or portion thereof containing three or more dwelling units.
Rooming House. A residence unit or any part thereof containing one or more rooming units in
which space is let by the owner or operator to three or more persons.
Sober House. A dwelling unit occupied by a group of not more than four (4) unrelated individuals,
unless a reasonable accommodation allowing more than 4 unrelated individuals to occupy a
dwelling unit is granted, all of whom are in recovery from chemical dependency and considered
disabled under the Federal Fair Housing Act Amendments of 1988 wherein the dwelling unit
provides a non-institutional residential environment in which the occupants willingly subject
themselves to rules and conditions intended to encourage and sustain their recovery. The residents
of a sober house are similar to a family unit and share kitchen and bathroom facilities and other
common areas of the unit. Sober houses are financially self-supporting. This definition does not
include facilities that receive operating revenue from governmental sources or those that provide
on-site supportive services to residents, including but not limited to the following: mental health
services; clinical rehabilitation services, social services; legal services; medical, dental, nutritional,
and other health care services; financial management services; legal services; vocational services;
and other similar supportive services.
Section 48-143. License Required.
No person, firm or corporation shall allow the use of a sober house in the City until a license has
been applied for and issued by the City of Anoka. Any sober houses existing prior to the adoption
of this Article must also follow and abide by the requirements set forth in this Article. A license is
not required for those entities that are licensed by State or County government agencies affording
the same safeguards and protections as set forth in this article.
Section 48-144. Application for License.
Applications for a sober house license shall be made in writing to the City by the owner of the
sober house dwelling unit(s) or his/her designated agent. Prior to issuance or renewal of a sober
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48; ARTICLE VI
2 of 6
house license, the owner shall submit a completed application to the Planning Department, pay an
application fee as determined by City Council, and comply with all inspection requirements.
(a) The following persons shall be authorized to sign and submit a sober house license
application.
(1) If the owner is a natural person, by the owner thereof.
(2) If the owner is a corporation, by an officer thereof.
(3) If the owner is a partnership, by a partner thereof.
(b) Before any license required by this Article shall be issued or renewed, the owner shall
submit the following information on forms provided by the City:
(1) Name, address and phone number of the property owner.
(2) Name, address and phone number of the property manager if different from the
property owner.
(3) Name, address and phone number of the designated agent (if applicable).
(4) The street address and property identification number of the property.
(5) Description of the number of units and number of bedrooms in each unit.
(6) An acknowledgement that the owner or designated agent has received a copy of
this ordinance.
(7) A management plan for the facility found to be acceptable by the City to ensure
the legitimacy of the sober house.
(8) A floor plan showing dimensions and locations of bedrooms, common areas,
kitchen, bathrooms, exits and any other rooms requested by the Property
Maintenance Coordinator.
(9) A Crime Free/Drug Free Lease Addendum signed by and applicable to all
occupants of the Sober House.
Section 48-145. Inspections of Dwellings – generally.
Upon receipt of a properly executed application for licensing and receipt of the appropriate fee, the
property maintenance coordinator or his/her designee shall complete an initial inspection of the
premises to determine whether the property is in compliance with this Chapter. Any sober house
dwelling may be re-inspected after a renewal application or transfer of license is filed to determine
compliance. The property maintenance coordinator or his/her designee shall further have the right
to re-inspect the premises at any time it is deemed necessary to assure compliance with this
Chapter.
(a) The property maintenance coordinator or his/her designee shall be authorized to make or
cause to be made inspections to determine the condition of dwellings, multiple dwellings,
dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units, and premises in order to safeguard the
health, safety, morals, and welfare of the public. The property maintenance coordinator,
or his/her designee, shall be authorized to enter any dwelling, multiple dwelling, dwelling
unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of
performing his/her duties under this Article. The owner, operator, or occupant of every
dwelling, multiple dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, and premises, or
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48; ARTICLE VI
3 of 6
the person in charge thereof, shall give the property maintenance coordinator or his/her
designee free access to such dwelling, multiple dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house,
rooming unit and premises on which it is located at all reasonable times for the purpose of
such inspection, examination and survey.
(b) If the owner, operator, person in charge, or occupant shall refuse to consent to the
inspection, a search warrant may be obtained. If the City finds it necessary to obtain an
administrative search warrant to enter the property for inspection due to the owner,
operator, person in charge or occupant’s lack of cooperation, said person or persons may
also be charged with all costs of obtaining the warrant including court costs and attorney’s
fees.
(c) No warrant is needed where an emergency condition exists which endangers persons or
property and insufficient time is available to obtain a warrant and protect such endangered
persons or property.
(d) Entry under this Section is subject to Minnesota Statutes, Section 504B.211 (Residential
tenant’s right to privacy) as amended.
Section 48-146. Agent Required.
Any property owner who does not live in the state shall appoint, on the license application, an agent
residing within the State of Minnesota upon which agent the City may serve notices pertaining to
the administration of this Article or any provisions of the City Code pertaining to such dwelling
unit.
Section 48-147. Length and Renewal of License.
The license period shall commence upon issuance of the license. A sober house license shall be
issued for a period of one (1) year.
Section 48-148. Transfer of License.
A sober house license is transferable to any person who has actually acquired legal ownership of a
licensed building for the unexpired portion of the term for which it was issued or reissued;
provided, that the application to transfer such registration is filed with the City within thirty (30)
days of closing and the transferee is not disqualified from holding a license due to prior revocation,
suspension, or denial of a sober house license. The sober house license shall terminate upon failure
to apply for its transfer within thirty (30) days of closing.
Section 48-149. License Suspension, Revocation, Denial and Non-Renewal.
(a) The City Council may revoke, suspend, deny or decline to renew any sober house license
issued under this Article upon any of the following grounds:
(1) False statements on any application or other information or report required by this
Article to be given by the applicant or licensee.
(2) Failure to pay any license or reinstatement fee required by this Article.
(3) Failure to correct deficiencies noted in notices of violation in the time specified in
the notice.
(4) Any other violation of the property maintenance, zoning, environmental, and
utility chapters of City Code.
(b) No action will be taken by the City Council to revoke, suspend, deny, or decline renewal
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48; ARTICLE VI
4 of 6
of a sober house license without a public hearing and written notice of that hearing is sent
to the property owner, agent, and affected tenants a minimum of ten days prior to the
hearing.
(c) The City Council shall give due regard to the frequency and seriousness of the violations,
the ease with which such violations could have been cured or avoided, and good faith
efforts to comply and shall issue a decision to revoke, suspend, deny, or decline renewal of
a license only upon written findings.
(d) The City Council may revoke, suspend, deny or decline renewal of a license for part or all
of a facility.
(e) Upon a decision to revoke, suspend, deny or decline renewal of a license, no new
application for the same facility will be accepted for a period of time as specified in the
City Council’s written decision, which time shall not exceed one year. All new
applications shall be accompanied by a reinstatement fee as required by this Article.
(f) A written decision to revoke, suspend, deny or decline renewal of a license or application
shall specify the part or parts of the facility to which it applies. Thereafter, and until a
license is reissued or reinstated, no units becoming vacant in such part or parts of the
facility may be re-let or occupied. Revocation, suspension, denial or non-renewal of a
license shall not excuse the owner from compliance with all terms of this Article for as
long as any units in the facility are occupied. Failure to comply with all terms of this
Article during the term of revocation, suspension, denial or non-renewal is a misdemeanor
and grounds for an extension of the term of such revocation, suspension, or non-renewal,
or for a decision not to reinstate the license, notwithstanding any limitations on the period
of suspension, revocation, denial or non-renewal specified in the City Council’s written
decision or in paragraph (e) of this Section.
Section 48-150. Display of License.
Licenses issued under this Article must be displayed on the premises of sober house dwellings. All
property owners must produce a copy of the sober house license upon demand of a prospective
tenant or City official.
Section 48-151. Fees.
Sober house license fees and reinstatement fees are to be determined by the City Council.
Section 48-152. No Retaliation.
No licensee shall evict, threaten to evict, or take any other punitive action against any tenant who,
by reason of good faith, calls City officials related to public safety or property maintenance
concerns. This Section shall not prohibit the evection of tenants from a sober house dwelling for
unlawful conduct of a tenant or invitee for violations of any rules, regulations, or lease terms other
than a prohibition against contacting City officials.
Section 48-153. Summary Action.
When the conduct of any license holder or their agent, representative, employee or lessee or the
condition of their dwelling is detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare as to
constitute a nuisance, fire hazard, or other unsafe or dangerous condition and thus give rise to an
emergency, the City shall have the authority to summarily condemn or post for no occupancy such
area of the rental dwelling.
Section 48-154. Severability Clause.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48; ARTICLE VI
5 of 6
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Article is for any reason held to be
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Article.
Section 48-155. Violations and Penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this Article is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Minnesota Statutes.
Sections 48-156. Reasonable Accommodations.
It is the policy of the City, pursuant to the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, to
provide reasonable accommodations in the application of its zoning regulations for persons with
disabilities seeking fair and equal access to housing. Reasonable accommodation means providing
an individual with a disability or developers of housing for an individual with a disability flexibility
in the application of land use and zoning regulations or policies, including the modification or
waiver of certain requirements, when it is necessary to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities.
The purpose of this subdivision is to establish a process for making and acting upon requests to
reasonable accommodation.
(a) Any person who requests reasonable accommodation in the form of modification in the
application of a zoning regulation which may act as a barrier to fair housing opportunities
due to the disability of existing or proposed residents may do so on an application form
provided by the City. “Person” includes any individual with a disability, his or her
representative or a developer or provider of housing for an individual, with a disability.
The application shall include a detailed explanation of why the modification is reasonably
necessary to make the specific housing available to the person(s), including information
establishing that the applicant is disabled under applicable laws, as well as other
information required by the City to make the determination. If the project for which the
request is being made also requires an additional land use review or approval, the
applicant shall file the request concurrently with the land use review.
(b) The City shall review the request and make a recommendation to the City Council. The
request shall be evaluated under the following factors:
1. Whether there is a qualifying disability;
2. Whether the request if needed to allow a disabled person equal opportunity to use
and enjoy a dwelling or to live in a particular neighborhood as a person without
disabilities;
3. Whether the request is reasonable, considering the potential impact on
surrounding uses, the extent to which the accommodation meets the stated need,
and other alternative that may meet that need;
4. Whether the request would constitute a fundamental alternation of the City’s
regulations, policies, or procedures;
5. Whether the request would impose an undue financial or administrative burden
on the City; and
6. Any other factor that may have a bearing on request, as determined by the City.
(d) The City Council shall consider the request following receipt of the recommendation of
the City staff. Notice of the meeting at which the City Council will evaluate the request
shall be mailed at least 10 days before the meeting to the owner of all properties located
within 350 feet of the property subject to the request.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 48; ARTICLE VI
6 of 6
(e) An approved request is granted only to an individual and does not run with the land unless
the City determines that the accommodation is physically integrated into the residential
structure and cannot easily be removed or altered or the accommodation is to be used by
another individual with a disability.
(f) No sober house granted a reasonable accommodation shall be located within 1,320 feet of
another sober house that has been granted a reasonable accommodation, as measured from
the property lines closest to one another.
Sections 48-157 through 48-175. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 48; ARTICLE VII
1 of 5
CHAPTER 48. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS
ARTICLE VII. Registration and Regulation of Foreclosed Property
Section 48-176. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to protect the public health, safety, and welfare by establishing a
program for the identification and registration of foreclosed properties and determine the
responsibilities of owners or agents of such properties and provides for administration,
enforcement, and penalties associated with the same.
Section 48-177. Findings.
Foreclosed properties have the potential to be a major cause and source of blight in residential and
non-residential neighborhoods, especially when the owner or responsible party of the building
fails to actively maintain and manage the property to ensure it does not become a liability to the
neighborhood. There is a substantial cost to the City for monitoring foreclosed properties. This
cost should not be borne by the general taxpayers of the community but rather these costs should
be borne by those who have a financial interest in the property.
Section 48-178. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this Article:
City means City of Anoka, Minnesota.
Compliance Officer means the City Manager and the City Manager’s designated agents authorized
to administer and enforce Anoka City Code.
Foreclosed Property means any real property that includes the building and grounds located in the
jurisdictional boundary of the City of Anoka that due to default of a financial agreement between a
lender and purchaser has been placed in the legal process by the lender to recover said property.
Owner means the following individuals and/or entities initiating the legal process to recover
foreclosed property shown on the records of the Anoka County Department of Property Taxation;
1. Those show to be the mortgage holder or their legal representatives.
2. Any person, partnership, association, corporation, or fiduciary having a legal or equitable
title or any interest in the property or building.
Responsible party means an owner, service provider, mortgagor, leasing agent, management
company or similar person or entity who has direct or indirect control or authority over the
building or real property upon which the building is located.
Vacant building means a building or in which no person or persons actually and currently
conducts a lawful business or lawfully resides or lives in any part of the building on a permanent,
non-transient basis in accordance with the City Code.
Section 48-179. Foreclosed Property Registration Process.
(a) Application. The owner initiating foreclosure proceedings or responsible party acting as
an agent for the owner must register a vacant building with the City no later than thirty
(30) days of the initiation of foreclosure proceedings. The registration must be submitted
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 48; ARTICLE VII
2 of 5
on a form provided by the City and shall include the following information supplied by
the owner:
1. The street address and tax parcel identification number (PIN) of the premises on
which the building is situated;
2. The name, address, telephone number, and email address, if applicable, of the
owner holding title to the property or their representative; and
3. A maintenance plan indicating the name, address, telephone number, and email
address, if applicable, of a person or company responsible for managing or
maintaining the property.
(b) Payment of Fees. The owner must pay an annual registration fee in an amount adopted by
the City Council. The amount of the registration fee shall be reasonably related to the
administrative costs for registering and processing the registration form and for the costs
of the City in monitoring the vacant building site. The fee must be paid in full prior to the
issuance of any building permits or licenses, with the exception of a demolition permit. If
there are questions regarding the status of the property in regards to type of dwelling or
code violations, the Compliance Officer of the City will perform an initial courtesy
inspection of the exterior condition of the building and property.
Section 48-180. Responsibility of Owner.
The owner or responsible party of a foreclosed property will be required to comply with the
following items:
(a) Notification of Sale or Property Transfer. It is the responsibility of the owner or
responsible party to inform the City should the property be sold or transferred to another
party. If the property is not sold, but transferred to a different party, that party must reregister
the property with the City within fifteen (15) business days of the transfer.
Failure to re-register the building within fifteen (15) business days will result in a $50.00
administrative fee being added to the annual fee.
(b) Maintenance of Building and Grounds. It is the responsibility of the owner or responsible
party to secure and maintain the building and grounds in compliance with City Code to
include the following:
1. Appearance. All vacant buildings must be so maintained and kept that they
appear to be occupied.
2. Securing. All vacant buildings must be secured from outside entry by
unauthorized persons or pests. Security must be by the normal building
amenities such as windows and doors having adequate strength to resist
intrusion. All doors and windows must remain locked. There shall be at least
one operable door into every building and into each housing unit. Exterior walls
and roofs must remain intact without holes.
3. Architectural (Cosmetic) Structural Panels. Architectural structural panels may
be used to secure windows, doors and other openings provided they are cut to fit
the opening and match the characteristics of the building. Architectural panels
may be of exterior grade-finished plywood or Medium Density Overlaid
plywood (MDO) that is painted to match the building exterior or covered with a
reflective material such as plexi-glass to simulate windows.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 48; ARTICLE VII
3 of 5
4. Temporary Securing. Untreated plywood or similar structural panels or
temporary construction fencing may be used to secure windows, doors and other
openings for a maximum period of fourteen (14) days.
5. “Artistic” board-up. With prior approval of the Compliance Officer, artistic
options may be utilized to secure a vacant building.
6. Emergency securing. The compliance official may take steps to immediately
secure a vacant building at his or her discretion in emergency circumstances.
(c) Fire Safety.
1. Fire protection systems. Owners of non-residential vacant buildings must
maintain all fire protection systems, appliances and assemblies in operating
condition and maintain underwriter laboratories (UL) monitoring of all systems.
2. Removal of hazardous and combustible materials. The owner of any vacant
building, or vacant portion thereof, must remove all hazardous material and
hazardous refuse that could constitute a fire hazard or contribute to the spread of
fire.
(d) Plumbing fixtures.
Plumbing fixtures connected to an approved water system, an approved sewage system,
or an approved natural gas utility system must be installed in accordance with applicable
codes and be maintained in sound condition and good repair or removed and the service
terminated in the manner prescribed by applicable codes. The building’s water systems
must be protected from freezing.
(e) Electrical. Electrical service lines, wiring, outlets or fixtures not installed or maintained
in accordance with applicable codes must be repaired, removed or the electrical services
terminated to the building in accordance with applicable codes.
(f) Lighting. All exterior lighting fixtures must be maintained in good repair, and
illumination must be provided to the building and all walkways in the same manner as
provided at the time the building was last occupied.
(g) Heating. Heating facilities or heating equipment in vacant buildings must be removed,
rendered inoperable, or maintained in accordance with applicable codes.
(h) Termination of utilities. The Compliance Officer may require that water, sewer,
electricity, or gas service to the vacant building be terminated or disconnected. Prior to
the termination of any utility service, written notice must be given to the owner. No
utility may be restored until consent is given by the Compliance Officer. Utilities may be
discontinued at the request of the owner or responsible party as part of the approved plan.
The Compliance Officer may authorize immediate termination of utilities at his or her
discretion in emergency circumstances.
(i) Signage. Obsolete or unused exterior signs and installation hardware must be removed.
Holes and penetrations must be properly patched and painted to match the building.
Surfaces beneath the signs that do not match the building must be repaired, resurfaced,
painted or otherwise altered to be compatible with the building surfaces. All signs must
be maintained in good condition.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 48; ARTICLE VII
4 of 5
(j) Exterior maintenance. The owner must comply with all applicable property maintenance
regulations and City codes including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Public nuisances. The owner must eliminate any activity on the property that
constitutes a public nuisance.
2. Grass and weeds. Any weeds or grass must be no greater than six (6) inches in
height.
3. Exterior structure maintenance. The owner must maintain the vacant building in
compliance with City Code.
4. Abandoned or junk vehicles. The owner must remove abandoned and junk
vehicles from the property.
5. Storage and disposal of refuse. The storage and disposal of refuse must comply
with the requirements of City Code.
6. Animals. The owner must ensure that all animals are removed from the property
and handled in a humane manner.
7. Diseased, dead or hazardous trees. The owner must remove diseased, dead or
hazardous trees or branches from the property.
8. Graffiti. The owner must remove all graffiti from the property in accordance
with City ordinance.
9. Abandoned pools. Swimming pools must be maintained in good operating
condition; treated to prevent pest harborage; or properly drained and emptied.
Swimming pools must be secured.
10. Removal of garbage and refuse. The owner of any vacant building, or vacant
portion thereof, must remove all garbage, refuse, rubbish, swill, filth, or other
materials from the vacant building and the property upon which the building is
located.
11. Police protections systems. The owner must properly maintain all alarm systems
in any vacant building or portion thereof in operating condition.
12. Loitering, criminal activities. Loitering or engaging in criminal activities is not
allowed in the vacant building or on the real property upon which the vacant
building is located. The owner or responsible party must not allow these
activities and take immediate actions to eliminate these conditions once notified
by the City.
Section 48-181. Emergency Abatement.
The Compliance Officer may authorize immediate abatement of any public nuisance or
maintenance item if, in the discretion of the Compliance Officer, emergency circumstances exist
that present an imminent threat to the public health and safety.
Section 48-182. Compliance.
(a) Other Codes. All other City Codes and applicable regulations must be complied with.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 48; ARTICLE VII
5 of 5
(b) Non-compliance and Notification:
If the owner does not comply with the property plan or maintain or correct nuisance
items, the City may commence abatement and recover its costs for correction of those
items. In the case of an absent owner and ongoing nuisance items, the City need not
provide notice of each abatement act to the owner. A single notice by the City to the
owner that it intends to provide ongoing abatement until the owner corrects the items will
be sufficient notice.
Section 48-183. Penalties.
Any person violating any provisions of this Article or providing false information to the City shall
be punished as provided in the penalties section of this Chapter.
Sections 48-184 through 48-190. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE I
1 of 3
CHAPTER 50. STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
ARTICLE I. In General
----------
State law reference--General powers as to streets, Minn. Stats. §§ 410.33, 412.221, subds. 6, 7, 18.
----------
Section 50-1. Penalties for violation of article.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
Section 50-2. Obstructions prohibited; exceptions.
(a) No person shall place any obstruction whatsoever upon any street or sidewalk,
nor shall any person allow any such obstruction to be placed or to remain upon
any street or sidewalk adjoining any property owned or occupied by him.
Anything which is placed on the street or sidewalk, whether permanently or
temporarily fixed thereto or merely resting thereon by its own weight, and any
wire, sign, or any other thing which is suspended less than 15 feet above a street,
or less than ten feet above a sidewalk, shall be deemed an obstruction.
(b) The prohibition in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the following
obstructions:
(1) Merchandise displayed for sale on the sidewalk in front of a place of
business; provided, that it does not extend more than three feet toward
the curbline, nor more than one-fourth of the total distance between lot
line and curbline.
(2) Merchandise delivered to the occupant of abutting property, left on the
sidewalk; provided, that at least three-fourths of the sidewalk is left
unobstructed; and provided, that no such merchandise shall remain on
the sidewalk between 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; but no occupant of any
property shall make any such use of the sidewalk during more than four
hours of any single day; nor shall any merchandise be placed within
five feet of any fire hydrant.
(3) Signs firmly secured to abutting structures and extending not more than
one foot into the space over the sidewalk.
(4) Awnings firmly secured to abutting structures and at no point nearer
than seven feet to the sidewalk.
(5) Parked vehicles, building materials, and excavation barriers so long as
any necessary permits are in effect; provided, that the provisions of this
Code on those respective subjects are fully complied with.
(6) Tables, chairs, and other City approved items placed on the sidewalk in
front of businesses that have obtained proper permits pursuant to
Article IX.
State law reference--Obstructing public highway or right-of-way, Minn. Stats. § 609.74.
Section 50-3. Impeding use of streets prohibited.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE I
2 of 3
No person shall do anything which impedes or tends to hinder or endanger the use of the
streets for travel.
State law reference--Obstructing public highway or right-of-way, Minn. Stats. § 609.74.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE I
3 of 3
Section 50-4. Permitting hazardous conditions on sidewalks prohibited.
No owner of any property having a public sidewalk adjacent thereto, shall permit any part
of the sidewalk to be raised above the established level of the sidewalk more than onehalf
inch, in any manner which might catch the foot of a pedestrian; nor permit any holes
or depressions to occur in the sidewalk in which a pedestrian might step or catch his foot
in a manner liable to cause injury; nor permit any trap door or coal chute to be open on
any sidewalk or near any sidewalk without having the trap door or coal chute properly
guarded, in which a pedestrian might step or catch his foot or fall into in any manner
liable to cause injury.
Section 50-5. Removal of sand, paper and debris from sidewalks.
(a) No owner or occupant of any property abutting on any public sidewalk shall
allow earth or sand or other substances to be washed upon such sidewalk or to
remain thereon. Every such owner and occupant shall take such steps as are
necessary to prevent earth or sand or other substances from washing upon such
sidewalk.
(b) No owner or occupant of any property abutting on any public sidewalk shall
allow waste paper, debris, or trash of any kind to remain on the public sidewalk
and each owner and occupant shall remove waste paper, debris, or trash of any
kind from the sidewalk in front of property abutting on the public sidewalk.
Such waste paper, debris, or trash of any kind shall not be swept into the street
or gutter adjacent to the sidewalk but shall be removed and disposed of.
Section 50-6. Removing part of sidewalk.
No person shall loosen or remove any part or support from any sidewalk or crosswalk or
any curbing or gutter; provided, that this section shall not apply to persons making repairs
on any such sidewalk, gutter, curb, or crosswalk, or any person temporarily removing the
sidewalk, gutter, curb, or crosswalk on account of building operations, if such person
restores the structure to its original condition.
Section 50-7. Hedge fences.
No person owning or controlling any hedge fence bordering on a street or sidewalk in the
city shall permit the hedge fence to grow to a height of more than four feet, or permit any
branches or any part thereof to hang over any sidewalk or sidewalk line.
Section 50-8. Maintenance of Right-of-Way.
(a) Property owners adjacent to public right of way shall be responsible for basic
care of the boulevard areas abutting their property. This includes, but is not
limited to, lawn mowing, leaf raking and litter and debris removal.
(b) Installation by adjacent property owners of appurtenances with the public right
of way are done solely at the property owner’s risk. The City is not responsible
for damage, repair or replacement of such appurtenances. The appurtenances
include, but are not limited to, irrigation systems, decorative plantings, fences,
decorative stones, and retaining walls.
(c) The Public Services Department shall be responsible to remove, at its discretion,
vegetation and other appurtenances from boulevard areas with interfere with
winter snow storage, causes damage to City equipment or presents a risk to the
travelling public.
Sections 50-9 thru 50-30. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE II
1 of 1
CHAPTER 50. STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
ARTICLE II. Snow and Ice Removal
Section 50-31. Snow and ice clearance required.
Each owner or occupant of real estate within the City along or by which there is built and
maintained a public sidewalk within the Central Business District, shall clear or cause to be
cleared all snow or ice from such sidewalk within 18 hours after the snow or ice has ceased to fall
thereon. The term "Central Business District" as used in this Article includes that part of the City
which is located east of the Rum River, west of Seventh Avenue, north of Monroe Street, and
south of Van Buren Street. The City’s policy to assist with snow removal does not exempt any
property owner from meeting this requirement. Removal of snow and ice outside of the Central
Business District is governed by Chapter 48, Article I, Section 48-3, Responsibility of Owners and
Occupants, Subd (1), Removal of Snow and Ice.
Section 50-32. Removal to street.
No person shall place on City streets snow or ice which has fallen on private driveways; private
parking lots; or sidewalks. However, snow and ice which is cleared from sidewalks within the
Central Business District may be placed on the curb-line for collection by the City.
Section 50-33. Removal by City at property owners or occupants expense.
Any snow or ice which is not cleared from sidewalks in accordance with Section 50-31, or which
is placed on City streets in violation of Section 50-32, may be cleared by the City at the expense of
the owner or occupant of the adjacent or offending property. The officer or employee in charge of
such clearance work shall keep a record of the costs of such work done adjacent to each parcel of
land. The costs of such sidewalk clearance may be recovered by the City, at its discretion, either
by (i) periodically billing the owner or occupant of the adjacent property for the costs of the
clearance work, and taking such steps as are necessary to collect the bill, or by (ii) extending the
costs of such work as a special assessment against the adjacent or offending property, which said
assessment shall be certified to the County Auditor for collection as other special assessments.
State law reference--Special assessments for snow removal, Minn. Stats. § 429.101.
Sections 50-34 thru 50-60. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE III
1 of 20
CHAPTER 50. STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
ARTICLE III. Right-of-Way Management and Use
----------
*State law references--Use and regulation of public right-of-way by telecommunications companies,
Minn. Stats. § 237.162 et seq.; uniform statewide standards, Minn. Stats. § 237.163, subd. 8.
----------
Section 50-61. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide a way for the city (i) to manage its public
rights-of-way and to recover its rights-of-way management costs and (ii) to regulate the
use of public rights-of-way by providers of telecommunication services, public utility
services, and the like, in a fair, efficient, competitively neutral and substantially uniform
manner, consistent with and to the extent authorized by state law, specifically Minn.
Stats. §§ 237.162, 237.163, 237.79, 237.81 and 238.086 and Minnesota Public Utility
Commission Rules 7819.0050 through 7819.9950. This article does not apply to outdoor
restaurant seating covered under Article IX.
Section 50-62. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section:
Applicant means any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a right-of-way.
City means the City of Anoka, Minnesota. For purposes of this article, the term "city"
means its elected officials, officers, employees, agents or any commission, committee or
subdivision acting pursuant to lawfully delegated authority.
City cost means the actual costs incurred by the city for managing rights-of-way
including, but not limited to costs associated with registering of applicants, issuing,
processing, and verifying right-of-way permit applications; revoking right-of-way
permits; inspecting job sites; creating and updating mapping systems; determining the
adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work inadequately performed;
maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user equipment during right-of-way work;
budget analysis; record keeping; legal assistance; systems analysis; and performing all of
the other tasks required by this article, including other costs the city may incur in
managing the provisions of this article except as expressly prohibited by law.
City inspector means any person authorized by the city to carry out inspections related to
the provisions of this article.
Commission means the state public utilities commission.
Degradation means the accelerated depreciation of the right-of-way caused by excavation
in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to reconstruct such right-ofway
earlier than would be required if the excavation did not occur, not to exceed the
maximum restoration shown in plates 1 to 13, set forth in Minnesota Rules parts
7819.9900 to 7819.9950.
Emergency means a condition that (i) poses a clear and immediate danger to life or
health, or of a significant loss of property; or (ii) requires immediate repair or
replacement in order to restore service to a customer.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE III
2 of 20
Equipment means any tangible thing located in any right-of-way; but shall not include
boulevard plantings or gardens planted or maintained in the right-of-way between a
person's property and the street curb.
Excavate means to dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or penetrate any
part of a right-of-way.
Excavation permit means the permit which, pursuant to this article, must be obtained
before a person may excavate in a right-of-way. An excavation permit allows the holder
to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit.
Excavation permit fee means money paid to the city by an applicant to cover the costs as
provided in section 50-124.
High density corridor means a designated portion of the public right-of-way within which
right-of-way users having multiple and competing facilities may be required to build and
install facilities in a common conduit system or other common structure.
Local representative means the person or designee of such person authorized by a
registrant to accept service and to make decisions for that registrant regarding all matters
within the scope of this article.
Obstruction permit means the permit which, pursuant to this article, must be obtained
before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder to hinder free and open
passage over the specified portion of a right-of-way by placing equipment described
therein on the right-of-way for the duration specified therein.
Obstruction permit fee means money paid to the city by a registrant to cover the costs as
provided in section 50-124.
Performance and restoration bond means any of the following forms of security:
(a) Individual project bond;
(b) Cash deposit;
(c) Security in the form listed or approved under Minn. Stats. § 15.73, subd. 3;
(d) Letter of credit in a form acceptable to the city;
(e) Self-insurance in a form acceptable to the city;
(f) Blanket bond for projects within the city or other form of construction bond for
time specified in a form acceptable to the city.
Permittee means any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right-of-way has
been granted by the city under this article.
Person means any natural or corporate person, business association or other business
entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole proprietorship, a political
subdivision, a public or private agency of any kind, a utility, a successor or assign of any
of the foregoing, or any other legal entity which has or seeks to have equipment located
in any right-of-way.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE III
3 of 20
Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, cartway, bicycle lane and public sidewalk in which the city has an interest,
including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes and utility easements of the
city. A right-of-way does not include the airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to
cellular or other nonwire telecommunications or broadcast service.
Probation means the status of a person that has not complied with the conditions of this
article.
Probation period means one year from the date that a person has been notified in writing
that they have been put on probation.
Registrant means any person who (i) has or seeks to have its equipment located in any
right-of-way, or (ii) in any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the
right-of-way or any equipment located in the right-of-way and, accordingly, is required to
register with the city.
Right-of-way permit means either the excavation permit or the obstruction permit, or
both, depending on the context, required by this article.
Rules means Rules 7819.0050 through 7819.9950 adopted by the state public utilities
commission.
Telecommunications right-of-way user means a person owning or controlling a facility in
the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control the facility, that is used or is intended to be
used for transporting telecommunication or other voice or data information. For purposes
of this article, a cable communications system defined and regulated under Minn. Stats.
ch. 238, and telecommunications activities related to providing natural gas or electric
energy services are not included in this definition for purposes of this article. This
definition shall not be inconsistent with Minn. Stats. § 237.162, subd. 4.
Section 50-63. Administration.
The city may designate a principal city official responsible for the administration of the
rights-of-way, right-of-way permits, and the ordinances related thereto. The city may
delegate any or all of the duties under this article.
Section 50-64. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this article is for any
reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent
provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
If a regulatory body or a court of competent jurisdiction should determine by a final,
nonappealable order that any permit, right or registration issued under this article or any
portion of this article is illegal or unenforceable, then any such permit, right or
registration granted or deemed to exist hereunder shall be considered as a revocable
permit with a mutual right in either party to terminate without cause upon giving 60 days
written notice to the other. The requirements and conditions of such a revocable permit
shall be the same requirements and conditions as set forth in the permit, right or
registration, respectively, except for conditions relating to the term of the permit and the
right of termination. If a permit, right or registration shall be considered a revocable
permit as provided in this article, the permittee must acknowledge the authority of the
city council to issue such revocable permit and the power to revoke it. Nothing in this
article precludes the city from requiring a franchise agreement with the applicant, as
allowed by law, in addition to requirements set forth in this article.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE III
4 of 20
Section 50-65. Reservation of regulatory and police powers.
(a) The city by the granting of a right-of-way permit, or by registering a person
under this article does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or
lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested
in the city under the Constitution and statutes of the state or the charter of the
city to regulate the use of the right-of-way by the permittee; and the permittee by
its acceptance of a right-of-way permit or of registration under those ordinances
agrees that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or
otherwise as are now or as may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the
city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the
city at any time. A permittee or registrant is deemed to acknowledge that its
rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and
enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public
deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances
enacted by the city pursuant to such powers.
(b) Any conflict between the provisions of a registration or of a right-of-way permit
and any other present or future exercise of the city's regulatory or police powers
shall be resolved in favor of the latter.
Section 50-66. Appeals.
(a) A person that:
(1) Has been denied registration;
(2) Has been denied a right-of-way permit;
(3) Has had its right-of-way permit revoked; or
(4) Believes that the fees imposed on the user by the city do not conform to
the requirements of law; may have the denial, revocation, or fee
imposition reviewed, upon written request, by the city council. The city
council shall act on a timely written request at its next regularly
scheduled meeting. A decision by the city council affirming the denial,
revocation, or fee imposition must be in writing and supported by
written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision.
(b) Upon affirmation by the city council of the denial, revocation, or fee imposition,
the right-of-way user shall have the right to have the matter resolved by binding
arbitration. Binding arbitration must be before an arbitrator agreed to by both the
city and the person. If the parties cannot agree on an arbitrator, the matter must
be resolved by a three-person arbitration panel made up of one arbitrator
selected by the city, one arbitrator selected by the person, and one arbitrator
selected by the other two arbitrators. The costs and fees of a single arbitrator
shall be borne equally by the city and the person. In the event there is a third
arbitrator, each party shall bear the expense of its own arbitrator and shall jointly
and equally bear with the other party the expense of the third arbitrator and of
the arbitration.
(c) Each party to the arbitration shall pay its own costs, disbursements, and attorney
fees.
State law reference--Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. § 237.163, subd. 5.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE III
5 of 20
Section 50-67. Franchise; franchise supremacy.
The city may, in addition to the requirements of this article, require any person which has
or seeks to have equipment located in any right-of-way to obtain a franchise to the full
extent permitted by law, now or hereinafter enacted. The terms of any franchise which
are in direct conflict with any provisions of this article, whether granted prior or
subsequent to enactment to this article, excluding the city's police powers which shall
always be reserved to the city, shall control and supersede the conflicting terms of this
article provided, however, that requirements relating to insurance, bonds, penalties,
security funds, letters of credit, indemnification or any other security in favor of the city
may be cumulative in the sole determination of the city or unless otherwise negotiated by
the city and the franchise grantee. All other terms of this article shall be fully applicable
to all persons whether franchised or not.
State law reference--Restriction on franchises, Minn. Stats. § 237.163, subd. 7(a)(4).
Section 50-68. Reporting obligations.
(a) Operations. Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and by December 1
of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan with the city.
Registrants must use commercially reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for
all upcoming projects and include all such projects in a construction or major
maintenance plan. Such plan shall be submitted using a format designated by the
city and shall contain the information determined by the city to be necessary to
facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency of excavations and
obstructions of rights-of-way. The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the
following information:
(1) The specific locations and the estimated beginning and ending dates of
all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year (in this
section, a "next-year project"); and
(2) The tentative locations and beginning and ending dates for all projects
contemplated for the five years following the next calendar year (in this
section, a "five-year project").
The term "project" in this section shall include both next-year projects
and five-year projects. By January 1 of each year the city will have
available for inspection in its offices a composite list of all projects of
which it has been informed in the annual plans. All registrants are
responsible for keeping themselves apprised of the current status of this
list. Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change any project
in its list of next-year projects, and must notify the city and all other
registrants of all such changes in such list. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, a registrant may at any time join in a next-year project of
another registrant that was listed by the other registrant.
(b) Additional next-year projects. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a)
of this section, the city may, for good cause shown, allow a registrant to submit
additional next-year projects. Good cause includes, but is not limited to, the
criteria set forth in subsection 50-123(3) concerning the discretionary issuance
of permits.
State law reference--Authority to so require, Minn. Stats. § 237.163, subd. 2(b)(3).
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE III
6 of 20
Section 50-69. Right-of-way restoration.
(a) The work to be done under the permit, and the restoration and the right-of-way
as required in this article, must be completed within the dates specified in the
permit, increased by as many days as work could not be done because of
circumstances constituting force majeure or when work was prohibited as
unseasonal or unreasonable under subsection 50-126(b) all in the sole
determination of the city. In addition to repairing its own work, the permittee
must restore the general area of the work, and the surrounding areas, including
the paving and its foundations, to the same condition that existed before the
commencement of the work and must inspect the area of the work and use
reasonable care to maintain the same condition for 36 months thereafter.
(b) In its application for an excavation permit, the permittee may choose to have the
city restore the right-of-way. In any event, the city may determine to perform the
right-of-way restoration and shall require the permittee to pay a restoration fee
to provide for reimbursement of all costs associated with such restoration. In the
event the permittee elects not to perform restoration, the city may, in lieu of
performing the restoration itself, impose a fee to fully compensate for the
resultant degradation as well as for any and all additional city costs associated
therewith. Such fee for degradation shall compensate the city for costs
associated with a decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by
excavation and shall include a restoration fee component. It does not relieve
permittee from any restoration obligation, including but not limited to replacing
and compacting the subgrade base material and the excavation. The restoration
fee will not include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities.
(1) City restoration. If the city restores the right-of-way, the permittee shall
pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If, during the 36 months
following such restoration, the right-of-way settles due to permittee's
excavation or restoration, the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30
days of billing, the cost of repairing such right-of-way.
(2) Restoration by permittee. If the permittee chooses at the time of
application for an excavation permit to restore the right-of-way itself,
such permittee shall post an additional performance and restoration
bond in an amount determined by the city to be sufficient to cover the
cost of restoring the right-of-way to its pre-excavation condition. If, 24
months after completion of the restoration of the right-of-way, the city
determines that the right-of-way has been properly restored, the surety
on the performance and restoration bond posted pursuant to this
subsection shall be released.
(c) The permittee shall perform the work according to the standards and with the
materials specified by the city and in compliance with Minnesota Rule
7819.1100. The city shall have the authority to prescribe the manner and extent
to the restoration, and may do so in written procedures of general application or
on a case-by-case basis. The city, in exercising this authority, shall be guided but
not limited by the following standards and considerations:
(1) The number, size, depth and duration of the excavations, disruptions or
damage to the right-of-way;
(2) The traffic volume carried by the right-of-way; the character of the
neighborhood surrounding the right-of-way;
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE III
7 of 20
(3) The pre-excavation condition of the right-of-way; the remaining life
expectancy of the right-of-way affected by the excavation;
(4) Whether the relative cost of the method of restoration to the permittee
is in reasonable balance with the prevention of an accelerated
depreciation of the right-of-way that would otherwise result from the
excavation, disturbance or damage to the right-of-way; and
(5) The likelihood that the particular method of restoration would be
effective in slowing the depreciation of the right-of-way that would
otherwise take place.
Notwithstanding the provision of this subsection, the maximum limits
of restoration methods and area requirements the city will impose are
found in PUC Plates 1 to 13, shown in parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950.
(d) By choosing to restore the right-of-way itself, the permittee guarantees its work
and shall maintain it for 24 months following its completion. During this 24-
month period it shall, upon notification from the city, correct all restoration
work to the extent necessary, using the method required by the city. Such work
shall be completed within five calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the
city, not including days during which work cannot be done because of
circumstances constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as
unseasonal or unreasonable under subsection 50-126(b), all in the sole
determination of the city.
(e) If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner and to the
condition required by the city, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all
repairs required by the city, the city at its option may perform or cause to be
performed such work. In that event the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30
days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way. If the permittee fails to pay
as required, the city may exercise its rights under the performance and
restoration bond.
State law reference--Right-of-way restoration, Minn. Stats. § 237.163, subd. 3.
Section 50-70. Installation requirements.
In accordance with Minn. Stats. §§ 237.162, subd. 8(3), 237.163, subd. 8; and the
commission rules, all work performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance
with the standard specifications for street openings as promulgated by the city and at a
location as may be required by subsection 50-72(b). The city may enforce local standards
pursuant to its inherent and historical police power authority, so long as such standards
do not impose greater requirements than those found in the commission rules.
Section 50-71. Inspection.
(a) When the work under any permit under this article is completed, the permittee
shall notify the city.
(b) Permittee shall make the work site available to the city inspector and to all
others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the
execution and upon completion of work.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE III
8 of 20
(c) At the time of inspection the city inspector may order the immediate cessation of
any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety or well being of
the public. The city inspector may issue an order to the registrant for any work
which does not conform to the applicable standards, conditions or codes. The
order shall state that failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation
of the permit. Within ten days after issuance of the order, the registrant shall
present proof to the city that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has
not been presented within the required time, the city may revoke the permit
pursuant to section 50-129.
Section 50-72. Location of equipment.
(a) Undergrounding. Unless otherwise permitted by an existing franchise or
Minn. Stats. § 216B.34, or unless existing aboveground equipment is repaired or
replaced, or unless infeasible such as in the provision of electric service at
certain voltages, new construction, the installation of new equipment, and the
replacement of old equipment shall be done underground or contained within
buildings or other structures in conformity with applicable codes unless
otherwise agreed to by the city in writing, and such agreement is reflected in
applicable permits.
(b) High density corridor. The city may assign specific high density corridors
within the right-of-way or any particular segment therefore as may be necessary
for each type of equipment that is or, pursuant to current technology, the city
expects will someday be located within the right-of-way, excavation,
obstruction, or other permits issued by the city involving the installation or
replacement of equipment may designate the proper corridor for the equipment
at issue and such equipment must be located accordingly. In the event the city
desires to establish a high-density corridor, it shall include the elements required
in commission rule 7819.0200. Any registrant having equipment located prior to
enactment of this article in the right-of-way in a position at variance with the
corridors established by the city shall, no later than at the time of the next
reconstruction or excavation of the area where its equipment is located, move
that equipment to its assigned position within the right-of-way, unless this
requirement is waived by the city for good cause shown, upon consideration of
such factors as the remaining economic life of the facilities, public safety,
customer service needs and hardship to the registrant.
(c) Nuisance. One year after the passage of the ordinance from which this article is
derived, any equipment found in a right-of-way that has not been registered shall
be deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has
at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or taking
possession of the equipment and restoring the right-of-way to a useable
condition.
(d) Limitation of space. To protect health, safety and welfare, the city shall have the
power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional equipment within
the right-of-way if there is insufficient space to accommodate all of the requests
of registrants or persons to occupy and use the right-of-way. In making such
decisions, the city shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing
and potential users of the right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by
considerations of the public interest, the public's needs for the particular service,
the condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential
utilities, the protection of existing equipment in the right-of-way, and future city
plans for public improvements and development projects which have been
determined to be in the public interest.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE III
9 of 20
Section 50-73. Relocation of equipment.
The person must promptly and at its own expense, with due regard for seasonal working
conditions, permanently remove and relocate its equipment and facilities in the right-ofway
whenever the city requests such removal and relocation, and shall restore the rightof-
way to the same condition it was in prior to such removal or relocation. The city may
take such requests in order to prevent interference by the company's equipment or
facilities with (i) a present or future city use of the right-of-way for a public project; (ii)
the public health or safety; (iii) the safety and convenience of travel over the right-ofway.
Section 50-74. Pre-excavation equipment location.
In addition to complying with the requirements of Minn. Stats. ch. 216D (one call
excavation notice system) before the start date of any right-of-way excavation, each
registrant who has equipment located in the area to be excavated shall mark the
horizontal and approximate vertical placement of all such equipment. Any registrant
whose equipment is less than 20 inches below a concrete or asphalt surface shall notify
and work closely with the excavation contractor in an effort to establish the exact location
of its equipment and the best procedures for excavation.
Section 50-75. Damage to other equipment.
(a) When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to maintain,
support or move a registrant's facilities to protect it, the city shall notify the local
representative as early as is reasonably possible. The costs associated therewith
will be billed to that registrant and must be paid within 30 days from the date of
billing.
(b) Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the
right-of-way which it or its facilities damages. Each registrant shall be
responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the facilities of another
registrant caused during the city's response to an emergency occasioned by that
registrant's facilities.
Section 50-76. Right-of-way vacation.
(a) If the city vacates a right-of-way which contains the facilities of a registrant, the
registrant's rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed by Minnesota Rules
7819.3200.
(b) If the vacation requires the relocation of registrant or permittee equipment and:
(i) if the vacation proceedings are initiated by the registrant or permittee, the
registrant or permittee must pay the relocation costs; or (ii) if the vacation
proceedings are initiated by the city, the registrant or permittee must pay the
relocation costs unless otherwise agreed to by the city and the registrant or
permittee; or (iii) if the vacation proceedings are initiated by a person or persons
other than the registrant or permittee, such other person or persons must pay the
relocation costs.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE III
10 of 20
Section 50-77. Indemnification and liability.
(a) By reason of the acceptance of a registration or the grant of a right-of-way
permit, the city does not assume any liability: (i) for injuries to persons, damage
to property, or loss of service claims by parties other than the registrant or the
city; or (ii) for claims or penalties of any sort resulting from the installation,
presence, maintenance, or operation of equipment by registrants or activities of
registrants.
(b) By registering with the city, or by accepting a permit under this article, a
registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance
with the provisions of Minnesota Rules 7819.1250.
Section 50-78. Future uses.
In placing any equipment, or allowing it to be placed, in the right-of-way the city is not
liable for any damages caused thereby to any registrant's equipment which is already in
place. No registrant is entitled to rely on the provisions of this article, and no special duty
is created as to any registrant. This article is enacted to protect the general health, welfare
and safety of the public at large.
Section 50-79. Abandoned and unusable equipment.
(a) A registrant who has determined to discontinue its operations with respect to any
equipment in any right-of-way, or segment or portion thereof, in the city must
either:
(1) Provide information satisfactory to the city that the registrant's
obligations for its equipment in the right-of-way under this article have
been lawfully assumed by another registrant; or
(2) Submit to the city a proposal and instruments for transferring
ownership of its equipment to the city. If a registrant proceeds under
this clause, the city may, at its option:
a. Purchase the equipment;
b. Require the registrant, at its own expense, to remove it; or
c. Require the registrant to post an additional bond or an
increased bond amount sufficient to reimburse the city for
reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the
equipment.
(b) Equipment of a registrant which fails to comply with subsection (a) of this
section and which, for two years, remains unused shall be deemed to be
abandoned. Abandoned equipment is deemed to be a nuisance. The city may
exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not
limited to, (i) abating the nuisance, (ii) taking possession of the equipment and
restoring it to a useable condition, (iii) requiring removal of the equipment by
the registrant or by the registrant's surety; or (iv) exercising its rights pursuant to
the performance and restoration bond.
(c) Any registrant who has unusable equipment in any right-of-way shall remove it
from that right-of-way during the next scheduled excavation, unless this
requirement is waived by the city.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE III
11 of 20
Sections 50-80 thru 50-95. Reserved.
Section 50-96. Registration, bonding and right-of-way occupancy.
(a) Each person which occupies, uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-of-way or
any equipment located in the right-of-way, including by lease, sublease or
assignment, or who has, or seeks to have, equipment located in any right-of-way
must register with the city. Registration will consist of providing application
information to and as required by the city, paying a registration fee, and posting
a performance and restoration bond. The performance and restoration bonds
required by this article shall be in an amount determined in the city's sole
discretion, sufficient to serve as security for the full and complete performance
of the obligations under this article, including any costs, expenses, damages, or
loss the city pays or incurs because of any failure to comply with this article or
any other applicable laws, regulations or standards. During periods of
construction, repair or restoration of rights-of-way or equipment in rights-ofway,
the performance and restoration bond shall be in an amount sufficient to
cover 100 percent of the estimated cost of such work, as documented by the
person proposing to perform such work, or in such lesser amount as may be
determined by the city, taking into account the amount of equipment in the rightof-
way, the location and method of installation of the equipment, the conflict or
interference of such equipment with the equipment of other persons, and the
purposes and policies of this article. Sixty days after completion of the work, the
performance and restoration bond may be reduced in the sole determination of
the city.
(b) No person shall construct, install, repair, remove, relocate, or perform any other
work on, or use any equipment or any part thereof located in any right-of-way
without first being registered with the city.
(c) Nothing in this section shall be construed to repeal or amend the provisions of a
city ordinance permitting persons to plant or maintain boulevard plantings or
gardens or in the area of right-of-way between their property and the street curb.
Persons planting or maintaining boulevard plantings or gardens shall not be
deemed to use or occupy the right-of-way, and shall not be required to obtain
any permits to satisfy any other requirements for planting or maintaining such
boulevard plantings or gardens under this article. However, excavations deeper
than 12 inches are subject to the permit requirements of section 50-116.
State law reference--Authority to require telecommunication right-of-way users to register,
Minn. Stats. § 237.163, subd. 2(b)(2).
Section 50-97. Registration information.
(a) The information provided to the city at the time of registration shall include, but
not be limited to:
(1) The registrant's name, Gopher One-Call registration certificate number,
address and e-mail address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers.
(2) The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and
facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local representative or designee
shall be available at all times. Current information regarding how to contact the
local representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time of
registration.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE III
12 of 20
(3) A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
a. Shall be on a form approved by the city;
b. Shall verify that an insurance policy has been issued to the
registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in
the state; or is covered by self-insurance which the city
determines to provide the city with protections equivalent to
that of a state licensed insurance company, legally
independent from registrant;
c. Shall verify that the registrant is insured against claims for
personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property
damage arising out of the (i) use and occupancy of the rightof-
way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees and
permittees, and (ii) placement and use of equipment in the
right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees
and permittees, including, but not limited to, protection against
liability arising from completed operations, damage of
underground equipment and collapse of property;
d. Shall name the city as an additional insured as to whom the
coverages required in this subsection are in force and
applicable and for whom defense will be provided as to all
such coverages;
e. Shall require that the city be notified 30 days in advance of
cancellation of the policy; and
f. Shall indicate comprehensive liability coverage, automobile
liability coverage, workers compensation and umbrella
coverage in amounts established by the city of the office of
risk and employee benefit management in amounts sufficient
to protect the city and carry out the purposes and policies of
this article.
(4) If the registrant is a corporation, a copy of the certificate required to be
filed under Minn. Stats. § 333.01 as recorded and certified to by the
secretary of state.
(5) A copy of the registrant's certificate of authority from the state public
utilities commission, where the registrant is lawfully required to have
such certificate from such commission.
(6) Such other information as the city may require.
(b) The registrant shall keep all of the information listed in subsection (a) of this
section current at all times by providing to the city information of changes
within 15 days following the date on which the registrant has knowledge of any
change.
State law reference--Minimum required information, Minn. Stats. § 237.163,
subd. 2(b)(2).
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE III
13 of 20
Section 50-98. Right to occupy rights-of-way; payment of fees.
(a) Any person required to register under section 50-96, which occupies, uses, or
places its equipment in the right-of-way, is hereby granted a right to do so if and
only so long as it (i) timely pays all fees as provided in this article and (ii)
complies with all other requirements of law.
(b) The grant of right in section 50-98 is expressly conditioned on, and is subject to,
the police powers of the city, continuing compliance with all provisions of law
now or hereinafter enacted, including this article as it may be from time to time
amended and, further, is specifically subject to the obligation to obtain any and
all additional required authorizations, whether from the city or other body or
authority.
State law reference--Registration fee, Minn. Stats. § 237.163, subd. 6.
Sections 50-99 thru 50-115. Reserved.
Section 50-116. Permit requirement.
(a) Generally. Except as otherwise provided for in this Code, no person may
obstruct or excavate any right-of-way without first having obtained the
appropriate right-of-way permit from the City to do so. This section does not
apply to the construction, alteration, improvement or expansion of driveways.
(b) Excavation permit. An excavation permit is required to allow the holder to
excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit and/or to hinder
free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing
equipment described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified therein.
(c) Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is required to allow the holder to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of right-of-way by
placing equipment, vehicles, or other obstructions described therein on the rightof-
way for the duration specified therein.
(d) Specified dates for excavation or construction. No person may excavate or
obstruct the right-of-way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless
a new permit or permit extension is granted.
Section 50-117. Applications.
Application for a permit under this article is made to the city. Right-of-way permit
applications shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon compliance with,
the requirements of the following provisions:
(a) Registration with the city pursuant to this article.
(b) Submission of a completed permit application form, including all required
attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the proposed
project and the location of all existing and proposed equipment.
(c) Payment of all money due to the city for:
(1) Permit fees and costs due;
(2) Prior obstructions or excavations;
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE III
14 of 20
(3) Any loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city as a result of
applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way of any
emergency actions taken by the city; and
(4) Franchise fees, if applicable.
Section 50-118. Joint applications.
(a) Registrants may jointly make application for permits to excavate or obstruct the
right-of-way at the same place and time.
(b) Registrants who join in and during a scheduled obstruction or excavation
performed by the city, whether or not it is a joint application by two or more
registrants or a single application, are not required to pay the obstruction and
degradation portions of the permit fee.
(c) Registrants who apply for permits for the same obstruction or excavation, which
is not performed by the city, may share in the payment of the obstruction or
excavation permit fee. Registrants must agree among themselves as to the
portion each will pay and indicate such portion on their applications.
Section 50-119. Submission of mapping data.
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, each registrant shall provide
as a part of its permit applicant the following information:
(1) Location and approximate depth of applicant's mains, cables, conduits,
switches, and related equipment and facilities with the location based
on:
a. Offsets from the property lines, distances from the centerline
to the public right-of-way, and curblines as determined by the
city;
b. Coordinates derived from the coordinates system being used
by the city; or
c. Any other system agreed upon by the applicant and the city;
(2) Type and size of the utility facility;
(3) Description showing aboveground appurtenances;
(4) A legend explaining symbols, characters, abbreviations, scale and other
data shown on the map; and
(5) Any facilities to be abandoned, if applicable, in conformance with
Minn. Stats. § 216D.04, subd. 3.
The applicant shall provide the city information mapping data shall be
provided with specificity and in the format requested by the city for
inclusion in the mapping system used by the city. If such format is
different from what is currently utilized and maintained by the
registration, the registrant may provide such information in the format
that they currently are utilizing. The permit application fee may include
the cost to convert the data furnished by the applicant to a format
currently in use by the city.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE III
15 of 20
(b) Information regarding equipment of telecommunications right-of-way users
constructed or located prior to May 10, 1997, need only be supplied in the form
maintained, however, all telecommunications right-of-way users must submit
some type of documentary evidence regarding the location of equipment within
the rights-of-way of the city.
(c) At the request of any registrant, any information requested by the city, which
qualifies as a "trade-secret" under Minn. Stats. § 13.37(b) shall be treated as
trade secret information as detailed therein. With respect to the provision of
mapping data, the city may consider unique circumstances from time to time
required to obtain mapping data.
Section 50-120. Supplementary applications.
(a) A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area of the right-of-way specified in
the permit. No permittee may perform any work outside the area specified in the
permit, except as provided in this article. Any permittee which determines that
an area greater than that specified in the permit must be obstructed or excavated
must before working in that greater area (i) make application for a permit
extension and pay any additional fees necessitated thereby, and (ii) be granted a
new permit or permit extension.
(b) A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates specified in the permit. No
permittee may begin its work before the permit start date or, except as provided
in this article, continue working after the end date. If a permittee does not finish
the work by the permit end date, it must make application for a new permit for
the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit or an extension of the
old permit before working after the end date of the previous permit. This
supplementary application must be done before the permit end date.
Section 50-121. Additional performance and restoration bonds.
When an excavation permit is requested for purposes of installing additional equipment,
and a performance and restoration bond which is in existence is insufficient with respect
to the additional equipment in the sole determination of the city, the permit applicant may
be required by the city to post an additional performance and restoration bond in
accordance with subsection 50-96(a).
Section 50-122. Issuance of permit; conditions.
(a) If the city determines that the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this
article, the city may issue a permit.
(b) The city may impose any reasonable conditions upon the issuance of a permit
and the performance of the applicant there under in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare, to ensure the structural integrity of the right-of-way,
to protect the property and safety of other users of the right-of-way, to minimize
the disruption and inconvenience to the traveling public, and to otherwise
efficiently manage use of the right-of-way.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE III
16 of 20
Section 50-123. Denial of permit.
The city may, in accordance with Minn. Stats. § 237.163, subd. 4, deny any application
for a permit as provided in this section.
(a) Mandatory denial. Except in the case of an emergency, no right-of-way permit
will be granted:
(1) To any person required by section 50-96 to be registered who has not
done so;
(2) To any person required by section 50-68 to file an annual report but has
failed to do so;
(3) For any next-year project not listed in the construction and major
maintenance plan required under section 50-68 unless the person used
commercially reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project;
(4) For any project which requires the excavation of any portion of a
right-of-way which was constructed or reconstructed within the
preceding five years;
(5) To any person who has failed within the past three years to comply, or
is presently not in full compliance, with the requirements of this article;
(6) To any person as to whom there exists grounds for the revocation of a
permit under section 50-129; and
(7) If, in the sole discretion of the city, the issuance of a permit for the
particular date and/or time would cause a conflict or interfere with an
exhibition, celebration, festival, or any other event. The city, in
exercising this discretion, shall be guided by the safety and
convenience of ordinary travel of the public over the right-of-way, and
by considerations relating to the public health, safety and welfare.
(b) Permissive denial. The city may deny a permit in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare, to protect interference with the safety and
convenience of ordinary travel over the right-of-way, or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its users. The city may consider one or more of the
following factors:
(1) The extent to which right-of-way space where the permit is sought is
available;
(2) The competing demands for the particular space in the right-of-way;
(3) The availability of other locations in the right-of-way or in other
rights-of-way for the equipment of the permit applicant;
(4) The applicability of ordinance or other regulations of the right-of-way
that affect location of equipment in the right-of-way;
(5) The degree of compliance of the applicant with the terms and
conditions of its franchise; if any, this article, and other applicable
ordinances and regulations;
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE III
17 of 20
(6) The degree of disruption to surrounding communities and businesses
that will result from the use of that part of the right-of-way;
(7) The condition and age of the right-of-way, and whether and when it is
scheduled for total or partial reconstruction; and
(8) The balancing of the costs of disruption to the public and damage to the
right-of-way, against the benefits to that part of the public served by the
expansion into additional parts of the right-of-way.
(c) Discretionary issuance. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a)(3)
and (4) of this section, the city may issue a permit in any case where the permit
is necessary (i) to prevent substantial economic hardship to a customer of the
permit applicant, or (ii) to allow such customer to materially improve its utility
service, or (iii) to allow a new economic development project; and where the
permit applicant did not have knowledge of the hardship, the plans for
improvement of service, or the development project when the applicant was
required to submit its list of next-year projects.
(d) Permits for additional next-year projects. Notwithstanding the provisions of
subsection (a)(3) of this section, the city may issue a permit to a registrant who
was allowed under subsection 50-68(b) to submit an additional next-year
project, or in the event the registrant demonstrates that it used commercially
reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project, such permit to be subject
to all other conditions and requirements of law, including such conditions as
may be imposed under this article.
State law reference--Permit denial, Minn. Stats. § 237.163, subd. 4.
Section 50-124. Permit fees.
(a) Excavation permit fee. The excavation permit fee shall be established by the city
in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:
(1) The city cost;
(2) The degradation of the right-of-way that will result from the
excavation;
(3) Restoration, if done or caused to be done by the city.
(b) Obstruction permit fee. The obstruction permit fee shall be established by the
city and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the city cost.
(c) Disruption fees. The city may establish and impose a disruption fee as a penalty
for unreasonable delays in excavations, obstructions, or restoration. Disruption
fees will not be imposed if the delay in completion is due to circumstances
beyond the control of the applicant, including without limitation inclement
weather, acts of God or civil strike.
(d) Payment of permit fees. No excavation permit or obstruction permit shall be
issued without payment of all fees required prior to the issuance of such a permit
unless the applicant shall agree (in a manner, amount, and substance acceptable
to the city) to pay such fees within 30 days of billing therefore. All permit fees
shall be doubled during a probationary period. Permit fees that were paid for a
permit which was revoked for a breach are not refundable. Any refunded permit
fees shall be less all city cost up to and including the date of refund.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE III
18 of 20
(e) Use of permit fees. All obstruction and excavation permit fees shall be used
solely for city management, construction, maintenance and restoration costs of
the right-of-way.
State law reference--Permit fees, Minn. Stats. § 237.163, subd. 6.
Section 50-125. Display of permits.
Permits issued under this article shall be conspicuously displayed at all times at the
indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by the city inspector and
authorized city personnel.
Section 50-126. Other obligations.
(a) Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not relieve permittee of its duty to obtain
all other necessary permits, licenses, franchises or other authorizations and to
pay all fees required by the city, any other city, county, state or federal rules,
laws or regulations. A permittee shall comply with all requirements of local,
state and federal laws, including Minn. Stats. ch. 216D (One Call Excavation
Notice System). A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all
applicable codes and established rules and regulations, and is responsible for all
work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who performs
the work.
(b) Except in the case of an emergency, and with the approval of the city, no
right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally
prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work.
(c) A permittee shall not so obstruct a right-of-way that the natural free and clear
passage of water through the gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with.
Private vehicles may not be parked with or adjacent to a permit area. The
loading or unloading of trucks adjacent to a permit area is prohibited unless
specifically authorized by the permit.
Section 50-127. Work done without a permit.
(a) Emergency situations. Each registrant shall immediately notify the city or the
city's designee of any event regarding its equipment which it considers to be an
emergency. The registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary
in order to respond to the emergency. Within two business days after the
occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply for the necessary
permits, pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the rest of the requirements
necessary to bring itself into compliance with this article for the actions it took
in response to the emergency. In the event that the city becomes aware of an
emergency regarding a registrant's equipment, the city may attempt to contact
the local representative of each registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the
emergency. In any event, the city may take whatever action it deems necessary
in order to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the
registrant whose equipment occasioned the emergency.
(b) Non-emergency situations. Except in the case of an emergency, any person who,
without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or evacuate a rightof-
way must subsequently obtain a permit, pay double the normal fee for such
permit, pay double all the other fees required by city ordinance, including, but
not limited to, criminal fines and penalties, deposit with the city the fees
necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-way and comply with all of the
requirements of this article.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE III
19 of 20
Section 50-128. Supplementary notification.
If the obstruction or evacuation of the right-of-way begins later or ends sooner than the
date given on the permit, the permittee shall notify the city of the accurate information as
soon as this information is known.
Section 50-129. Revocation of permits.
(a) Registrants hold permits issued pursuant to this Code as a privilege and not as a
right. The city reserves its right, as provided in this article and in accordance
with Minn. Stats. § 237.163, subd. 4, to revoke any right-of-way permit, without
fee refund, in the event of a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any
statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, or any condition of the permit. A
substantial breach by permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the
following:
(1) The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
(2) An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the
right-of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any
fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens;
(3) Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
right-of-way permit;
(4) The failure to maintain the required bonds and/or insurance;
(5) The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; or
(6) The failure to correct a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant
to subsection 50-71(c).
(b) If the city determines that the permittee has committed a substantial breach of a
term or condition of any statute, ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of
the permit, the city shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy
such violation. The demand shall state that continued violations may be cause
for revocation of the permit. Further, a substantial breach, as stated in this
subsection, will allow the city, at the city's discretion, to place additional or
revised conditions on the permit.
(c) Within 24 hours of receiving notification of the breach, the permittee shall
contact the city with a plan, acceptable to the city inspector, for its correction.
The permittee's failure to so contact the city inspector, the permittee's failure to
submit an acceptable plan, or the permittee's failure to reasonably implement the
approved plan shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit. Further,
the permittee's failure to so contact the city inspector, or the permittee's failure
to submit an acceptable plan, or permittee's failure to reasonably implement the
approved plan shall automatically place the permittee on probation for one full
year.
(d) From time to time, the city may establish a list of conditions of the permit
which, if breach, will automatically place the permittee on probation for one full
year, such as, but not limited to, working out of the allotted time period or
working on right-of-way outside of the permit.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE III
20 of 20
(e) If a permittee, while on probation, commits a breach as outlined above, the
permittee's permit will automatically be revoked and the permittee will not be
allowed further permits for one full year, except for emergency repairs.
(f) If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also reimburse the city for the city's
reasonable costs, including restoration costs and the costs of collection and
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in connection with such revocation.
State law reference--Permit revocation, Minn. Stats. § 237.163, subd. 4.
Sections 50-130 thru 50-150. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE IV
1 of 3
CHAPTER 50. STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
ARTICLE IV. Parks and Cemeteries
----------
*State law references--General authority relative to parks, Minn. Stats. §§ 410.33, 412.191; general
authority relative to cemeteries, Minn. Stats. §§ 410.33, 412.221, subd. 9.
----------
Sections 50-151 thru 50-165. Reserved.
Section 50-166. Definitions.
For the purpose of this division the term "park" shall mean a park, playground, playfield,
swimming pool, lake, pond, stream, trail, nature area, open space area, recreational
center, golf course, or cemetery. It shall also mean any other property owned, leased,
used, or controlled, wholly or in part, by the city for park and recreation use.
Section 50-167. Scope.
The provisions of this division apply to all parks within the city.
Section 50-168. Park facilities use policies, procedures and fees.
Policies, procedures, and fees for use of park facilities in the city may be set by the city
council, either upon its own motion or following recommendation by the park and
recreation advisory board.
Section 50-169. Penalties.
Violation of section 50-172, 50-174, 50-175, 50-177, 50-178, 50-180, 50-181, 50-182,
50-186 or 50-188 shall be a petty misdemeanor, and violation of section 50-173, 50-176,
50-179, 50-183, 50-184, 50-185 or 50-187 shall be a misdemeanor under this Code.
Section 50-170. Emergency orders.
When necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare, the chief of police is
authorized to issue reasonable temporary orders concerning the use of parks on matters
not specifically addressed in this article or the policies, procedures, rules, or regulations
adopted under this article by resolution.
Section 50-171. Additional regulations.
In order to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to better control and manage all
parks of the city, the superintendent of parks is authorized to propose additional written
rules and regulations which shall define in detail the procedures to be followed in the use
of the parks. Such regulations and any amendments thereto shall be effective upon
council approval by resolution.
Section 50-172. Park hours.
Except for Greenhaven, unless otherwise posted, all public parks will close by 11:00 p.m.
each day and shall remain closed to the public until 6:00 a.m. on the following day. By
council resolution, and upon posting, other closed hours may be designated for any park.
No person shall be in, remain in, or enter any closed public park.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE IV
2 of 3
Section 50-173. Obeying authorized persons.
Any person using a park and recreation facility shall obey all orders or directions of
authorized city personnel given in conformance with this article. The superintendent of
parks and any park attendant shall have the authority to eject from the park and its
facilities any person acting in violation of this article.
Section 50-174. Traffic.
(a) Parking. No person shall drive into, remain in, or leave a parked vehicle in a
public parking area within or immediately adjacent to a public park during the
hours when such park is closed in accordance with section 50-172 except as
authorized by permit or the police department.
(b) Parking in proper areas. No person shall operate or park any motorized vehicle
in any public park or recreation area except on roads or in designated parking
areas unless authorized by a special permit.
(c) Speed limit. No person shall operate a motorized vehicle within a park at a speed
in excess of 15 miles per hour.
Section 50-175. Fires.
No fires shall be lighted or made in any park except in designated areas. Fires must be
attended at all times and extinguished after use.
Section 50-176. Fireworks and firearms.
(a) No person shall bring into or discharge any fireworks in any park without the
written permission of the city and without a permit, from the fire chief.
(b) No person shall bring into or discharge a firearm in any park unless as approved
under a special permit to allow hunting.
Section 50-177. Golf activities prohibited in public parks.
No person shall hit, drive, stroke or otherwise propel a golf ball upon, in, over or across
any park other than a designated golf course or driving range. The play or practice or use
of golf equipment of any kind is prohibited in public parks within the city, except under
the direction and approval of the superintendent of parks or on a golf area provided for
that purpose or as part of a city park and recreation program.
Section 50-178. Gambling; excessive use of alcoholic beverages; abusive, boisterous, profane or
indecent language, conduct or attire.
Gambling, excessive use of alcoholic beverages, and abusive, boisterous, profane or
indecent language, conduct or attire is prohibited in public parks. No alcoholic beverages
shall be possessed or consumed in parks where notice of such restriction is posted.
Section 50-179. Nuisance and disorderly conduct.
No person shall commit any nuisance as defined by Minn. Stats. § 609.74 or any offense
against decency or any act defined as disorderly conduct as defined by
Minn. Stats. § 609.72.
Section 50-180. Sales.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE IV
3 of 3
Advertising, selling, or solicitation is prohibited in parks and recreation areas except as
specifically permitted by the city.
Section 50-181. Animals.
(a) It shall be unlawful for a person to cause or permit a dog, cat, or other pet to be
in a park unless restrained at all times on an adequate leash not greater than
eight feet in length. Feces of any domestic animal shall be properly disposed of
by the owner or guardian of the pet.
(b) No person shall disturb, molest, injure or interfere with any birds, animals,
animal habitat, or nesting area in a park.
Section 50-182. Litter.
No person shall scatter about or litter a park with any form of waste material. Dumping or
depositing bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, or refuse of any kind is
prohibited except in the containers provided in the parks.
Section 50-183. Shooting mechanisms.
No person shall possess or use an air rifle, BB gun, bow and arrow, or sling shot in a park
or on public property unless as approved under a special permit to allow hunting.
Section 50-184. Pollution of water.
No person shall discharge in waters of any pond, stream or any body of water, any
substance, liquid or solid, or any material or thing which will result in pollution of the
water.
Section 50-185. Protecting public property.
No person shall remove, break, destruct, injure, mutilate, carry away, or deface in any
way any tree, plant, flower, shrub, rock, soil, sand, fence, bench, table, building, shelter,
or any other city property or thing pertaining to or located in a park.
Section 50-186. Climbing.
Climbing of trees, flagpoles, buildings, shelters, light standards, fences and backstops,
sitting or standing upon monuments, vases, fountains, railings, or fences in any park and
recreation area is prohibited.
Section 50-187. Safe use of facilities.
No person shall use a park facility in a manner which endangers any person or property.
Section 50-188. Exclusive use.
No person or organization shall use a park or a park area for group celebrations,
meetings, entertainment, etc., which are considered "exclusive use," except through use
of a permit issued by the Director of Public Services.
Sections 50-189 thru 50-210. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE V
1 of 2
CHAPTER 50. STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
ARTICLE V. Rum River Speed Restrictions
Section 50-211. Purpose.
Pursuant to Minn. Stats. §§ 378.32 and 459.20 and Minn. Rules Parts 6110.3000 through
6110.3800, it is the purpose of the city to regulate the operation and speed of watercraft
on the Rum River from its confluence with the Mississippi River upstream to the
southern border of the City of Ramsey. The limitations contained in this ordinance are
designed to prevent and limit the erosion which is occurring to the banks and shoreline of
the Rum River, within the city. The heavy wake from water-skiing, jet skiing and speed
boating creates wave action which is eroding the shoreline, banks, and bluffs along the
river, is adverse to the public's interest in maintaining and preserving the shoreline, and
swimmers, people canoeing and other people using the river more passively are placed in
jeopardy by water-skiing, jet skiing and speed boating. This division is designed to
protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public.
Section 50-212. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section:
Operate means to navigate or otherwise use a watercraft.
Person means an individual, partnership, corporation or any body of persons, whether
incorporated or formed into an association or not.
Rum River means the body of water located in the City of Anoka from its confluence with
the Mississippi River upstream to the Ramsey city limits.
Slow-no wake means the operation of a watercraft at the slowest possible speed necessary
to maintain steerage and in no case greater than five miles per hour.
Watercraft means the same as is defined in Minn. Stats. § 361.02, subd. 7.
Section 50-213. Regulations.
No person shall operate a watercraft at greater than slow-no wake speed on the Rum
River from its confluence with the Mississippi River upstream to the Ramsey city limits.
Any person who shall violate this provision shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
Section 50-214. Exemptions.
(a) Authorized resource management, emergency and enforcement personnel, when
acting in the performance of their duties, shall be exempt from the provisions of
this ordinance.
(b) Temporary exemptions from this ordinance may be granted by the chief of
police.
Section 50-215. Marking.
The city police department shall be responsible for informing the public, posting
notification at all public accesses and marking or buoying areas affected by this
ordinance as necessary to give reasonable notice of the speed restriction of this section.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE V
2 of 2
Section 50-216. Enforcement.
The city police department, the Anoka County Sheriff's Department and other licensed
peace officers, including Conservation Offices of the Department of Natural Resources of
the State of Minnesota are authorized to enforce this division.
Sections 50-217 thru 50-229. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE VI
1 of 2
CHAPTER 50. STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
ARTICLE VI. Mississippi River Speed Restrictions
Section 50-230. Surface zoning of the Mississippi River by restricting speeds during certain seasonal
fluctuations of the water level.
A slow-no-wake speed shall be in effect 24 hours per day on the Mississippi River
between River Mile 879 upstream (upstream of the upstream tip of Goodin Island,
located between Dayton and Ramsey) and River Mile 866.2 downstream (the Coon
Rapids Dam) when the river level on the Mississippi River exceeds 837 feet above sea
level, as measured at Gauge C, Peninsula Point Park, Anoka, Minnesota and located at
the confluence of the Rum and Mississippi Rivers. A map depicting the physical
boundaries of this section is attached as Attachment A. When high water levels have
subsided and have remained below an elevation of 837 feet for three consecutive days,
said restrictions shall be promptly removed.
Section 50-231. Definitions.
For the purpose of this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section:
Slow-no-wake means operation of a watercraft at the slowest possible speed necessary to
maintain steerage, but in no case greater than five miles per hour.
Operate means to navigate or otherwise use a watercraft.
Watercraft means the same as is defined in Minn. Stats. ch. 361, subd. 7.
Person means an individual, partnership, corporation or any body of persons, whether
incorporated or formed into an association.
Section 50-232. Violation.
No person shall operate a watercraft at greater than slow-no-wake speed on the
Mississippi River during a period when a slow-no-wake speed is in effect.
Section 50-233. Enforcement.
The City Police Department, the Anoka County Sheriff’s Department and other licensed
Peace Officers, including Conservation Officers of the Department of Natural Resources
of the State of Minnesota, are authorized to enforce this article.
Section 50-234. Exemptions.
All authorized emergency, resource management and law enforcement personnel shall be
exempt from the restrictions of this division while they are performing their official
duties.
Section 50-235. Notification.
The restrictions on operation of watercraft as set forth in this section shall become
effective upon publication in the official newspaper of the city or on a specified date,
whichever is later. All public watercraft access areas shall be posted prior to, and during
the time, the restrictions are in place. In addition, the restrictions shall be posted at city
hall.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50; ARTICLE VI
2 of 2
Section 50-236. Penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this division may be charged with a
petty misdemeanor.
Sections 50-237thru 50-249. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50;ARTICLE VII
1 of 2
CHAPTER 50. STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
ARTICLE VII. Parades
----------
*State law reference--Authority to regulate processions or assemblages on highways,
Minn. Stats. § 169.04(a)(3).
----------
Section 50-250. "Parade" defined; exceptions.
(a) The term "parade" when used in this article means any parade, march,
ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind, or any similar
display, in or upon the portion of a street reserved for vehicular travel in the city.
(b) This article shall not apply to the following:
(1) Funeral processions;
(2) A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
Section 50-251. Interference prohibited.
No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede or interfere with any parade,
parade assembly or any person, animal or vehicle participating in the parade.
Section 50-252. Driving between units of parade.
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade
when such parade is in motion.
Section 50-253. Parking on parade route.
The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or
restrict the parking of vehicles along the route of the parade in areas contiguous thereto.
The chief of police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person
to park or leave any vehicle unattended in violation of such signs.
Section 50-254. Reserving Public Space.
Prior to 4:00 a.m. on the day of a morning or “daytime” parade and 4:00 p.m. on the day
of a “nighttime” parade, no person shall claim or attempt to claim, reserve, occupy or
otherwise control public space along the adjoining parade route, either in person or by the
placement of any objects such as, but not limited to, ropes, tapes, chairs, blankets,
barricade or barriers of any kind. After the foregoing 4:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. time
restrictions, ropes, tapes, chairs and blankets may be used to reserve public space along
the adjoining parade route, provided such objects are removed within three (3) hours
following the conclusion of the parade.
Section 50-255. Removal of Objects From Public Space.
Any objects on public property in violation of Section 50-254 may be removed by the
City or its designee and stored at a location designated by the City until such time as the
object is claimed by its owner or deemed to be abandoned by the City pursuant to Section
50-256. The City shall not be responsible for any objects removed and/or stored by the
City pursuant to this Section.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50;ARTICLE VII
2 of 2
Section 50-256. Reclamation of Removed Objects.
Individuals who have had objects removed from public property pursuant to
Section 50-255 must claim their objects no later than three (3) calendar days following
the conclusion of the parade. All items not claimed by said time may be deemed
abandoned and disposed of at the discretion of the City.
Section 50-257. City Reservation of Public Space.
The City may reserve public space along the parade route for observation of the parade
and erect and control seating on such reserved public space.
Sections 50-258 thru 50-270. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50;ARTICLE VIII
1 of 2
CHAPTER 50. STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
ARTICLE VIII. Unlawful Camping and Storage of Personal Property on Public Property.
Section 50-271. Purpose.
The public streets and public property, including, but not limited to open space,
sidewalks, parks, buildings, and easements within the City, should be readily accessible
and available to residents and the public at large. The use of these areas for camping
purposes or storage of personal property interferes with the rights of others to use these
areas as they were intended. The purpose of this Article is to conserve and maintain
public streets and public areas within the City in a clean and accessible condition.
Section 50-272. Definitions. For purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall be used.
Camp means the erecting of or occupying camp facilities for the apparent purpose of
overnight occupancy; to use camp paraphernalia.
Camp facilities include, but are not limited to, tarpaulins, tents, cots, beds, blankets,
bedding, bedrolls, mattresses, pads, sleeping bags, hammocks, lanterns, stoves, or noncity
designated cooking facilities and similar equipment.
Camp paraphernalia includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, tents, cots, beds, blankets,
bedding, bedrolls, mattresses, pads, sleeping bags, hammocks, lanterns, stoves or nondesignated
cooking facilities and similar equipment.
Park shall have the meaning set forth in Section 50-166 of the City Code.
Public property means all publicly owned real property, including, but not limited to, any
street, alley, sidewalk, pedestrian or transit mall, bike path, greenway, creek, waterway,
lots, parcels, any other forms of improved or unimproved land or real property, or any
other area encompassed within the public right-of-way; any park, parkway or other
recreation facility; or any other grounds, buildings or other facilities owned or leased by
the City or by any other public entity, regardless of whether such public property is
vacant or occupied and actively used for any public purpose.
Section 50-273. Unlawful camping.
Unless specifically authorized by the City or designated as an authorized camping
location, it shall be unlawful for any person to camp, occupy camp facilities or use camp
paraphernalia upon Public Property.
Section 50-274. Storage of personal property in public places.
Unless specifically authorized by the City, it shall be unlawful for any person to
accumulate excessive personal property or leave personal property unattended for thirty
(30) minutes or more upon Public Property.
Personal property left on Public Property that is associated with attendance at a City
authorized parade shall be excluded from the provisions of this Article and instead
governed under Chapter 50, Article VII.
Section 50-275. Enforcement procedures.
No law enforcement officer shall issue a citation, make an arrest or otherwise enforce this
Article against any person unless:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50;ARTICLE VIII
2 of 2
(a) The officer first orally requests or orders the person to refrain from the alleged
violation of this Article, and informs the person that if they fail to comply, the
person may be cited or arrested for a violation of this Article; and
(b) If, following the oral request or order required under paragraph (a) the person
refuses to cooperate, the officer may proceed to cite or arrest the person for a
violation of this Article.
Section 50-276. Violations.
Any person violating any provision of this Article is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Minnesota Statutes.
Section 50-277 thru 50-287. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50;ARTICLE IX
1 of 9
CHAPTER 50. STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
ARTICLE IX. Outdoor Seating Areas on Public Sidewalks
Section 50-288. Purpose. This Article is intended to facilitate outdoor dining by local business
establishments in order to create an active streetscape, enhance the economic and social
vitality of the City, and promote pedestrian and retail friendly activity; to allow for the
use of the public right of way for such outdoor dining; and to expedite the approval of
such facilities while ensuring that the public's use of the sidewalks will not be
significantly impaired by such dining, and that adjacent commercial and residential uses
will be protected from any adverse impacts from such dining.
Section 50-289. Definitions.
City means the City of Anoka, Minnesota.
Operator means any person who owns, operates, or manages a business that uses or
applies to use an outdoor seating area.
Outdoor seating area means a permitted seating area on a public sidewalk that is used for
seating purposes by a Permit Holder.
Permit Holder means any person who holds a current permit for an outdoor seating area.
Permitted Business means the business that regularly and customarily sells food or drink
and is allowed to use an outdoor seating area as authorized under this section.
Section 50-290. Sidewalk Use Limited; Outdoor Seating Area Permit.
(1) No business may use a public sidewalk to seat its patrons without first obtaining
a permit for an outdoor seating area issued by the City. No person shall place
tables, chairs, or other seating on a public sidewalk in conjunction with a
business without first obtaining a permit for an outdoor seating area that is
issued by the City.
(2) A business that regularly and customarily sells food or drink may obtain a
permit from the City to operate an outdoor seating area on the terms and
conditions set out in this section. The permit shall specify the specific area to be
used for outdoor seating, the furniture to be used within the outdoor seating area,
and the proposed arrangement of the furniture.
(3) An outdoor seating area permit authorizes a limited use of the public sidewalk
so long as that private use does not interfere with the public interest or public
use of the sidewalk.
(4) The City may temporarily suspend a Permit Holder’s use of an outdoor seating
area for any reason and for any length of time. During periods of temporary
suspension, the Permit Holder must remove its furnishings from the outdoor
seating area and shall not use the area. Outdoor seating areas may be
prohibited during special events, parades or pickets, or for any other reason
deemed appropriate by the City. The City will endeavor to give Permit Holders
reasonable advance notice before issuing a temporary suspension, including a
suspension related to a special event, parade, or picket.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50;ARTICLE IX
2 of 9
(5) The City will endeavor to give Permitted Businesses a minimum of twentyfour
(24) hours advanced notice, using information as provided on the permit
application or renewal, of any pressure washing or other maintenance of the
sidewalk to allow for the relocation of outdoor furniture.
(6) Neither the City nor any public utility company shall be responsible for
damage to personal property of a Permitted Business during repair,
maintenance or replacement of the sidewalk, public right of way, or any other
public facilities or utilities in the outdoor seating area.
(7) The authorization granted by a permit approved under this Article to
establish and maintain an outdoor seating area may be terminated whenever
the City desires to use the affected sidewalk or public right of way for any
purpose whatsoever and, by written notification, demands from the
Permitted Business the removal of its personal property. Said removal shall
be completed by the date specified in the notice and shall be accomplished
by the Permitted Business without cost to the City.
If the Permitted Business shall fail or neglect to remove its personal
property within the time specified, the City shall have the right to remove
the same, at the expense of the Permitted Business, and shall not be liable to
the Permitted Business for any loss or damage to the personal property
caused by the removal.
Section 50-291. Sidewalk Areas Eligible for Outdoor Seating.
An outdoor seating area shall meet all of the following requirements:
The building in which the Permitted Business operates must share a common boundary
line with a public sidewalk.
(1) The outdoor seating area shall not extend beyond the boundaries fronting the
Permitted Business.
(2) The outdoor seating area shall allow a minimum four-foot-wide unobstructed
pedestrian corridor at all times. Wider pedestrian corridors or increased
clearances may be required where warranted by pedestrian traffic or other
circumstances or to comply with the Minnesota Building Code, Americans with
Disabilities Act, or other laws. Furniture in an outdoor seating area may be
located next to the curb (with 2 feet clearance) and/or adjacent to the building,
so long as clearances are maintained.
(3) Where existing obstructions are present (such as fire hydrants, lamp posts,
parking meters or plantings), the corridor can be measured to go around these
obstructions.
(4) Where curbside abuts on-street parking, curbside tables shall be placed parallel
to the street. A minimum 2 foot setback should be maintained from the curb
edge.
(5) A minimum clearance of 5 feet must be maintained between the outdoor seating
area and edge of driveways, alleys, and handicapped ramps.
(6) Outdoor seating area at corners must not extend to within sight triangles at street
intersections or driveway entrances.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50;ARTICLE IX
3 of 9
(7) Clear unobstructed height of 7 feet must be maintained between the sidewalk
surface and overhead objects including umbrellas.
(8) The outdoor seating area must not block access to public amenities like street
furniture, trash receptacles, and way finding, or directional signs.
(9) The total number of seats (both indoor and outdoor) shall not exceed the
Permitted Business’ previously approved maximum number of seats by more
than 10 seats, and the number of seats permitted is dependent on the amount of
space available and on building and fire code requirements.
(10) Above-ground City public utilities infrastructure or transportation infrastructure
shall not be enclosed without written authorization of the Director of Public
Works.
(11) Furniture must be made of durable material. No plastic, or unfinished or
pressure treated wood furniture is permitted.
(12) City approved planters or pots may be used to define the outdoor dining space
but are not required.
(13) Tabletop signage is limited to menus and permitted business related advertising
not exceeding 81/2” x11”.
(14) Table umbrellas are permitted if they do not have signs or advertisements on
them, if the umbrellas are completely contained within the outdoor seating area,
even when fully extended, and if the lowest dimension of the umbrella maintains
a minimum vertical clearance of seven feet above the sidewalk to allow for
patron and server circulation. Table umbrellas are not allowed on tables located
within 10 feet of block corners. In other locations, there can be no more than 1
umbrella per table.
(15) Lighting must not cause glare to pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
(16) Lighting must not be affixed to City trees without a permit from the City.
(17) Loudspeakers outside are prohibited, and amplified sounds from inside the
Permitted Business must not be audible in any outside seating area on the
sidewalk or public right of way.
(18) Any business desiring to use the outdoor seating area directly associated with its
business use must have a direct, unobstructed access that must front on and open
onto the sidewalk, public alley or pedestrian way proposed for the outdoor
seating area.
Section 50-292. Application; Permit Requirements.
(1) A person owning, operating, or managing a business that regularly and
customarily serves food or drinks may apply for an outdoor seating area permit
on a form approved by the City. At a minimum, the application form shall
require:
a. The name, address, and telephone number of the business desiring to
operate an outdoor seating area;
b. The name, address and telephone number of each of the Operators of
the business;
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50;ARTICLE IX
4 of 9
c. The hours of operation of the business and the proposed hours of
operation of the outdoor seating area;
d. A scaled drawing or site plan, on a form provided by the City,
showing the proposed outdoor seating area boundary and surrounding
streetscape details covering seven feet on either side of the frontage of
the associated business, including but not limited to property lines,
sidewalks, curb lines, lighting, trees (including tree size), tree grates,
planters, street signs, bicycle parking, benches, bus stops, and fire
hydrants. The drawing shall show the section of any public right of way
to be used for the outdoor seating area and the section to be kept clear
for pedestrian use, and depict the proposed materials and placement of
tables, chairs, barriers, and other furnishings on the public right of way.
No material change to an approved plan shall be made without prior
written approval by the City; and
e. The furniture to be used in the outdoor seating area and its proposed
arrangement.
(2) An applicant shall also provide:
a. An application fee as provided in the City fee schedule to cover the cost
of processing and investigating the application, issuing the permit, and
other staff time associated with the permit;
b. Evidence of a valid insurance policy, through an insurance carrier
authorized or eligible to do business in the State of Minnesota for any
damage to the public right of way, and for any damages for which the
City might incur liability because of property damage or personal
injury arising out of the use of the public right of way for seating
purposes. The minimum liability limit of the policy shall be
$1,000,000.00. The City of Anoka shall be listed as an “additional
insured as its interests may appear” on all Certificates of Insurance;
c. An indemnity agreement, approved by the City Attorney, whereby the
Permit Holder and the Permitted Business agree to indemnify and hold
harmless the City and its officers, agents and employees from any
claim arising or resulting from the operation of the outdoor seating
area; and
d. A copy of all permits and licenses issued by the State, County or City
that are necessary for the operation of the business, including health
permits, liquor licenses and business licenses.
(3) The applicant shall comply with such other additional reasonable terms as the
City may include in the permit.
(4) No permit shall be issued until the applicant has submitted a completed
application and all items required by this section.
Section 50-293. Permit Term and Renewals.
(1) A permit issued under this section shall be valid from the date of issuance and
shall expire on November 1st of each year. All personal property of a Permitted
Business approved to be used on a public sidewalk through the issuance of the
permit must be removed from the public sidewalk by November 1st of each year.
If the Permitted Business shall fail or neglect to remove its personal property
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50;ARTICLE IX
5 of 9
by said date, the City shall not be liable to the Permitted Business for any loss
or damage to the personal property caused by the removal.
(2) Permits must be renewed annually by the applicant. The Permit Renewal
process shall consist of re-submission of the following:
a. Application Form;
b. Certificate of Insurance;
c. Indemnity Agreement;
d. A copy of all permits and licenses issued by the State, County or City
that are necessary for the operation of the business, including health
permits, liquor licenses and business licenses.; and
e. Permit Fee
No scaled drawing shall be required for a permit renewal unless the Permit
Holder has rearranged or reconfigured the tables, chairs, or other furnishings
used for outdoor seating purposes or otherwise revised the outdoor seating area
from the previous permit year.
Section 50-294. Denial of Application; Reconsideration.
(1) The City shall notify the applicant in writing if it is determined that the
proposed outdoor seating area does not meet the criteria established by this
section. The notice shall identify which criteria were not met.
(2) Within thirty (30) days of denial, the applicant may submit for reconsideration
one revised plan for an outdoor seating area for the same business. The payment
of a new application fee is not required.
(3) A revised plan that is submitted for reconsideration after the thirty (30) day
period has expired must be accompanied by a new application, including the
application fee.
Section 50-295. Operation of Outdoor Seating Areas.
(1) An outdoor seating area may be used only by the Permitted Business identified
in the permit and only for the seating of patrons in the furniture provided by the
Permit Holder. Every patron within the outdoor seating area must have their own
chair. No overcrowding of the outdoor seating area with standing patrons is
allowed.
(2) A Permit Holder may place one host station, removable tables, chairs, or
other items used in conjunction with seating within an outdoor seating area in the
arrangement shown on the permit. No cash registers, tents, minibars or similar
appurtenances shall be permitted. Furniture in an outdoor seating area shall be
kept clean and in good repair.
(3) No food preparation is permitted in the outdoor seating area.
(4) A Permit Holder may rearrange or reconfigure approved tables, chairs, and other
furnishings in the permitted outdoor seating area without submitting a new
application and without any fee only if:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50;ARTICLE IX
6 of 9
a. No prior rearrangement or reconfiguration had been submitted within
the permit year.
b. The Permit Holder, within seven (7) days of the reconfiguration,
provides the City with a scaled drawing or site plan of architectural
design standard quality of the new placement; and
c. The furnishings or their new placement do not:
i. Extend outside of the approved area;
ii. Constitute a danger to the health or safety of a patron or the
public; or
iii. Otherwise violate the terms of the permit.
(5) Outdoor seating areas shall be open to the air, except that seating may be located
under approved umbrellas, awnings, or canopies.
(6) Nothing shall be permanently affixed to a sidewalk or to other public property.
All improvements (furniture and fixtures) must be readily removable without
damage to the sidewalk or other public property.
(7) The Permit Holder and the Permitted Business shall not operate outside
the area specified in the permit.
(8) Permit Holders and operators shall keep all licenses and permits required for
their business operations continuously in effect.
(9) An outdoor seating area may be used by the Permit Holder only when the
Permitted Business is open to customers.
(10) No outdoor seating area shall operate or be open for seating after 10:00 p.m.
and Permit Holders shall ensure that their outdoor seating areas are not available
for use after this time. Furniture, enclosures and barriers may not be stored on
the sidewalk for extended periods, and must be removed from the sidewalk daily
when the Permitted Business is closed, unless previous arrangements have been
made with the City.
(11) The maximum occupancy permitted in the outdoor seating area shall be posted
on the exterior of the building in a conspicuous place. The Permit Holder shall
ensure that the number of occupants in the outdoor seating area does not exceed
the posted limit at any time. A server or other person employed by the Permit
Holder who briefly enters and exits an outdoor seating area shall not be
considered an occupant for the purposes of this subsection.
(12) The Permit Holder shall keep the outdoor seating area and the adjacent seven (7)
feet of public space surrounding it clean of any solid waste, including, food
debris, paper, cups, cans, cigarette butts and any other garbage associated with
the operation of the outdoor seating area space on a daily basis. The public right
of way within and adjacent to the outdoor seating area must be washed down
with water and detergent when needed and cleaned on a daily basis. Any stains
from spills must be removed. The Permit Holder must properly dispose of all
waste and trash in its own trash receptacles. Use of pubic trash receptacles for
disposing of business generated waste and trash is strictly forbidden.
(13) No glass, bottles or other similar breakable items used in association with the
Permitted Business’ operation shall be allowed in the outdoor seating area.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50;ARTICLE IX
7 of 9
(14) The Permit Holder is responsible for the maintenance, upkeep, and security of
furniture and accessories used in the outdoor seating area.
(15) The Permit Holder shall comply with all State laws regarding smoking in the
outdoor seating area. Permit Holders may be more, but may not be less
restrictive than the State laws.
(16) The Permitted Business must comply with all applicable City, state and federal
laws and regulations.
Section 50-296. Additional Requirements for Permitted Businesses Serving Alcohol.
In addition to all other provisions of this Article, the following provisions shall apply to Permitted Businesses
serving alcohol in outdoor seating areas.
(1) A Permit Holder must provide stanchions or other portable, visible, aboveground
barrier between the approved outdoor seating area and the remainder of
the public sidewalk whenever the outdoor seating area is in use. All barriers
must be previously approved by the City.
(2) There must be only one well-defined entrance to the outdoor seating area and it
must be located directly in front of the egress doors of the Permitted Business.
(3) The outdoor seating area must have adequate illumination during evening hours.
(4) Permit Holders and operators shall ensure that the Permitted Business obeys all
laws related to alcohol service and consumption. Permit Holders shall post
visible signs at all exit points from the outdoor seating area to the public
sidewalk reminding patrons that they cannot possess open containers of alcohol
outside the public seating area. Patrons are not permitted to carry their own
alcohol to the outdoor seating area. To retain an outdoor seating area permit,
Permit Holders and operators shall ensure that no alcohol is served or consumed
outside the permitted outdoor seating area.
Section 50-297. Assignment Prohibited; Effect of Ceasing Business Operations.
(1) An outdoor seating area permit is not transferrable or assignable. The permit
authorizes use of the outdoor seating area by the Permit Holder for the Permitted
Business. Any change in the ownership of a business after the issuance of an
outdoor seating area permit shall cause the permit to be immediately invalid and
require the new owner to reapply for the permit. A change in ownership shall
mean acquisition of more than ten percent of the stock in a publicly traded
corporation, any change in the ownership of shares in a privately held
corporation, sale of all or part of a sole proprietorship, or any change in the
membership of any form of limited liability organization.
(2) Outdoor seating area Permit Holders shall notify the City when business
operations cease. If business operations cease at the business for thirty (30)
calendar days or longer, the outdoor seating area permit shall automatically
terminate.
Section 50-298. Enforcement. Violations of any provision of this Article may result in one or more of
the following:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50;ARTICLE IX
8 of 9
(1) Civil Penalties. Violations of any of the provisions of this Article may result in
the following civil penalties:
(a) First offense in any twelve-month period, $100.00
(b) Subsequent offenses in any twelve-month period, $200.00 per offense.
The City Manager or the Manager’s designee may issue a notice of violation assessing
civil penalties. The notice shall be issued in writing and shall set forth with reasonable
specificity the basis for the civil penalty. The notice of violation shall be served by
registered or certified mail, or by personal service. When service is made by registered
or certified mail, a copy of the notice may also be sent by first class mail. Service shall
be deemed sufficient if the first class mail is not returned the Post Office within ten (10)
days after the mailing. Refusal to accept the notice shall not relieve the violator of the
obligation to pay the penalty.
The notice of violation shall contain a time period by which the violation must be
corrected. From and after the date specified in the notice, each subsequent day that the
violation continues in existence shall constitute a separate and distinct offense subject to
additional civil penalties.
(2) Permit Suspension. If a Permit Holder or Permitted Business violates any
provision contained in this Article, any outdoor seating area permit issued to or
on behalf of that person and/o business may be suspended at the discretion of the
City Manager.
(3) Other Remedies. In addition to civil penalties and permit suspension, a
violation of this Article is a misdemeanor and may also be enforced through
injunctive or other equitable relief, or a combination of remedies.
(4) Appeals.
a. A party aggrieved may appeal any decision under this section to the
City Council. To appeal to the City Council, the aggrieved party must
submit a request in writing to the City Clerk within fifteen (15)
calendar of the City Manager’s decision (or the decision of his
designee). The appeal must be accompanied by a fee as established by
the City Council.
b. The appeal will be heard by the City Council after notice served in
person or b registered mail at least ten (10) days in advance of the
hearing. The parties to the hearing will have an opportunity to present
oral or written arguments regarding the City Manager’s decision (or the
decision of his designee).
c. The City Council must consider the City Manager’s decision or the
decision of his designee), and any additional arguments before making
a determination. The City Council is not bound by the City Manager’s
decision (or the decision of his designee), but may adopt all or part of
the City Manager’s decision (or the decision of his designee). The City
Council’s decision must be in writing.
If the City Council finds that the facts as found by the City Manager (or
of his designee) are correct, the City Council may order any one or
more of the remedies available under Section 50-298 (1), (2) or (3).
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 50;ARTICLE IX
9 of 9
Section 50-299. Article Controlling. In order to establish a uniform set of regulations for outdoor
seating in the public right of ways, the provisions of this Article shall supercede and
preempt conflicting provisions covering the same topic and applicable to rights of way
located elsewhere in the City Code.
Section 50-300. If this ordinance or application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the ordinance which can be
given separate effect and to this end the provisions of this ordinance are declared to be
severable.
Sections 50-301 thru 50-320. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 54; ARTICLE I
CHAPTER 54. SUBDIVISIONS
ARTICLE I. In General
Section 54-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Administrative official means the City Manager or such other full time employee of the City as the
City Council may designate.
Alley means a public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property.
Block means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, or by streets and
the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision, or a combination of the above with a river or
lake.
City engineer means a professional engineer as designated by the City Council.
Deflection angle means the angle between a line and the prolongation of the preceding line.
Design standards means the specifications to land owners or subdividers for the preparation of plats,
both preliminary and final, indicating among other things, the optimum, minimum or maximum
dimensions of such items as right-of-way, blocks, easements and lots.
Easement means a grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land for the purpose of
constructing and maintaining any public utilities, storm drainage ways or ponding areas.
Final plat means a drawing or map of a subdivision, meeting all the requirements of the City and in
such form as required by the County for purposes of recording.
Flood means a temporary rise in stream flow or stage that results in inundation of the areas adjacent
to the channel.
Flood frequency means the average frequency, statistically determined, for which it is expected that a
specific flood level or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
Flood fringe means that portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway.
Floodplain means the areas adjoining a watercourse which has been or hereafter may be covered by
the regional flood.
Floodproofing means a combination of structural provision, changes or adjustments to properties and
structures subject to flooding primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages.
Floodway means the channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains
which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the regional flood.
Lot means a portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for building development or for
transfer of ownership.
Lot split means a subdivision of a parcel of land into two lots along an existing public street not
involving the opening, widening, or extension of any public street.
1 of 5
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 54; ARTICLE I
Master plan means a comprehensive plan, prepared and adopted by the Planning Commission and
adopted by the City Council, which indicates the general locations recommended for the various
functional classes of public works, streets and thoroughfares, places and structures and for the general
physical development of the city and includes any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and
any amendment to such plans or parts thereof.
Owner means and includes the plural as well as the singular, and where appropriate shall include a
natural person, partnership, firm, association, public or quasi public corporation, private corporation,
or a combination of any of them.
Pedestrian way means a public or private right-of-way across a block or within a block to provide
access, to be used by pedestrians and which may be used for the installation of utilities where
approved by the Planning Commission and City Council.
Percentage of grade means the distance vertically (up or down) from the horizontal in feet and
decimals of a foot for each 100 feet of horizontal distance.
Preliminary plat means the preliminary map, drawing or chart indicating the proposed layout of the
subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Commission for its consideration.
Protective covenants means contracts made between private parties as to the manner in which land
may be used, with the view to protecting and preserving the physical, social and economic integrity
of any given area.
Regional flood means a flood which is representative of large floods known to have occurred
generally in the State and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average
frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year recurrence interval.
Regulatory flood protection elevation means a point not less than one foot above the water surface
profile associated with the regional flood plus any increases in flood heights attributable to
encroachments on the floodplain. It is the elevation to which uses regulated by this chapter are
required to be elevated or flood-proofed.
Street means a public right-of-way affording primary access by pedestrians and vehicles to abutting
properties, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road,
avenue, boulevard, lane, place, or however otherwise designated.
Street, collector means streets that carry traffic from minor streets to the major system of arterial
streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of residential neighborhoods.
Street, cul-de-sac means a minor street with only one outlet and having an appropriate terminal for
the sale and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
Street grade means the centerline grade of the street which shall be related to the property line grades
as shown on standard street cross sections on file in the city engineer's office.
Street, local means those streets which are used primarily for access to abutting properties.
Street, major thoroughfares or arterial means streets used primarily for heavy traffic, and serving as
an arterial traffic way between the various districts of the community, including the municipal Stateaid
system, as shown on the master plan.
Street, marginal access means minor streets which are parallel and adjacent to arterial streets and
highways; and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
2 of 5
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 54; ARTICLE I
Street width means the shortest distance between lines of lots delineating the street.
Subdivision means the division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels. The term includes
resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the
land subdivided.
Tangent means a straight line which is perpendicular to the radius of a curve where a tangent meets a
curve.
U.S.G.S. datum means the United States Geodetic Survey Datum. (1929 adjustment).
Vertical curve means the surface curvature connecting lines of different percentage of grade.
Cross reference--Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Section 54-2. Purpose of chapter.
In order to safeguard the best interests of the community and to assist the subdivider in harmonizing
his interests with those of the City at large, this chapter is adopted in order that adherence to the
chapter will bring results beneficial to both parties. Because each new subdivision becomes a
permanent unit in the basic unit structure of the expanding community, and to which the community
will be forced to adhere, and because piecemeal planning of subdivisions will bring an undesirable
disconnected patchwork of pattern and poor circulation of traffic unless its design and arrangement is
correlated to a master plan of the city aiming at a unified scheme of community interests, all
subdivision of land hereafter submitted for approval to the planning commission shall, in all respects,
fully comply with the regulations set forth in this chapter. It is the purpose of this chapter to make
certain regulations and requirements for the platting of land within the City pursuant to the authority
contained in Minn. Stats. Chapters. 429, 462 and 471, which regulations the City Council deems
necessary for the health, safety and general welfare of this community.
Section 54-3. Applicability of chapter.
The regulations in this Chapter governing plats and subdivisions shall, pursuant to Minn. Statutes
462.357(1), apply within the corporate limits of the City of Anoka.
The 100-year flood profile of the Mississippi River and the 100-year flood profile of the Rum River,
both prepared by the United States Geological Survey, and the zoning map which is a part of Chapter
74 of this Code are made a part of this chapter by reference and are on file in the office of the City
Clerk. The elevations mentioned in this chapter refer to such 100-year profile elevations.
Section 54-4. Land suitability.
No land shall be subdivided which is held unsuitable for its intended use by the City Council for
reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, soil and rock formations with severe limitations for
development, susceptibility to mudslides or earth slides, severe erosion potential, unfavorable
topography, inadequate water supply or sewage disposal capabilities or any other feature harmful to
the health, safety or welfare of the future residents of the proposed subdivision or community.
However the City Council may approve the preliminary and final plats if the subdivider improves the
land consistent with the standards of this and other applicable ordinances in order to make the area, in
the opinion of the City Council, suitable for its intended use. Should the City Council determine that
only part of a proposed subdivision can be safely developed, it shall limit development to that part
and require that the specifications for development be consistent with its determination.
3 of 5
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 54; ARTICLE I
Section 54-5. Registered land surveys.
All registered land surveys in the City shall be presented to the Planning Commission in the form of a
preliminary plat in accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter for preliminary plats and
that the planning commission shall first approve the arrangement, sizes, and relationship of proposed
tracts in such registered land surveys, and that tracts to be used as easements or roads should be so
designated. Unless such Planning Commission approval and City Council approval in accordance
with the City standards set forth in this chapter have been obtained, building permits will be withheld
for buildings on tracts which have been so subdivided by registered land surveys and the city may
refuse to take over tracts as streets or roads to improve, repair or maintain any such tracts unless so
approved.
Section 54-6. Platting land divisions.
All subdivisions that create two or more parcels shall be platted, except as provided otherwise in this
Chapter.
State law reference--Mandatory provisions, Minn. Stats. § 462.358, subd. 3a.
Section 54-7. Lot splits.
(a) Applications for lots splits that do not require variances may be administratively approved
by the City Planner. An application form, along with three copies of a site sketch and the
appropriate fee, as determined by the City Council, must be submitted to the City Planner.
The City Planner may require the applicant to submit a survey showing the proposed lots to
be created.
(b) The City Planner may require such revisions as are necessary to meet code requirements.
(c) If lot split approval is denied by the City Planner, the applicant may appeal that decision to
the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall recommend approval,
disapproval or approval of the lot split with specified modifications to the City council.
(d) The City Council will take action on lot split requests which have been reviewed by the
Planning Commission. The City Planner will notify the owner and subdivider in writing of
the Council's decision.
Section 54-8. Conveyance by metes and bounds.
(a) No conveyance of land in the land conveyed is described by metes and bounds, or by a
portion of a platted lot, or by reference to an unapproved land survey made after April 21,
1961, to an unapproved plat made after June 3, 1962, the date upon which the ordinance
from which this chapter is derived became effective, shall be made or recorded unless the
parcel described in the conveyance:
(1) Was a separate parcel of record on June 3, 1962; or
(2) Was the subject of a written agreement to convey entered into prior to June 3,
1962; or
(3) Was a separate parcel of not less than 22 acres in area and 150 feet in width on
January 1, 1966; or
(4) Was a separate parcel of not less than five acres in area and 300 feet in width on
July 1, 1980; or
4 of 5
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 54; ARTICLE I
(5) Is a single parcel of commercial or industrial land of not less than five acres and
having a width of not less than 300 feet and its conveyance does not result in the
division of the parcel into two or more lots or parcels, any one of which is less than
five acres in area or 300 feet in width; or
(6) Is a single parcel of residential or agricultural land of not less than 20 acres and
having a width of not less than 500 feet and its conveyance does not result in the
division of the parcel into two or more lots or parcels, any one of which is less than
20 acres in area or 500 feet in width.
(b) In any case in which compliance with the restrictions of subsection (a) of this section will
create an unnecessary hardship and failure to comply does not interfere with the purpose of
the subdivision regulations, the City Council may waive such compliance by adoption of a
resolution to that effect pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. All requests for waivers
shall require a public hearing.
(c) Each request for waiver shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee determined by the
Council.
State law references--Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. § 462.358, subd. 4b; variances, Minn. Stats. § 462.358, subd. 6.
Section 54-9. Variances.
(a) The Planning Commission may recommend a variance from the provisions of this chapter
when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In granting any
variance, the Council shall prescribe only condition it deems necessary to or desirable for
the public interest. In making its findings, as required in this subsection, the Planning
Commission shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing
use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to preside or work in the proposed
subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in
the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the Planning Commission finds:
(1) That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting such property such that
the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant
of the reasonable use of his land.
(2) That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial
property right of the petitioner.
(3) That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or
injurious to other property in the territory in which property is situated.
(b) Applications for any such variance shall be submitted in writing by the subdivider at the
time when the preliminary plat is filed for consideration by the Planning Commission,
stating fully and clearly all facts relied upon by the petitioner and shall be supplemented
with maps, plans or other additional data which may aid the Planning Commission in the
analysis of the proposed project. The plans for such development shall include such
covenants, restrictions or other legal provisions necessary to guarantee the full achievement
of the plan.
Secs. 54-10--54-30. Reserved.
5 of 5
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 54; ARTICLE II; DIVISION I
CHAPTER 54. SUBDIVISIONS
ARTICLE II. Plats.
----------
*State law reference--Platting procedures, Minn. Stats. § 462.358, subd. 3b.
----------
Division 1. Generally
Section 54-31. Required generally.
(a) Form. Every proposed subdivision, excluding lot splits, must be submitted in the form of
a preliminary plat to the City Planner who will transmit it to the planning commission for
review and recommendation to the City Council. The preliminary plat is not intended to
be a final plat. The purpose of a preliminary plat is to graphically show all of the facts to
determine whether the proposed plat meets the requirements of this chapter. The
preliminary plat shall be signed by a registered land surveyor. Inaccurate or insufficient
information supplied by the applicant may be cause for disapproval of a preliminary plat.
(b) Filing. The subdivider must, at least three weeks prior to the appropriate Planning
Commission meeting, submit five prints and a 8½-inch by 11-inch reduction of the
proposed preliminary plat and any other required plans to the City Planner with an
application for approval. A fee, as determined by the City Council, must be submitted at
the time of application.
Section 54-32. Contents of preliminary plat.
The following information must be included on the preliminary plat:
(1) Plat identification and description.
a. Proposed name of the subdivision. The name cannot duplicate the name of any
plat previously recorded in the County.
b. Location by section, township and range or by other legal description.
c. Names and addresses of the owner and subdivider having control of the land
included in the preliminary plat, the designer of the plat and the surveyor.
d. Graphic scale, of a size not less than one inch equals 200 feet.
e. North point.
f. Date of preparation.
(2) Existing conditions.
a. Boundary line survey. The survey shall show the location of any buildings,
fences, existing public or private utilities, or other substantial structures on or
within the boundary lines of the plat.
b. Total acreage in the preliminary plat computed to one one-hundredth of an acre.
1 of 3
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 54; ARTICLE II; DIVISION I
c. Location and names of existing or platted streets or rights-of-way, parks and
other public open spaces, permanent buildings or structures, easements and
section and corporate lines within the preliminary plat and 100 feet beyond the
plat boundaries.
d. If the plat is a replat of any former plat, the lot and block arrangement of the
original plat, along with its original name, must be indicated by dotted or dashed
lines. Any revised or vacated roadways, railroad rights-of-way, walkways,
parklands and easements of the original plat must be indicated.
e. Location and size of existing paved streets, railroads, sewers, water mains,
quarries, gravel pits, culverts or any underground facilities within the tract and
100 feet beyond the plat boundaries.
f. Boundary lines of adjoining platted or unplatted land within 100 feet of the plat
as shown on the County records and the owner's name and address indicated.
g. The preliminary plat and a reproducible copy, superimposed on a contour map
compiled to the national map accuracy standards with a contour interval not
greater than two feet. The following must also be depicted: watercourses,
wetlands and marshes, including their acreage; rock outcrops; floodplain,
floodway and flood fringe areas; and other significant features. United States
Geodetic Survey datum must be used for all topographic mapping. High water
elevations and the date thereof must be indicated if applicable.
h. Sufficient soil borings to determine soil classifications and water table
elevations, including the depth of proposed utilities.
i. A copy of restrictive covenants, if any, and that of all adjoining subdivisions.
(3) Design features.
a. Layout of streets, showing right-of-way widths and names of streets.
b. Location and width of alleys, pedestrian ways and utility easements.
c. Proposed street and alley grades, if any, and a complete set of profiles showing
both existing and proposed grade lines.
d. Location and size of storm and sanitary sewer lines, water mains and
approximate gradient of sewer lines.
e. Layout, lot and block numbers, and typical lot dimensions scaled to the nearest
foot.
f. Areas other than those mentioned above intended to be conveyed for public use,
including the size of such areas.
g. A separate draft of proposed restrictive covenants, if they are to be used, for the
preliminary plat and restrictive deed covenants covering plats within floodplain
areas for the purpose of insuring that the areas will be left essentially in the state
shown on the plat.
2 of 3
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 54; ARTICLE II; DIVISION I
Section 54-33. Review.
The preliminary plat submission shall be reviewed by the planning commission to determine its
conformity to all regulations which affect subdivisions. Copies of the preliminary plat will be
transmitted by the city planner, to the director of public works, the park and recreation director,
and other appropriate officials for their recommendations concerning matters within their
jurisdiction.
Section 54-34. Approval.
(a) Planning Commission approval. The Planning Commission shall conduct a public
hearing according to the procedure set forth in Chapter 74 on the proposed plat at which
interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The planning commission
shall recommend approval, disapproval or approval of the plat with specified
modifications to the City Council.
(b) City Council action. The City Council will take action on the preliminary plat within 120
days of the date of filing the application with the City Planner. If the recommendation
from the Planning Commission has not been received within the 120-day period, the City
Council may act without such recommendation. The City Council may require such
revisions in the preliminary plat as it deems necessary for the health, safety and general
welfare of the City. Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute final approval.
Approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council shall give the applicant the
following rights for a 12-month period from the date of approval:
(1) That the general terms and conditions under which the approval was granted will
not be changed by the City;
(2) That the applicant may submit on or before such expiration date, the whole or
any part of the approved plat for final approval; and
(3) The City Council may extend the time period of preliminary approval, upon
written application by the developer and for good cause shown. Such extension
shall not exceed a 12-month period.
Section. 54-35--54-50. Reserved.
3 of 3
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 54; ARTICLE II; DIVISION 2
CHAPTER 54. SUBDIVISIONS
ARTICLE II. Plats
Division 2. Final Plats
Section 54-51. Submission.
(a) After approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider may, within 12 months, submit to the City Planner
the final plat of the subdivision incorporating all modifications required in the preliminary plat.
(b) If requested by the subdivider, the City Council may extend the time limit on an annual basis.
(c) The final plat may constitute the entire area covered by the preliminary plat or only that portion which the
subdivider proposes to record, provided that the public improvements to be constructed in the area covered
by the plat are sufficient to provide for the health, safety, and convenience of the future residents and for
access to contiguous areas.
State law reference--Effect of approval of preliminary plat, Minn. Stats. § 462.358, subd. 3c.
Section 54-52. Filing a final plat.
(a) Application for final plat approval must be made to the City Planner at least two weeks prior to the
appropriate meeting of the City Council.
(b) At the same time that the application for final plat approval is made with the City Planner, a final drawing
must be presented.
(c) Five black-on-white or other acceptable reproductions and an 8½-inch by 11-inch reduction must
accompany the original drawing.
(d) The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of Minn. Stats. Ch. 505 and signed by
the owners, mortgagees and surveyor. The subdivider must furnish an opinion from an attorney-at-law
showing that the fee title is in the name of the owner as shown on the plat or the subdivider shall furnish
evidence of a title insurance policy indicating the such ownership.
Section 54-53. Review and recommendation.
(a) The City Planner will transmit a copy of the final plat to the Director of Public Works for his
recommendation. Other copies of the plat will be retained by the Planning Department for public
inspection.
(b) The report of the Director of Public Works will be submitted to the City Planner. The Director of Public
Works will state whether the final plat and proposed or constructed improvements conform to the City's
engineering standards as established in this chapter. The Director of Public Works shall also establish the
required payment for City administrative and engineering costs and the amount of escrow funds required
for installation of site improvements and shall establish any other engineering requirements.
(c) The City Planner will verify that the final plat is in significant agreement with the preliminary plat and that
it meets all ordinances and regulations of the City.
Section 54-54. Disposition of final plat by city council.
(a) If the plat meets engineering and Planning Department requirements, it will be submitted to the City
Council for approval or disapproval.
1 of 2
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 54; ARTICLE II; DIVISION 2
(b) The City Planner will notify the owner and subdivider in writing of the Council's decision.
Section 54-55. Recording final plat.
If the City Council approves the final plat, the owner will record the plat within 30 days in accordance with Minn.
Stats. Ch. 505 with the County Recorder or register of titles, as the case may be, and return a fully recorded,
reproducible Mylar copy to the Director of Public Works. In addition, either a Mylar copy at a scale of 200 feet to
the inch or an electronic plat file must be submitted to the Director of Public Works.
Section 54-56. Final plat contents.
The final plat must contain the following:
(1) All information, except topographic data, water and sewer locations, required on the preliminary plat shall
be accurately shown.
(2) The plat shall be at a scale of not less than one inch equals 200 feet.
(3) Municipal, township, county or section lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and
angles.
(4) Names of new streets and roadways. A sequence of street naming shall be followed, consistent with the
pattern that has been established by usage in the particular area under consideration. All dimensions shall
be shown for streets, roadways, etc., and horizontal curve data shall be indicated by central angle, radii and
arc length.
(5) The name of the subdivision shall be lettered in prominent print at the top of the plat, together with the
name of the City and County wherein the subdivision lies. The name of the subdivision shall be simple in
nature, easy to pronounce and shall not duplicate in exact name any plat of record in the County.
(6) Form of approval by the City Council as follows:
Approved by the City Council of the City of Anoka, Minnesota this ________ day of ________.
Signed: _______________________
Mayor
Attest: _______________________
City Clerk
(7) Form of approval of the Planning Commission as follows:
Approved by the Planning Commission of the City of Anoka, Minnesota this ________ day of________.
Signed: _______________________
Chair
Attest: _______________________
Secretary
(8) Form of approval by County authorities as required by their standards.
Secs. 54-57--54-80. Reserved.
2 of 2
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 54; ARTICLE III; DIVISION 1
CHAPTER 54. SUBDIVISIONS
ARTICLE III. Design Standards
Division 1. Generally
Section 54-81. General requirements.
(a) The planning commission in its review of a preliminary plat, will take into
consideration the requirements of the community and the best use of the land
being subdivided. Particular attention will be given to the arrangement, location
and widths of streets, the general drainage situation, lot sizes and arrangement,
as well as master plan requirements such as parks, school sites, boulevards and
highways, but not limited to these.
(b) The preliminary plat must cover all of the subdivider's contiguous land, but the
final plat may cover only a portion of the preliminary plat; provided, that it is in
conformance with an approved preliminary plat and other requirements of this
chapter.
(c) Where the parcel is subdivided into larger tracts than for building lots, such
parcels shall be divided so as to allow for the opening of major streets and the
ultimate extension of adjacent minor streets.
(d) Subdivisions showing unplatted strips or private streets controlling access to
public ways shall not receive approval.
(e) No land shall be subdivided which is held unsuitable by the planning
commission for reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage
treatment facilities. All lots within the floodplain districts shall contain a
building site at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. All
subdivisions shall have water and sewage disposal facilities that comply with the
provisions of the Floodplain Ordinance of Chapter 74 of this Code, and have
road access both to the subdivision and to the individual building sites no lower
than two feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation. In the general
floodplain district, applicants shall provide the information required in Chapter
74 of this Code. The planning commission shall evaluate the subdivision in
accordance with procedures established in Chapter 74 of this Code.
Section 54-82. Streets.
(a) The arrangement, character, extent, width and location of streets shall conform
to the master plan, the approved standard street sections and all applicable
ordinances and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned
streets, to reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographical conditions, to runoff
of storm water, to public convenience and safety and in their appropriate
relation to the proposed uses of the area to be served.
(b) Street right-of-way widths shall be a continuation of the existing right-of-way
width or as shown in the master plan and where not shown therein, shall be not
less than as follows:
Major thoroughfare 100 feet
1 of 4
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 54; ARTICLE III; DIVISION 1
Collector 80 feet
Minor and marginal access 60 feet
Terminating in cul-de-sac 60 feet
(c) Street intersections, at both centerline, and property line, insofar as practical
shall be at right angles.
(d) Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided.
(e) A tangent of at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on
arterial and collector streets and 50 feet on other streets.
(f) Where street center lines within a block have a deflection angle of more than ten
degrees there shall be a connecting curve with a radius adequate to insure a sight
distance of not less than 200 feet for minor and collector streets, and of such
greater radii as the planning commission shall determine for special cases.
(g) Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of at least 20
feet or with comparable cut-offs or chords in place of rounded corners, on all
street rights-of-way which are less than 60 feet in width.
(h) Street grades wherever feasible shall not exceed seven percent and in no case
shall they be less than three-tenths percent.
(i) Different connecting street gradients shall be connected with vertical parabolic
curves. Minimum length, in feet, of these curves for collector streets shall be 15
times the algebraic difference in the percent of grade of the two adjacent slopes.
For minor streets the minimum length shall be 7½ times the algebraic difference
in the percent of grade of the two adjacent slopes.
(j) Minor streets shall be so aligned that their use by through traffic will be
discouraged.
(k) Cul-de-sac streets designed to be so permanently, shall not be longer than 500
feet, measured along the center line from the intersection of origin to end of
right-of-way. Each cul-de-sac shall have a terminus of nearly circular shape with
a minimum right-of-way diameter of 100 feet and a minimum outside roadway
diameter of 80 feet. The property line at the intersection of the turnaround and
the straight portion of the street shall be rounded at a radius of not less than 20
feet. Where a street dead ends at the property line of the tract, the developer
shall submit a plan for ingress and egress acceptable to the planning
commission.
(l) Half-streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable
development of the subdivision or the completion of the existing half-street in
conformity with other requirements of these regulations and where the planning
commission finds that it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other
half when the adjoining property is subdivided.
(m) Street names or numbers shall be used and shall not duplicate or be confused
with names of existing streets and they shall be subject to approval by the
planning commission.
2 of 4
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 54; ARTICLE III; DIVISION 1
(n) Alleys, where permitted by the city, shall be at least 20 feet wide in residential
areas and at least 24 feet wide in commercial areas. The city may require alleys
in commercial areas where adequate off-street loading space is not available.
Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where
necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe vehicular
movement. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided, but if unavoidable, shall be
provided with adequate turn-around facilities at the dead-end.
(o) All finished street surfaces shall be no more than one foot below the regulatory
flood protection elevation.
Cross reference--Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50.
Section 54-83. Easements.
(a) Easements at least 14 feet wide, centered on rear or side lot lines, shall be
provided for utilities, where necessary. Easements shall have continuity of
alignment from block to block and at deflection points, easements for pole-line
anchors shall be provided.
(b) Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or
stream, a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming
substantially with the lines of such watercourses shall be provided, together with
such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the storm
water drainage of the area.
Section 54-84. Blocks.
(a) The maximum length of blocks shall be 1,800 feet. Blocks over 900 feet long
may require pedestrian ways at least ten feet wide at their approximate centers.
The use of additional access ways, to schools, parks and other destinations may
be required.
(b) Blocks intended for commercial and industrial use must be designed as such,
and the block must be of sufficient size to provide for adequate off-street
parking, loading and such other facilities as are required to satisfy the
requirements of chapter 74.
Section 54-85. Lots.
(a) The minimum lot size and dimensions in subdivisions designed for the R-1
residence zone shall be:
(1) Width, 75 feet at the established building setback line and 60 feet at the
front lot line.
(2) Width of 75 feet at the established building setback line and 50 feet at
the property line of cul-de-sac.
(3) Depth, 120 feet.
(4) Area, 10,000 square feet.
3 of 4
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 54; ARTICLE III; DIVISION 1
(b) Lots intended for commercial, industrial or any other than R-1 single-family
residential use, shall be designed as such, and the lot shall be of adequate size to
allow off-street parking, loading areas and such other facilities as are required
by Chapter 74.
(c) Corner lots in residence zones shall have at least ten feet extra width and
sufficient depth for established building setback on both streets.
(d) All lots must have at least the minimum required frontage on a public dedicated
street.
(e) All lots must have a minimum of 30 feet in width at the rear lot line.
(f) Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to the street line.
(g) Double-frontage or lots with frontage on two parallel streets shall not be
permitted except:
(1) Where lots back on an arterial street in which case vehicular and
pedestrian access between the lots and arterial street shall be prohibited.
Such double-frontage lots shall have an additional depth of at least 20
feet in order to allow space for screen planting along the back lot line.
(2) Where topographic or other conditions render subdividing otherwise
unreasonable, such double-frontage lots shall have an additional depth
of at least 20 feet in order to allow space for screen planting along the
back lot line.
(h) Lots abutting on a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream shall have an
additional depth or width, as required, to assure house sites that are not subject
to flooding.
Sections. 54-86--54-100. Reserved.
4 of 4
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 54; ARTICLE III; DIVISION 2
1 of 4
CHAPTER 54. SUBDIVISIONS
ARTICLE III. Design Standards
Division 2. Public Sites and Open Spaces
----------
*State law reference--Authority to required dedication, Minn. Stats. § 462.358, subd. 2b.
----------
Section 54-101. Application of division.
The requirements of this division shall apply at the time of the final approval of the plat,
replat, subdivision or waiver of platting. The provisions of section 54-113 and shall apply
to any plat, replat, subdivision, waiver of platting, or development receiving final
approval after August 24, 1980.
Section 54-102. Park and Recreation Director review.
The director of planning shall transmit a copy of all preliminary plats involving land to be
dedicated for parks to the park and recreation director, who shall report back to the
director of planning within 15 days on the appropriateness of any proposed park
dedication.
Section 54-103. Dedication required.
In every plat, replat, or subdivision of land allowing development for residential land
uses, or where a waiver of platting is granted (but excluding simple lot line adjustments
which do not create additional lots), and at the sole determination by the City, applicants
and/or developers shall dedicate land for parks, playgrounds, public open spaces or trails
and/or shall make a cash contribution to the City’s Park Dedication Fund roughly related
to the anticipated effect of the subdivision on the park and trail system. The amounts
listed in this section or established in the Anoka Master Fee Schedule Ordinance are the
City’s best estimate of the dedication or cash contribution needed to offset the effect of
the subdivision on the park and trail system. The requirement may also be met with a
combination of land and cash, if approved by the City Council.
Section 54-104. Land Dedication.
(a) The amount of land required to be dedicated by a developer shall be based upon
the gross area of the subdivision or development, which could be developed for
residential, commercial, or industrial purposes and shall be determined as
follows:
(1) Residential development.
Dwelling Unit/Acre Land to be Dedicated
0--1 5%
2--3 10%
4--5 12%
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 54; ARTICLE III; DIVISION 2
2 of 4
6--7 14%
8--12 16%
13--16 18%
For each unit over 16/acre, add 0.5%
Provided that if a lot, which is a platted lot as of August 1, 1986, is split
into two lots, the land to be dedicated shall be five percent (5%).
(2) Commercial and industrial subdivisions shall be exempt from Park
Land Dedication.
(b) In establishing a reasonable portion to be dedicated, the City may give credit for
open space, park, recreational or common areas and facilities reserved for the
subdivision.
(c) Land shall be suitable for its intended use and shall be at a location convenient
to the people to be served. Factors used in evaluating the adequacy of the park
land will include tree cover, topography, access, location, and future park needs
pursuant to the Comprehensive Plan. Wetlands, ponding areas, and drainage
ways shall not be eligible for park dedication credit. Park land to be dedicated
shall be above the ordinary high water level. Grades exceeding twelve percent
(12%) or areas unsuitable for park development will not be considered for
dedication unless specifically accepted by the City Council for an intended
public purpose. Land with trash, junk, pollutants and/or unwanted structures is
not acceptable.
Section 54-105. Conformance with comprehensive plan.
Land dedicated under this provision shall reasonably conform to the City's
Comprehensive Plan. The Planning Commission and Park Board shall review proposed
dedication of land or proposed payment of cash in lieu of land and shall recommend to
the City Council appropriate action. If the Comprehensive Plan of the parcel of land to be
divided shows public property in excess of that required in subsection 54-104(a) the
Planning Commission, Park Board and City Council shall, before they approve or
disapprove the plat, consider the Comprehensive Plan and determine whether to take the
necessary steps to acquire, by purchase or condemnation, all or part of the public property
as shown on the Comprehensive Plan.
Section 54-106. Cash contributions in lieu of accepting dedication of land.
The City shall have the option to require cash contributions in lieu of accepting
dedication of land or the City may require a combination of land dedication and cash
payment. The cash contribution shall be an amount adopted in the Anoka Master Fee
Schedule Ordinance reflecting roughly proportional effect that the new subdivision will
have on the City parks, playgrounds, open space and trail system and the estimated fair
market value of the property at the time of the final plat. The estimate of fair mark value
shall include value added to the property by utilities, streets, and other public
improvements serving the land but shall exclude value added by all other improvements
to the land.
Section 54-107. Cash payments in special fund.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 54; ARTICLE III; DIVISION 2
3 of 4
Contributions of cash payments in lieu of land dedication shall be placed in a special fund
which shall be held and used by the City to acquire land for, or to improve, parks,
playgrounds, trails, public open space, or storm water holding areas or ponds.
Section 54-108. When cash shall be required.
The City shall require a cash payment in lieu of park dedication whenever the proposed
dedication of land for public use is not needed, is not suitable for the intended use, is too
small for practical maintenance, or whenever cash payment would be more beneficial to
the development of the overall park system than dedication of land within the property to
be developed.
Section 54-109. Less dedication.
If the City accepts park dedication in an amount less than that specified in subsection
54-104(a), the subdivider or developer shall pay in addition a fraction of the park
dedication fee otherwise payable, the numerator of which is the difference between the
percentage of land dedicated and the percentage of land required to be dedicated, and the
denominator of which is the percentage of land to be dedicated.
Section 54-110. More dedication.
If the City requires park dedication in excess of the amount required by subsection
54-104(a), the City shall pay to the subdivider or developer the fair market value of the
land in excess of the percentage of land required to be dedicated.
Section 54-111. Credit for private open space.
Where a private open space for park or recreation purposes is provided in a proposed
subdivision and such space is to be privately owned and maintained by the future
residents of the subdivision, a credit of up to 25 percent (25%) of the requirements of
subsection 54-104(a) may be given, provided that the following conditions are met:
(a) That such land area is not occupied by non-recreational buildings and is
available for the use of all the residents of the proposed subdivision.
(b) That required setbacks shall not be included in the computation of such private
open space.
(c) That the use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreational
purposes by recorded covenants which run with the land in favor of the future
owners of the property within the tract and which cannot be defeated or
eliminated without the consent of the City Council.
(d) That the proposed private open space is of a size, shape, location, topography,
and usability for park and recreational purposes or contains unique national
features that are important to be preserved.
(e) That the proposed private open space reduces the demand for public recreational
facilities to serve the development.
Section 54-112. Dedication appeal.
If the applicant or developer does not believe that the park dedication required by this
ordinance fairly and accurately represents the effect of the subdivision on the park or trail
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 54; ARTICLE III; DIVISION 2
4 of 4
system of the City, the applicant or developer may request that the City prepare an indepth
study of the effect of the subdivision on t he park and trail system and an estimate
of that effect in money and/or land. The applicant may provide evidence and information
in support of their claims to be included or considered in conjunction with the study. All
costs of said study shall be borne by the developer or applicant.
Upon receipt of the study and support information, the City Council shall make a
determination as to whether an adjustment in the park dedication is warranted.
The City shall approve or disapprove a preliminary plat application within one hundredtwenty
(120) days following delivery of a completed application in compliance with City
ordinances. In the event a dedication study as set forth herein is required, the applicant
may be requested to extend the deadline for plat approval for a period not to exceed sixty
(60) days, in order to conduct, receive and review the study.
If cash in lieu of land dedication is being required, the developer or applicant may deposit
the required cash dedication in an escrow and request preparation of the study. The
application may then proceed as if the fee has been paid.
Sections 54-113--54-140. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 54; ARTICLE IV
CHAPTER 54. SUBDIVISIONS
ARTICLE IV. Basic Improvements
Section 54-141. Generally.
(a) Before a final plat is approved by the city council, the owner and subdivider of
the land covered by the plat shall execute and submit to the city council an
agreement, which shall be binding on his heirs, personal representatives and
assigns, that he will cause no private construction to be made on the plat or file
or cause to be filed any application for building permits for such construction
until all improvements required under this chapter have been made or arranged
for in the manner following as respects the streets to which the lots sought to be
constructed have access.
(b) Prior to the making of such required improvements, the owner or subdivider
shall deposit with the city clerk an amount equal to the city engineer's estimated
cost of such improvements, either in cash or an indemnity bond, with sureties
satisfactory to the city, conditioned upon the payment of all construction costs
incurred by the city in making of such improvements and all expense incurred
by the city for engineering and legal fees and other expense in connection with
the making of such improvements.
(c) No final plat shall be approved by the city council without first receiving a
report from the city engineer certifying that the improvements described in this
article, together with the agreements and documents required in this article, meet
the minimum requirements of all applicable ordinances. As-built drawings of all
improvements shall be filed with the city engineer. Such as-built drawings shall
show the date of construction and shall be drawn in such a manner and on such
materials to meet the standards of the city available in the city engineer's office.
As-built drawings must be completed and filed in the city engineer's office
within 60 days of the completion of such improvement. If as-built drawings are
not filed within the time period specified the city engineer may be authorized to
conduct surveys and complete the drawings and all of the costs pursuant thereto
shall be paid by the owner.
Section 54-142. Street grading.
The full width of the street right-of-way shall be graded and paid for by the developer,
including the stabilized gravel base of the areas to be paved, in accordance with standards
for street construction approved by the city. No prepared street shall be approved if its
surface is more than two feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation. The city
planning commission and city council may require, where necessary, profiles and
elevations of finished streets for areas subject to flooding. Fill may be used for streets
provided such fill does not unduly increase flood heights. Drainage openings shall not
restrict the flow of water so as to unduly increase flood heights.
Section 54-143. Street improvements.
(a) Petitions for sidewalks, if required, pavement, curb and gutter covering all
streets in the subdivision shall be filed, or, if these improvements are to be
installed by the owner or subdivider under contract, a cash deposit or bond
covering the cost, as estimated by the city engineer shall be made in accordance
with section 54-141.
1 of 4
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 54; ARTICLE IV
(b) A certified copy of the plat restrictions which shall include a provision that, in
all instruments of sale or conveyance given before all street improvements have
been made, the consignee shall agree to and approve such improvements, and
the assessment of their cost.
Cross reference--Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50.
Section 54-144. Street trees.
Street trees shall be planted in conformance with a platting plan and standards approved
by the city.
Cross reference--Vegetation, ch. 70.
Section 54-145. Street signs.
Street signs of standard design approved by the city shall be installed at each street
intersection.
Section 54-146. Sidewalks.
A sidewalk six feet in width shall be installed within the street right-of-way in front of
each lot fronting on a public street within areas platted after the effective date of the
ordinance from which this section is derived before any lot constituting a part of such plat
shall be conveyed.
Section 54-147. Driveways.
A concrete or asphalt driveway at least ten feet wide shall be installed on lots in areas
platted after the effective date of this provision. The driveway shall run from the near
edge of the roadway into the lot for a distance of at least 25 feet from the front lot line.
No lot constituting a part of areas platted after the effective date of this provision and
upon which a dwelling has been erected shall be conveyed unless such driveway has been
installed.
Section 54-148. Sewers.
(a) Sanitary sewers shall be installed to serve all properties in the subdivision where
a connection to the city sewer system is available at or reasonably near the
boundary of the subdivision.
(b) Storm drainage facilities, where required, shall be designed to convey the flow
of surface waters without damage to persons or property. The system shall
insure drainage at all points along streets, and provide positive drainage away
from building and onsite waste disposal sites. The city planning commission and
city council may require a primary underground system to accommodate
frequent floods and a secondary surface system to accommodate less frequent
floods. Drainage plans shall be consistent with local and regional drainage plans.
The facilities shall be designed to protect against surface erosion and siltation of
surface waters and to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent
properties.
2 of 4
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 54; ARTICLE IV
(c) If the subdivision requires additional trunk sewers they may, if approved by the
city council, be installed under contract by the city after petition for such
additional trunk sewers by the owner. The cost shall be assessed against all lots
in the subdivision over a period of not to exceed ten years.
(d) If approved by the city council, both storm and sanitary sewers may be installed
under contract by the city after petition for the storm and sanitary sewers by the
owner. The cost shall be assessed against all lots in the subdivision over a period
of not to exceed ten years.
(e) All sewer construction must conform to the standards of the city for such work.
(f) The city planning commission and city council may prescribe adequate methods
for waste disposal. If a sanitary sewer system is located on or near the proposed
subdivision, the city planning commission and city council shall require the
subdivider to provide sewage facilities and to connect to this system where
practical, and shall prescribe the procedures to be followed by the subdivider in
connecting to the system. The city planning commission and city council may
prohibit installation of sewage disposal facilities requiring soil absorption
systems where such systems will not function due to high ground water,
flooding, or unsuitable soil characteristics. The city planning commission and
city council may require that the subdivider clearly indicate on the face of the
plat and in any deed of conveyance the areas in which soil absorption systems
are not to be used. If the subdivision is not to be served by the public city sewer
system, private restrictions shall be filed with the final plat and incorporated in
each deed, calling for the installation on each lot of an individual sewage
disposal system meeting fully the requirements of the city, county, or state
officials having jurisdiction.
Cross reference--Utilities, ch. 66.
Section 54-149. Water supply.
(a) Where a connection to the city water system is presently available at or
reasonably near the boundary of the subdivision, water distribution facilities,
including fire hydrants, shall be installed to serve all properties within the
subdivision. Water mains shall be a minimum of six inches in diameter and shall
meet all city standards therefore. All water systems located in flood prone areas,
whether public or private, shall be flood proofed to a point at or above the
regulatory flood protection elevation. If there is an existing public water supply
system on or near the subdivision, the city planning commission and city council
shall require the subdivider to connect to this system, where practical, and
prescribe the procedures to be followed.
(b) If approved by the city council, water mains may be installed under contract by
the city after petition for the water mains by the owner. The cost shall be
assessed against all lots in the subdivision over a period of not to exceed ten
years.
Cross reference--Utilities, ch. 66.
3 of 4
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 54; ARTICLE IV
Section 54-150. Building site improvements.
No subdivision shall be approved for floodway areas if anticipated levees, fills, structures
or other features will individually or collectively increase flood flows or damages. The
city council shall reasonably assume an equal degree of encroachment on the opposite
side of the watercourse in calculating possible effects of the proposed uses.
(1) Building sites for residences, motels, resorts and similar uses for human
occupancy shall not be permitted in floodway areas. These uses may be
permitted outside the floodway if building sites are filled to an elevation not
lower than one foot below the regulatory flood protection elevation for the
particular area. Required fill areas must extend 15 feet beyond the limits of
intended structures and, if the subdivision is not to be sewered, must include
areas for onsite waste disposal.
(2) Building sites for structures other than those used for human occupancy outside
of floodway areas shall ordinarily be filled as provided in subsection (1) of this
section. However, the city council may allow subdivision of areas for
commercial and industrial use at a lower elevation as the subdivider protects the
areas to the regulatory flood protection elevation by levees, floodwalls, channel
modifications, or other protective techniques; or if the subdivider agrees to
protect uses through structural flood proofing, flood warning systems or other
techniques.
(3) Should the city council determine that only part of a proposed plat can be safely
developed, it shall limit development to that part and require that the
specifications for development be consistent with its determination.
(4) When the subdivider does not intend to develop the plat himself, and the city
council determines that additional use controls are required to insure safe
development, it may require the subdivider to impose appropriate deed
restrictions on the land. Such deed restrictions shall be inserted in every deed
and noted on the face of the final recorded plat.
Section 54-151. Warning signs.
The limits of the areas which have been or would be inundated by the regional flood or
by experienced floods of greater magnitude shall be delineated at 1,000 feet intervals by
means of firmly placed markers of sufficient size to be easily read from a distance of 20
feet. The markers shall record the maximum known level of flooding or regional flood
protection elevation, whichever is greater. The city council shall prescribe the size, shape,
lettering and installation instructions for floodplain markers. The cost of preparing and
installing such markers shall be borne by the subdivider and the markers shall be installed
prior to the sale of lots and construction of any buildings or structures.
4 of 4
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 58; ARTICLE II
CHAPTER 58. TAXATION
ARTICLE II. Lodging Tax*
----------
*State law reference--Lodging tax, Minn. Stats. § 469.190.
----------
Section 58-31. Purpose.
There is hereby created a tax upon lodging at hotels, motels, rooming houses, tourist
courts or resorts. The purpose of the tax is to provide funding for a convention and
visitors bureau to promote tourism and conventions.
Section 58-32. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to
them:
City Finance Director means the individual designated by the City Manager to fulfill the
duties of City Treasurer as specified in the City Charter.
Hotel means the furnishing for consideration, of lodging by a hotel, tourist court, or
motel, and the granting of any similar license to use real property other than the renting
or leasing thereof for a continuous period of 30 days or more. The furnishing of rooms by
any legally constituted religious, educational or nonprofit organization shall not
constitute lodging for the purposes of this article.
Operator means the person who is the proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of
owner, lessee, sublessee, licensee, or any officer, agent or employee of such person, is an
operator.
Cross reference--Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Section 58-33. Imposition of tax.
The following tax, as authorized by Minn. Stats. § 469.190, shall apply in the city:
(a) For the privilege of occupation of any hotel, each person shall pay a tax in the
amount of three percent of the charge made by the operator.
(b) Those persons qualifying under subsection (1) of this section shall pay the tax to
the operator of the hotel at the time the charge is paid. Such tax constitutes a
debt owed to the city by the operator and is extinguished only by payment to the
city.
Section 58-34. Collections.
(a) Operator's duties. Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this article at
the time the rent is paid. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the
rent charged. Those persons paying the tax shall receive a receipt of payment
from the operator.
1 of 4
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 58; ARTICLE II
(b) Reports. Each operator collecting such tax shall make a report to the City by
submitting to the City Finance Director signed copies of the sales tax reporting
forms required by the State Department of Revenue. The Finance Director may
require such additional information from the operator to verify the amount of the
tax to be paid is correct. Such reports shall contain, at minimum:
(1) The amount of room rentals collected.
(2) The amount of tax required to be collected and due for the period.
(3) The signature of the operator or that of the agent if the operator has not
made the report.
(4) The period the return covers.
(5) The amount of room rental uncollectible.
(6) Such additional information as the City Council in its discretion, from
time to time requires.
(c) Payment to the City. Payment of the tax shall be submitted by the operator to the
City along with the required reports. Payment shall cover the tax due for the
preceding calendar month, or any alternative four-week accounting period,
whichever it shall be, and such payment shall be made no later than 25 days
after the end of such calendar or alternative accounting month.
(d) Uncollectible charges. The operator may offset against the tax due with respect
to any reporting period the amount of taxes imposed by section 58-37 previously
paid as a result of any transaction which becomes uncollectible during such
reporting period, but only in proportion to the portion of such amount which
becomes uncollectible.
(e) Examination of return. After a return is filed, the city finance director may make
any examination of the records and accounts of the person making the return
which he deems necessary for determining its correctness. The tax computed on
the basis of such examination shall be the tax to be paid. If the tax due is found
be greater than that paid such excess shall be paid within ten days after receipt
of such notice. Such notice shall be given either personally or sent by registered
mail to the address listed on the return. If the tax paid is greater than the tax
found to be due, the excess paid shall be refunded to the operator at the address
listed on the return.
Section 58-35. Refunds.
(a) Any operator may file for a refund for taxes paid in excess of the amount
actually due for that period, provided that no such claim shall be entertained
unless filed within one year after such tax paid.
(b) Upon application, the City Finance Director shall determine the correctness of
the claim and return any excess paid. If no excess is found, the City shall so
inform the operator. The operator may make written application for city council
hearing within five days after receipt of notice that the claim has been denied.
The operator shall be informed at least five days in advance of the scheduled
Council hearing.
2 of 4
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 58; ARTICLE II
Section 58-36. Penalties for late payment.
Any operator failing to make payment within the 25-day period specified in subsection
58-34(c) shall be required to pay a penalty of ten percent. If the delinquency continues
beyond 30 days after the tax is due as specified in subsection 58-34(c), such delinquent
taxes, plus penalty, as heretofore provided, shall be entered, shown and placed on the tax
assessment rolls of the city for the hotel, generating the delinquency, or the city attorney
may commence such action necessary to collect the tax and penalties due including all
costs of collection including, but not limited to attorney's fees.
Section 58-37. Tax determined by the City Council.
(a) If the operator refuses to collect the tax imposed or fails to make the required
report, the City Finance Director shall obtain facts and information and make an
estimate of the amount of tax due and shall give the operator a statement of the
tax due to his estimate and give notice personally or through registered mail to
such operator of the amount due. Depending upon the time periods as specified
in section 58-33, the amount of tax estimated shall include the applicable
penalties and interest. Payments shall be made within ten days after receipt of
the notice. For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this section, the city
finance director shall have the right of access to the books and records of the
operator.
(b) The operator shall have ten days after receipt of notice to make a written
application for a hearing on the amount estimated to the City Finance Director.
If no request is made during this ten-day period, the amount specified in the
statement of the City Finance Director, including penalties, becomes final and
payable within ten days.
(c) If a hearing is properly requested, the running of the time periods described in
section 58-36 is automatically stayed. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the
operator at least ten days in advance. All hearings are to be held before the City
Council. The Council may determine the amount due, when it shall be paid, and
whether or not the penalty time period under section 58-36 still resume running
until payment. Once the amount due becomes fixed under either subsection (a),
(b), or (c) of this section, any further steps necessary to ensure collection as
described in subsection 58-36 may be taken for the collection of deficiencies.
Section 58-38. Administration.
The City Finance Director shall be charged with the responsibility for enforcement and
administration of this article.
Cross reference--Administration, ch. 2.
3 of 4
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 58; ARTICLE II
Section 58-39. Violations.
Any willful violations of any provision of this article or tendering a false report required
pursuant to this article shall be a misdemeanor.
Section 58-40. Deposit in special purpose fund.
All revenues collected by the City pursuant to this article shall be deposited in a special
purpose fund hereby established to be known at the hotel/motel tax fund.
Section 58-41. Distribution.
Distribution of all revenues relating to three percent of the charge made by the operator
and collected pursuant to this article shall be used for the purpose of the advancement of
the City as a tourist and convention center. The City may retain a sum not to exceed five
percent of the gross proceeds from the tax authorized in section 58-33.
4 of 4
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 62; ARTICLE I
1 of 1
CHAPTER 62. TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE I. In General
Section 62-1. Vehicle noise and nuisance.
No owner, driver, or operator of a motor vehicle if the owner is not present, shall operate
or permit the use or operation of any vehicle radio, stereo, compact disc player, receiver,
tape deck, loud speaker, sound amplifier, or any similar device used for the production of
sound in any public or private place in such a manner or at such a noise level which is
audible from a distance of 25 feet from the source, knowing or having reasonable
grounds to know that it will alarm, anger, or disturb others or otherwise affect the peace
and quiet of any person who may witness or hear it. A violation of this section shall be a
petty misdemeanor.
Cross reference--Nuisances, § 30-31 et seq.
Section 62-2. Riding in pick-up trucks.
No person shall ride, nor shall the driver of a pick-up truck allow a person to ride, in the
open box of a pick-up truck on any street designated as a "No Cruising Zone" between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m.
Secs. 62-3--62-30. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 62; ARTICLE II
CHAPTER 62; TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE II. Administration and Enforcement.
----------
*Cross reference--Administration, ch. 2.
----------
Section 62-31. Through streets.
The Chief of Police may designate any street as a through street and any intersection as a
stop intersection where necessary to preserve the free flow of traffic and to prevent
accidents; and he shall post appropriate signs at the entrance to such streets or intersections;
but no trunk highway shall be designated as a through street and no intersection on a trunk
highway shall be designated as a stop intersection unless the consent of the state
commissioner of highways to such designation is first secured.
Cross reference--Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50.
State law references--Authority to designate through highway preserved, Minn. Stats. §
169.04(5); stops when entering through highway, Minn. Stats. § 169.20, subd. 3.
Section 62-32. Seasonal weight restrictions.
The City Engineer may prohibit the operation of vehicles upon any street under his
jurisdiction or impose weight restrictions on vehicles to be operated on such street whenever
the street, by reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions will be
seriously damaged or destroyed unless the use of vehicles on the street is prohibited or the
permissible weights thereof reduced. He shall erect and maintain signs plainly indicating the
prohibition or restriction at each end of that portion of the street affected. No person shall
operate a vehicle on a posted street in violation of the prohibition or restriction.
State law reference--Seasonal load restrictions authorized, Minn. Stats. §169.87, subd. 1.
Section 62-33. Prohibiting turns at intersections.
The Chief of Police may, whenever necessary to preserve the free flow of traffic or prevent
accidents prohibit turns at intersections and shall cause such intersections to be marked with
appropriate signs. No trunk highway shall be so designated without the consent of the state
department of transportation.
Section 62-34. Regulation of parking.
The Chief of Police shall have the authority to regulate times and places of parking and limit
the types of vehicles that may park in designated areas and erect signs wherever necessary
for the convenience of the public or to minimize traffic hazards and to preserve the free flow
of traffic on a temporary or permanent basis.
State law references--Authority to regulate parking or standing or vehicles preserved,
Minn. Stats. § 169.04(1); stopping, standing and parking, Minn. Stats. § 169.32 et seq.
Section 62-35. Parking permits; fees.
The City Council shall, by resolution, establish the number of parking permits to be issued
by the City for parking in any City-owned parking lot and shall establish the fee for such
permits.
1 of 2
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 62; ARTICLE II
Section 62-36. Erection of signs prohibiting riding of bicycles on sidewalks or roadways.
When necessary to preserve public safety, the Chief of Police is authorized to erect signs on
any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person.
Secs. 62-37--62-60. Reserved.
2 of 2
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 62; ARTICLE III
1 of 3
CHAPTER 62; TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE III. Vehicle Operation
Section 62-61. Truck restrictions.
The City Council may by resolution designate streets on which travel by commercial
vehicles in excess of 10,000 pounds gross weight is prohibited. The City Engineer shall
erect appropriate signs on such streets. No person shall operate a commercial vehicle on
such posted streets in violation of the restrictions stated, unless necessary for the pick up
or delivery of property to homes or businesses on such posted streets, in which event the
vehicle shall be driven over the shortest possible route on the posted street.
State law reference--Truck routes authorized, Minn. Stats. § 169.87, subd. 1.
Section 62-62. Unnecessary acceleration.
No person shall start or accelerate any motor vehicle with an unnecessary exhibition of
speed on any public or private way or public or private parking lot within the city limits.
Prima facie evidence of such unnecessary exhibition of speed shall be unreasonable
squealing or screeching sounds emitted by the tires or the throwing of sand or gravel by
the tires of such vehicle or both.
Section 62-63. Regulation of traffic on the Rum River footbridge.
No motorized vehicles of any kind shall be allowed on the Rum River Footbridge south
of the Main Street Bridge, except for motorized wheel chairs. No non-motorized vehicles
of any kind, except for wheel chairs, shall be used on the Rum River Footbridge
including bicycles, tricycles, roller skates, skateboards, wagons, or any other wheeled
vehicle which may cause a hazard to pedestrian traffic. Wheeled vehicles, however, may
be pushed or carried by a pedestrian across the bridge if pushed or carried in a manner
which does not interfere with pedestrian traffic. A violation of this section shall be a petty
misdemeanor.
Section 62-64. Regulation of traffic on the pedestrian underpass of the Main Street Bridge.
No motorized vehicles of any kind shall be allowed on the pedestrian underpass of the
Main Street Bridge across the Rum River, except for motorized wheelchairs. No nonmotorized
vehicles of any kind, except for wheelchairs, shall be used on the pedestrian
underpass of the Main Street Bridge, including bicycles, tricycles, roller skates, skate
boards, wagons, or any other wheeled or nonwheeled vehicle which may cause a hazard
to pedestrian traffic. A violation of this section shall be a petty misdemeanor.
Section 62-65. Cruising.
(a) Purpose. The objectives of this section are to reduce traffic congestion,
eliminate safety hazards, provide for the clear passage of emergency vehicles,
and reduce criminal activity that accompanies cruising.
(b) Definitions. As used in this section the following words and terms shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed:
Cruising means the operation of a motor vehicle as defined in Minn. Stats. §
169.01, subd. 3, past a traffic control point on a street in the designated "No
Cruising Zone" four or more times between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 62; ARTICLE III
2 of 3
in a manner and under circumstances manifesting a "purpose" of unnecessary,
repetitive driving in the area.
No cruising zone means East Main Street and West Main Street in the City.
Traffic control point means a point on a street in a "No Cruising Zone" selected
by a police officer and noticed by a posted sign.
(c) Cruising prohibited. No person shall operate or permit a motor vehicle under his
care, custody or control, to be operated in such a manner so as to constitute
cruising.
(d) Penalties. A violation of this section shall constitute a petty misdemeanor. When
preceded by two or more petty misdemeanor convictions of this section or two
or more convictions of any of the provisions of Minn. Stats. ch. 169 or 171, or
any combination thereof, within the immediate preceding 12-month period, a
violation shall constitute a misdemeanor. The circumstances which may be
considered in determining whether such purpose is manifested include, but are
not limited to, that the operator or any passenger in the vehicle attempts to gain
the attention of other motorists or pedestrians or engages them in conversation,
whether by hailing, arm waiving, horn blowing, excessively loud music or
vibrations, or another action or device; that the operator or any passenger
present in the vehicle enters or exits the vehicle directly from or to another
vehicle driven in or parked in close proximity to the "No Cruising Zone"; that
the operator or passenger in the vehicle violates state or municipal traffic
regulations or municipal ordinances; or that such person has declared his
purpose for driving to be that of cruising. No citation shall be issued for a
violation of this section unless the arresting officer first provides the suspect
with an opportunity to explain such conduct; and no person shall be convicted of
violating this section if it is decided at trial that the explanation given disclosed a
lawful purpose, and was not unnecessary repetitive driving. Lawful purposes
include, but are not limited to, taxicabs for hire, buses, authorized emergency
vehicles, vehicles used under contract with the city, vehicles traveling to a
specific destination by a person whose residence address is in the designated
area, or by a person whose business or employment requires driving in the
designated area.
Section 62-66. Regulation of non-motorized traffic in city parking ramps.
No non-motorized vehicles of any kind, except for wheelchairs, shall be used in any cityowned
or operated parking ramps in the city, including bicycles, tricycles, wagons or any
other wheeled vehicle which may create a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. A
violation of this section shall be a petty misdemeanor.
Section 62-67. Snowmobile operation prohibited.
(a) Definitions. As used in this section the following words and terms shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed:
Operate means to ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile.
Snowmobile means a self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice
which is steered by skis or runners.
(b) Snowmobile operation prohibited. No person shall operate a snowmobile within
the City limits.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 62; ARTICLE III
3 of 3
(c) Exceptions:
1. A snowmobile may be operated on private property with the permission
of the property owner for maintenance purposes and to load or unload
the snowmobile for transportation purposes.
2. A snowmobile may be operated in an emergency during the period of
time when and at locations where snow upon the roadway renders
travel by automobile impractical.
3. A snowmobile may be operated on the Rum River and within
designated areas within the City in a manner that is consistent with
MN Rules 6100.5200 subp. 4.
(d) Towing. The Anoka Police Department may tow any snowmobile operated in
violation of this section.
(e) Penalty. Violation of this section shall be a petty misdemeanor.
State law references--Snowmobiles generally, Minn. Stats. § 84.81 et seq.; local
regulation of snowmobiles, Minn. Stats. § 84.87, subd. 3.
Secs. 62-68--62-90. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 62; ARTICLE IV
1 of 3
CHAPTER 62. TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE IV. Stopping, Standing and Parking*
----------
*Cross reference--Off-street parking and loading, § 74-506 et seq.
State law references--Authority to regulate parking or standing of vehicles preserved, Minn. Stats. §
169.04(1); stopping and parking, Minn. Stats. § 169.32 et seq.
----------
Section 62-91. Marking of spaces; parking within spaces.
Every vehicle parked within the City in a parking stall, lot or area delineated with lines or
markings painted upon the curb or roadway surfaces shall be parked within the lines or
markings. It shall be unlawful to park any such vehicle across any such line or marking,
or to park a vehicle in such a position that it shall be not entirely within the space
designated by such lines or markings. Where such lines or markings indicate parking
other than parallel to the curb, all vehicles shall park with the front of the vehicle closest
to the curb.
Section 62-92. Obliterating marks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, erase or otherwise obliterate any mark or
sign placed upon a tire or other part of a vehicle by a police officer for the purpose of
measuring the length of time such vehicle has been parked in a parking spot while a
vehicle is parked in any limited time zone.
Section 62-93. Shifting of parked vehicles.
For the purpose of regulations relating to limited time parking zones, any vehicle moved
less than 200 feet in a limited time parking zone shall be deemed to have remained
stationary.
Section 62-94. Parking in stall designated for permit parking only.
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or traffic control device, no person shall stop, stand or park a
vehicle in any parking stall designated for permit parking only located in a parking lot
owned or operated by the city without a permit issued by the chief of police.
Section 62-95. House trailers.
No person shall for camping purposes, leave or park a house trailer on any street or the
right-of-way thereof.
Section 62-96. Parking to display vehicle for sale.
No vehicle shall be parked on any street, City-owned parking lot, or other public property
for the purpose of displaying it for sale. No person shall park, nor shall a property owner
allow to be parked, more than one vehicle on private property, whether residential,
commercial, industrial or other, in the city for the purpose of displaying it for sale. This
does not apply to a properly licensed auto sales business located in the city.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 62; ARTICLE IV
2 of 3
Section 62-97. Time limitations.
No vehicle, except that of a physician on an emergency call or a public utility vehicle on
an emergency call shall be parked on any City street or in any public parking lot without
an overnight parking permit between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
Section 62-98. Keys to be removed from vehicle.
(a) No person shall park a vehicle on a street and leave the vehicle unattended
without locking the ignition of the vehicle and removing the ignition key from
the vehicle.
(b) No person shall park a vehicle on a public parking lot and leave the vehicle
unattended without locking the ignition of the vehicle and removing the ignition
key from the vehicle, unless all the windows of the vehicle are closed, all the
doors are locked and the keys are removed from the door locks.
Section 62-99. Truck loading only zones.
The Chief of Police may establish in each block in the congested districts one or more
"Truck Loading Only" zones and shall mark by appropriate signs any zones so
established. Such zones shall be located at places most convenient for the use of the
public with regard to traffic conditions in the block. No person shall, between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., of any week day, park any vehicle, nor shall the owner of any
vehicle allow it to be parked in any such zone except for the purpose of actually receiving
or discharging freight or passengers, if such person or owner is regularly engaged in the
business of transporting freight or passengers for hire, and then for only a period of no
longer than is necessary for the discharge or receipt of such freight or passengers.
Section 62-100. No parking zones in congested districts.
The Chief of Police may establish "No Truck Parking"' zones in the congested districts
and shall mark by appropriate signs any zones so established. Such zones shall be
established in the congested districts where heavy traffic by commercial vehicles or other
traffic congestion makes parking by commercial vehicles a hazard to the safety of the
vehicles or pedestrians. No person shall park a commercial vehicle of more than one ton
capacity, nor shall the owner of such a vehicle allow the vehicle to be parked, between
8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on any week day upon any street in any "No Truck Parking"
zone, but parking such vehicles for a period of not more than 30 minutes shall be
permitted in such zones for the purpose of having access to abutting property when such
access cannot conveniently be secured from any alley or from a side street where truck
parking is not so restricted.
Section 62-101. No parking or limited parking in congested districts.
The Chief of Police may designate certain blocks within the congested districts as no
parking, 10-minute, 20-minute, 30-minute, one-hour or two-hour limited or three-hour
parking zones and shall mark by appropriate signs any zones so established. Such zones
shall be established in the congested districts wherever necessary for the convenience of
the public or to minimize traffic hazards and to preserve a free flow of traffic. No person
shall park any vehicle, nor shall the owner of any vehicle allow it to be parked, in any
limited parking zone for a longer period than specified on the signs marking such zones.
Section 62-102 Citation of violators; fines.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 62; ARTICLE IV
3 of 3
(a) It shall be the duty of the chief of police to keep account of all violations of this
chapter. The Chief of Police shall report violations of any provisions of this
chapter, the date and hour of such violation, the make and state license number
of every vehicle, and any other facts, the knowledge of which are necessary to a
thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such violation.
(b) The Chief of Police or his agents shall attach to any such vehicle a notice stating
that it has been parked in violation of this chapter, and instructing the owner or
operator to deposit envelope with fine in the courtesy deposit box located in the
parking lot of the main entrance to City Hall. Further, the owner or operator of
any vehicle to which a violation notice has been attached shall, within five days
after the time when such notice was attached to such vehicle, pay the chief of
police or other authorized deputy in full satisfaction of such violation an amount
of money which shall be set from time to time by the city council. If the fine for
such violation is not paid within such five days, the fine then shall be increased
to an amount of money which shall be set from time to time by the city council,
if paid before a complaint is drafted. If the amount is not paid in full before a
complaint is drafted for the violation, the penalty will be that set for a petty
misdemeanor and will be determined by the court.
(c) A person who holds the legal title to a vehicle shall be deemed the owner. In the
event a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease
thereof, with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in
the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the
conditional vendee or lessee, then such conditional vendee or lessee shall be
deemed the owner. In the event a mortgagor of the vehicle is entitled to
possession, then such mortgagor shall be deemed the owner. Pursuant to the
power vested in the city under Minn. Stats. § 459.14(6), it is hereby provided
that the operation or use of a motor vehicle in violation of this chapter shall be
prima facie evidence that such motor vehicle was at the time of such violation,
controlled, operated, and used by the owner thereof.
(d) Violations of any parking regulation defined in this chapter shall constitute petty
misdemeanors.
Section 62-103. Collection and disposition of revenue.
The Chief of Police shall account for all monies collected under this chapter. All monies
collected shall then be turned over to the city clerk to be deposited in the general fund.
Secs. 62-104 Towing of Illegally Parked Vehicles.
Any vehicle parked in violation of the City ordinance, in violation of the State Law, or in
such a manner so as to interfere with snow removal or use of a public street during an
emergency or special event, may be removed by towing at the direction of the Chief of
Police, or his/her designee. The owner or other person responsible for such parking of
the vehicle shall be liable for the reasonable cost of such towing and storage. The City
shall not be liable for any damage to any towed vehicle.
Secs 62-105--62-130. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 62; ARTICLE V; DIVISION I
CHAPTER 62. TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE V. Bicycles and Play Vehicles.
DIVISION 1. Generally
Section 62-131. Regulation of roller devices.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the public health and safety
arising out of the use of roller devices, such as skate boards, roller blades, roller
skates, in-line skates and roller skis within the city. The council of the city finds
that there are certain public streets, ways and property wherein the operation and
use of such roller devices create an unnecessary potential danger to either the
user of such devices or the general public; and that the use of such devices in an
improper manner may cause destruction of property.
(b) Definition--Roller device. As used in this section, the term "roller device" means
a non-motorized platform, foot board, ski-like device, shoe, boot or similar
object mounted on wheels and designed or intended to propel a rider by human
power or force of gravity, including but not limited to, skate boards, roller
skates, roller blades, in-line skates and roller-skis. These devices do not include
wheel chairs operated for or by a disabled person, wagons or strollers.
(c) Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, ride or use a roller
device under the following circumstances:
(1) In a careless, reckless or negligent manner or in a manner that
endangers or is likely to endanger any property or any person,
including the user of the roller device; or in such a manner as to
indicate either a willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or
property.
(2) In any area within the city while being pushed, pulled or in any way
propelled by any motorized vehicle or by a person on a bicycle.
(3) On private property without the express permission of the owner or
occupant or the property.
(4) Upon any city-owned parking lot, ramp or other parking facility.
(5) Upon any public street or roadway where the posted speed limit is in
excess of 30 miles per hour.
(6) Upon any public street, sidewalk or roadway after sunset and before
sunrise.
(7) On any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public property in the
following area: On the east side of the Rum River, commencing at the
Rum River, then east on VanBuren Street to Fourth Avenue, then south
on Fourth Avenue to Monroe Street, then west on Monroe Street to the
Rum River, except for the sidewalk adjacent to the north side of
VanBuren Street, the sidewalk adjacent to the south side of Monroe
Street, and the sidewalk adjacent to the east side of Fourth Avenue.
Unless otherwise specified, the described area includes all sidewalks
1 of 2
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 62; ARTICLE V; DIVISION I
adjacent to the streets and all cross streets and adjacent sidewalks on
such cross streets.
(8) In any area to be described in the future, in addition to the areas
described in this section, as established by resolution of the city council
upon recommendation of the chief of police.
(d) Exceptions. Roller devices may be used by medical, police or other
emergency personnel.
(e) Penalty. A violation of this section shall constitute a petty
misdemeanor.
(f) Impoundment. Any police officer who observes any violation of this
section is authorized to impound the roller device and to hold the roller
device at the police department until resolution of the case following a
violation. The impounded item shall be released to the parent or legal
guardian of a user who is under the age of 18 years, or released to a
user 18 years of age or older, following the expiration of the
impoundment period.
Secs. 62-132--62-150. Reserved.
2 of 2
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 62; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
CHAPTER 62. TRAFFIC AND VEHCILES
ARTICLE V. Bicycles and Play Vehicles.
DIVISION 2. Bicycles.
----------
*State law reference--Bicycle operation and equipment, Minn. Stats. § 169.222.
----------
Section 62-151. Registration required.
(a) All bicycles used or ridden upon any highway, street, alley, sidewalk or other
public property within the City of Anoka shall be registered pursuant to Minn.
Stats. ch. 168C.
(b) The finding of any bicycle in any street, alley, highway, boulevard, or public
grounds without a current license identification tag, or with a mutilated frame
number shall be prima facie evidence that the bicycle is being operated on the
streets of the city without having been registered. The bicycle shall be
immediately impounded and shall only be surrendered to the owner thereof upon
proof of ownership satisfactory to the police department, proof of licensing of
the bicycle with the state, and payment of an impounding fee as established from
time to time by the city council.
Section 62-152. Number and placement of passengers.
No person shall ride or propel a bicycle on a street or other public highway of the City
with another person on the bicycle, unless the bicycle has been designed with a separate
mounted seat for each passenger of the bicycle. No passenger shall ride or be seated
ahead of the person who is guiding the bicycle.
Section 62-153. Speed.
No bicycle shall be ridden faster than is reasonable and proper, but every bicycle shall be
operated with reasonable regard to the safety of the operator and other persons upon the
sidewalks, streets and other public highways of the City.
Section 62-154. Observance of traffic signs.
Persons riding bicycles shall observe all traffic signs and stop at all stop signs.
Section 62-155. Riding or parking on sidewalks in business districts.
No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district. Any bicycle left
parked upon a sidewalk so as to constitute a hazard to the public shall be removed by the
police department. After the bicycle has been properly identified, it may be released to
the owner if it has been validly licensed.
Cross references--Businesses, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50.
Section 62-156. Observance of traffic rules and regulations.
Every person riding or propelling a bicycle upon any street or other public highway in the
City shall observe all traffic rules and regulations applicable thereto.
1 of 2
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 62; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Section 62-157. Yielding to other traffic.
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building, shall, upon
approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alley way, yield the
right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on such sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon
entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such
roadway.
Secs. 62-158--62-175. Reserved.
2 of 2
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 62; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
CHAPTER 62. TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE V. Bicycles and Play Vehicles.
DIVISION 3. Motorized Bicycles.
----------
*State law reference--Motorized bicycles, Minn. Stats. § 169.223.
----------
SUBDIVISION I. In General.
Section 62-176. Definitions.
For the purpose of this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section:
Electric-assisted bicycle means a motor vehicle with two or three wheels that:
(a) Has a saddle and fully operable pedals for human propulsion;
(b) Meets the requirements of federal motor vehicle safety standards 49 CFR 571.01
et seq.; and
(c) Has an electric motor that (i) has a power output of not more than 1,000 watts,
(ii) is incapable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of more than 20 miles per
hour, (iii) is incapable of further increasing the speed of the device when human
power alone is used to propel the vehicle at a speed of more than 20 miles per
hour, and (iv) disengages or ceases to function when the vehicle's brakes are
applied.
State law reference--Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. § 168.01, subd. 4a.
Motorized bicycle means a bicycle that is propelled by a motor of a piston displacement
capacity of 50 cubic centimeters or less, and a maximum of two brake horsepower, which
is capable of a maximum speed of not more than 30 miles per hour on a flat surface with
not more than one percent grade in any direction when the motor is engaged. The term
"motorized bicycle" includes an electric-assisted bicycle.
Motorized bicycle business means any business enterprise whereby motor scooters owned
by one person are used or leased by another for a consideration.
Motorized bicycle livery means a business of leasing or furnishing motorized bicycles to
the public for a consideration.
State law reference--Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. § 168.01, subd. 4b.
Cross reference--Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Section 62-177. Rules governing lessors generally.
All licensees under this division shall:
(a) Verify the signature of the vehicle user in the rental agreement.
1 of 3
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 62; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
(b) Obtain a written rental agreement from each vehicle user.
(c) Obtain a written record, permanent and legible, containing the name, address,
age and the motor vehicle driver's license.
(d) Maintain and service all motorized bicycles in accordance with a comprehensive
maintenance checklist.
(e) Post and maintain state, county and city regulations as to speed, carrying
passengers and insurance required in this division.
(f) Instruct all customers in operation of motorized bicycles and determine that
lessee is capable of operating motorized bicycles.
(g) Require that only lessee may operate leased motorized bicycles.
Section 62-178. Driver's license prerequisite to lease.
No licensee shall let or furnish any motorized bicycle licensed under this division to any
person not having his motor vehicle driver's license issued in accordance with the
provision of the laws of the state of the residence of the operator.
State law references--Use of motor bicycle by unlicensed person, Minn. Stats. §
168.835; rental to unlicensed person prohibited, Minn. Stats. § 168.834, subd. 1.
Section 62-179. Operation generally.
No person operating a motorized bicycle on the streets or public thoroughfares of this city
under this division shall:
(a) Permit more than one person on each motorized bicycle.
(b) Use a motorized bicycle not properly licensed and identified in accordance with
this division.
Section 62-180. List of license plate numbers of lessors.
All licensees under this division shall file with the city manager a list of the license plate
numbers for all the motorized bicycles leased by the licensee and shall further keep such
list current at all times.
Secs. 62-181--62-195. Reserved.
2 of 3
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 62; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
SUBDIVISION II. Sales or Rental Licenses*
----------
*State law reference--Motor bicycle business license, Minn. Stats. § 168.832.
----------
Section 62-196. Required.
No person shall engage in the motorized bicycle business or operate a motorized bicycle
livery without a license issued by the city clerk.
Section 62-197. Application.
Any person desiring a license under this subdivision shall apply in writing to the City
Manager giving the name of the owner or manager of the business, the address of the
business, the nearest street or parkway intersection of such place of business, the
maximum number of motorized bicycles to be used and the state license number of each
motorized bicycle.
Section 62-198. Fee.
The annual fee for a license under this subdivision shall be established by the council.
Section 62-199. Insurance.
No license shall be issued until the applicant obtains and files with the city clerk a policy
of liability insurance by an insurance company authorized to do business under the laws
of the state, to be kept in force for the remainder of the licensing year. The policy shall
insure the applicant, his renters and lessees, and the persons operating such motor
bicycles against liability for loss in the sum of $25,000.00 for injury to or death of any
one person in any one accident, $50,000.00 for injury to or death of more than one person
in any one accident, and $5,000.00 because of damage to or destruction of property in
any one accident resulting from the negligent operation, use or defective condition of any
motor bicycle belonging to the applicant. The policy shall contain a provision for
continuing liability there under for the term of the license to the full amount thereof,
notwithstanding any recovery thereon. The policy also shall contain an endorsement to
the effect that the liability under the policy is not affected by reason of any motor bicycle
having been furnished to, or rented or leased by a minor, and further, that the city clerk
shall be notified by letter at least ten days before the cancellation of the insurance policy.
The policy shall also contain a provision providing for at least $200.00 medical payments
to cover the operator or passenger of such vehicle if personal injury results to the operator
or passenger from its use.
State law reference--Motor bicycle business insurance, Minn. Stats. § 168.833.
Section 62-200. Investigation of traffic conditions prior to issuance.
Upon the filing of an application for a license under this subdivision, the police
department shall investigate the traffic conditions in the immediate vicinity of applicant's
proposed motorized bicycle business place, particularly during Saturdays and Sundays
and holidays, and the police department shall make a report and recommend thereon to
the City Council.
Section 62-201. Expiration date.
All licenses under this subdivision shall expire on January 1st of each year.
3 of 3
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 62; ARTICLE VI
1 of 4
CHAPTER 62. TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE_VI. Use of Motorized Golf Carts and Utility Task Vehicles
_______
*State law reference—Special Vehicle Use on Roadway, Minn. Stats. § 169.045
_______
Section 62-202. Purpose.
Pursuant to its authority under Minnesota Statutes, Section 169.045, the City authorizes
the operation of a motorized golf cart or utility task vehicles on designated public rightsof-
ways as permitted under this section.
Section 62-203. Definitions.
(a) Authorized Operator. Only persons 21 years of age or older may operate a
motorized golf cart on designated public right-of-ways.
(b) City. The City of Anoka, Minnesota.
(c) Designated Public Right-of-ways. The public rights-of-ways including street or
trails listed in Section 62-205 on which motorized golf carts may operate.
(d) Community and Special Events. Events sponsored, co-sponsored or supported by
the City. Community and Special events may also include celebrations approved
by the City and organized by a nonprofit, community based organization
intended to serve the entire community.
(e) Motorized Golf Cart. A self-propelled three or four-wheel vehicle of this type
and style designated for and commonly used for transportation on a golf course.
(f) Police Department. City of Anoka Police Department.
(g) UTV or Utility Task Vehicles. A side-by-side, four-wheel drive that has four
wheels propelled by a motorized internal combustion engine and has a total dry
weight of at least 1,800 but less than 2,600 pounds. This type of motorized
vehicle can be classified as a Class 2 ATV.
Section 62-204. Permit Required.
No motorized golf cart may be operated on a designated public right-of-way without first
obtaining a permit from the City.
(a) Permit Application. Permit applications require approval of the Police
Department and must contain the following information:
1. Registered owner’s name, address, and telephone number.
2. Make, model, vehicle identification number if available.
3. Proof of insurance for the motorized golf cart.
4. Other information as required by the Police Department.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 62; ARTICLE VI
2 of 4
(b) Permits in the form of a sticker issued by the Police Department is required to
be affixed to the lower center windshield area or other visible location on the
front center of the motorized golf cart.
(c) Inspection. As part of the permit process, the Police Department may require the
Applicant to have the motorized golf carts inspected by the Police Department.
(d) Education. As part of the permit process, the Police Department may require the
Applicant to demonstrate their knowledge in the use of hand signals for turning
and stopping.
(e) Fee. The City Council may establish an annual fee for a permit
(f) Term of Permit. Permits maybe granted for a period of up to three (3) years.
(g) Insurance. The Applicant must provide, and submit with the permit application,
evidence of insurance complying with the provisions of Minnesota Statutes
Section 65B.48, Subdivision 5. Every motorized golf cart operator shall have
proof of insurance in possession while operating the motorized golf cart on
designated public rights-of-ways and shall produce such proof of insurance on
demand of a police officer as defined in Minnesota Statutes Section 169.791.
Section 62-205. Operating Conditions.
(a) Designated Public Right-of-Ways. Motorized golf carts may be operated on all
local city streets within the limits of the City that have a speed limit of 30 mph
or less, with the exception of East Main Street, where such operation is
prohibited.
(b) Designated Trails. Motorized golf carts may be operated on designated trails
along Green Haven Parkway providing access to the golf course.
(c) Unless otherwise stated in Section 62-205 of this Chapter, motorized golf carts
may not be operated in the following areas:
1. Within State or County rights-of-ways, including grassy boulevard and
ditch areas, unless crossing intersecting State/County highways and
local streets as authorized by Section 62-205 (d) of this Article.
2. Local City streets with speed limits greater than 30 mph.
3. Any area posted that prohibits motorized golf carts.
4. On Burlington Northern or Anoka County railroad rights-of-ways.
5. On City sidewalks, bike or pedestrian trails unless authorized by
Section 62-205 (b) of this Article.
6. On public or private property unless permission is posted by the
property owner.
7. Within the grassy boulevard and/or ditch areas of local City streets.
8. Public parks and open space/natural areas.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 62; ARTICLE VI
3 of 4
(d) Crossing Intersecting State/County Highways and Local Streets. The operator,
under permit, of a motorized golf cart may cross any State/County highway or
local city street intersecting a designated public right-of-way at a signalized
intersection intersecting said designated public right-of-way.
(e) Time of Operation. Motorized golf carts may only be operated on the designated
public rights-of-ways and trails from sunrise to sunset. Motorized golf carts shall
not be operated in inclement weather or when visibility is impaired by weather,
smoke, fog, or other conditions, or at any time when there is insufficient light to
clearly see persons and vehicles on the public right-of-way at a distance of 500
feet.
(f) Motorized Golf Cart Safety Equipment Requirements. All motorized golf carts
shall have the following equipment:
Motorized golf carts must display a slow-moving vehicle emblem as described
in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 169.522 when operated on designated public
rights-of-ways.
Rear view mirror as defined in Minnesota Statute Section 169.70.
(g) Application of Traffic Laws. Every person operating a motorized golf cart under
permit on designated public rights-of-ways has all the rights and duties
applicable to the driver of any other vehicle under Minnesota Statutes, Chapter
169, except when those provisions cannot be reasonably applied.
(h) Parking of Motorized Golf Cart. Motorized golf carts must be parked in
designated public parking stalls or areas used by automobiles only. No parking
is permitted on public sidewalks, public parks, public boulevard areas or other
similar public areas.
Section 62-206. Revocation of Permit.
A permit may be revoked at any time for violating any provision of this Article, after
investigation by the Police Department and final determination by the Police Chief or his
or her appointee.
Section 62-207. Appeal.
Any permit revocation may be appealed to the City Council by providing a written
request for an appeal within ten (10) business days of the revocation to the City Clerk.
The revocation will remain in full force and effect until the appeal process has been
completed.
Section 62-208. Exemptions.
(a) City Operations. The City of Anoka Police and Fire Department and Public
Works Department are authorized to utilize UTVs to carry out its operations and
are exempt from all requirements under this Article.
(b) Golf Course Operations. Authorized motorized golf carts and UTVs utilized on
property associated with Green Haven Golf Course and Event Center are exempt
from all requirements under this Article.
(c) Community or Special Events. Motorized golf carts on public streets during
parades and special events by event organizers, and others authorized by the
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 62; ARTICLE VI
4 of 4
City for such use, are exempt from all requirements under this Article. The
Police Chief or his or her appointee shall determine if an event qualifies for the
exemption. Notwithstanding the foregoing, additional conditions and/or
restrictions may be imposed upon individuals authorized to use motorized golf
carts on City streets under this Section.
(d) Private Property. Motorized golf carts utilized on private property, by the
property owner or with the property owner’s express permission, are exempt
from all requirements of this Article.
Section 62-209. Violation; Penalty.
Any person violating the terms of this Article may lose his or her permit to operate a
motorized golf cart on public rights-of-ways in the City of Anoka and, upon conviction
for any such violation, may be found guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in
accordance with the penalties established
Sections 62-210 thru 62-249. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 66; ARTICLE I
CHAPTER 66. UTILITIES
ARTICLE I. In General.
Section 66-1. Application and payment for utility services.
(a) Utility service shall include electric service, water service, sewer service,
garbage service.
(b) To secure utility service from the City, application shall be made to the City on
forms prescribed by the City Council.
(c) Accounts shall be carried in the name of the fee owner. The fee owner shall be
liable for utility services supplied to his property, whether he is occupying the
property or not and any charges unpaid shall be a lien upon the property.
(d) At the time of filing an application for utility services the applicant shall deposit
a sum of money with the City. This sum of money will be set by the City
Council from time to time. The deposit and interest balance shall be returned
upon the fee owner's termination of service with all bills paid. A utility deposit
and interest balance will be returned to apartment and residential customers after
the bill is paid by the due date for twelve (12) consecutive months. Deposits
shall bear interest at the rates set by Minn. Stats. § 325E.02.
(e) The Department of Finance inconjunction with the Department of Public Works
may terminate utility services to delinquent customers in accordance with the
City utility rules and regulations. Service calls for reconnection of service after
termination for nonpayment of bills shall be accompanied by a charge set by the
City Council from time to time.
(f) Each year an assessment roll shall be prepared providing for assessment of all
delinquent utility service accounts against the respective properties served. The
assessment roll shall be delivered to the Council for adoption on or before
October 10th of each year. Upon such adoption, the clerk shall certify the
assessment roll to the County Auditor for collection.
Section 66-2. Connections to public sewer and water required; right of city to make connection.
(a) It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of any property platted into lots
and blocks and having a dwelling house or business property situated thereon,
which property abuts upon any public street or alley along which any municipal
sewer and water mains shall have been constructed, to install a toilet in such
dwelling or business property and make connection thereof with the water and
sewer in such street or alley adjacent thereto.
(b) It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any property situated as
described in subsection 66-2(a) to fail to make connection with the water and
sewer within 30 days after written notice is given to such owner or occupant to
install such toilet, and written notice shall be prepared by the City Clerk and
served on such owner or occupant.
(c) Whenever any owner or occupant shall fail to comply with such written notice
the City Council shall by resolution direct that a toilet be installed and that a
connection be made with the sewer and water and that the cost of such
installation be paid in the first instance out of the general revenue fund, and the
1 of 2
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 66; ARTICLE I
actual cost thereof shall be assessed against the property benefited by such
connection.
(d) After such installation and connection is completed by order of the City Council,
the City Clerk shall serve a written notice of the assessment upon the owner or
his representative directing him to pay such assessment within ten days after the
service of such notice to the City Finance Director. If such assessment is not
paid within ten days it shall be the duty of the City Assessor to certify the
amount thereof to the County Auditor for collection in the same manner as other
special assessments are made; provided, that the commission may by resolution
provide that the assessment plus interest, not to exceed six percent per annum,
be spread over a term of five years upon request of the owner of the property or
his representative.
State law reference--Authority to require sewer and water connections, Minn. Stats. §§
410.33, 412.231, subd. 28.
Section 66-3. Waterworks and light department property--Unauthorized connections.
No person shall make any connection with any meter, pieces, conduit, wire, line, or other
apparatus belonging to the City and used in the management or operation of the
waterworks and light department of the City, for the purpose of taking, using, or wasting
water or electric current there from without first having obtained the written consent of
the Director of Public Works and Director of Electric Utility Department.
Secs. 66-4--66-30. Reserved.
2 of 2
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 66; ARTICLE II; DIVISION 1
CHAPTER 66. UTILITIES
ARTICLE II. Sewers and Sewage Disposal.
DIVISION 1. Generally.
Section 66-31. Control of construction of sewers, drains, and connections.
The City Manager shall have general supervision and control of all public sewers and
drains and connections thereto, which have been or may hereafter be constructed by the
City, or which have been or may be hereafter constructed by private parties under
authority granted by the City Council.
Section 66-32. Enforcement of article.
It shall be the duty of the City police department, in all cases where they may find any
person engaged in the work of breaking ground for the purposes of making connections,
etc., with sewers or drains or in any manner interfering with or operating upon any of the
sewers or drains of the City, to ascertain at once if such persons have been granted a
permit therefore, and in the event such person does not have a permit, to order them to
desist, under pain of arrest for violation of this Code and to at once report the fact to the
City Manager.
Section 66-33. Right of entry for inspections; correction of defective sewers and drains.
The City Manager or his duly authorized assistants shall have the right to enter upon any
premises connected with any public sewer or drain at all reasonable hours for the purpose
of ascertaining whether the provisions of this article or any other ordinance in regard to
house drains or connections have been complied with and whether the sewer or drain
connecting such premises with the public sewers is in good condition. If the City
Manager shall find that such sewer or drain or its appurtenances do not conform to the
provisions of law in regard thereto, or have become clogged, obstructed, broken, or out of
order, he shall notify the owner, agent, or occupant or person having charge of the
building or premises which are drained by such sewer or drain. It shall thereupon be the
duty of such owner, agent, occupant or person having charge of the building or premises
to cause the sewer or drain or appurtenances to be removed, reconstructed, repaired,
altered or cleansed as the condition of such sewer or drain or appurtenances may require,
and in case of neglect or refusal of the owner, agent, occupant or other person to remove,
reconstruct, repair, alter or cleanse such sewer or drain or appurtenances for the space of
three days after receiving such notice from the City Manager, the City Manager shall
cause such work to be done in such a manner as he may deem expedient and shall charge
the expense thereof to the owner, agent, occupant or other person provided in this section.
Section 66-34. Connection permit.
(a) No connection shall be made with any public sewer or drain without a written
permit from the City Manager, or his duly authorized assistants, and no
connection so made shall thereafter be extended without such a permit.
(b) Applications for permits to connect to sewers and drains must be made and filed
in the office of the City Manager or his duly designated assistants by the
licensed plumber who is employed to do the work and must state the location of
the property to be connected and the name of the owner and the number of
buildings to be connected and how occupied. Applications for permits must be
accompanied by a sketch plan showing the location of the proposed connection
1 of 3
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 66; ARTICLE II; DIVISION 1
and the manner in which it is to be made. The city manager shall inspect the
plan and if it is found that the connection provided for by such plan does not
conform to the provisions of this article or the rules and regulations of the
commission relating to such connections or such permit shall not be issued for
its construction.
(c) No permit shall be issued to tap or connect with any municipal sewer or water
system of the City, either directly or indirectly, from any lot or tract of land,
unless the Finance Director shall have certified the following:
(1) That such lot or tract of land to be served by such connection or tap has
been separately assessed for lateral sewer system and lateral water main
with which the connections are made and for other municipal
improvements benefiting the property;
(2) If no assessment has been levied for such improvements, that
proceedings for levying such assessment have been or will be
commenced in due course;
(3) That the cost of all improvements benefiting the property have been
paid by the developer or builder platting such lot or tract of land; or
(4) That the applicant has paid compensation to the city for the sanitary
sewer, water main, and all other improvements benefiting the property.
The amount of compensation shall not exceed the benefit to the
property resulting from the improvements. The latest large-area
assessments for similar improvements may be used as a guideline in
determining the benefits to the property.
(d) Any sum received by the City under subsection (c) of this section shall
be paid into a special expense account until it shall be determined by
the City Council whether the property, served by such connection under
such permit will be assessable for any other sewer system or water
main; if it shall be determined that no other main shall be so assessable,
then such fee shall be credited to the fund for the sewer system or water
main to which the connection was made, but if the tract or lot served by
the connection is subsequently assessed for another sewer system or
water main, such sum shall be transferred to the fund for such main,
and credited against the amount assessable against such tract or lot.
(e) All permits issued to connect with sewers and drains shall be upon the
express condition that the City Manager or his designee may revoke
and annul the permit at any time previous to the time the work of
making such connection is commenced, and the person making such
connection, or his successors in interest, shall not have the right to
claim any damages in consequence of such permit being revoked or
annulled.
Section 66-35. Street excavations; restoration of streets, curbs, and sidewalks thereafter.
When excavations in the street are made, the paving or street surfacing and the excavated
material shall be deposited in a manner that will occasion the least inconvenience to the
public; provided that the passage of storm water along the gutters must be made. Onehalf
the street must be left clear for the passage of vehicles and bridge-ways must be
provided on sidewalks for foot passengers. In refilling the trench the earth must be
thoroughly rammed to prevent settlement. The paving or street surfacing and curbs and
2 of 3
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 66; ARTICLE II; DIVISION 1
sidewalks are to be restored to at least as good a condition as they were before the
excavation was made, and all rubbish and surplus earth must be removed.
Secs. 66-36--66-50. Reserved.
3 of 3
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 66; ARTICLE II; DIVISION 2
CHAPTER 66. UTILITIES
ARTICLE II. Sewers and Sewage Disposal
DIVISION 2. Rate and Charges
----------
*Charter reference--Utility rates, § 12.02.
----------
Section 66-51. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section:
Industrial wastes means the liquid waste resulting from any commercial, manufacturing
or industrial operations or processes.
Sanitary sewage means the waste from water closets, lavatories, sinks, bathtubs, showers,
household laundries, cellar floor drains, bars, soda fountains, refrigerators, air
conditioners, drinking fountains and any other equipment or device.
Cross reference--Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Section 66-52. Power to fix and adjust rates.
The City Council shall have the power to classify sewage and industrial wastes
discharged into the sewage system based upon its concentration and cost of disposal, and
to fix just and reasonable rates and charges for its disposal according to such
classification, and the City Council shall have the power to increase or decrease such
rates and charges as may reasonably be required.
Secs. 66-53--66-80. Reserved.
1 of 1
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 66; ARTICLE III; DIVISION 1
1 of 5
CHAPTER 66. UTILITIES
ARTICLE III. Solid Waste Collection and Disposal.*
----------
*State law references--Waste Management Act, Minn. Stats. ch. 115A; littering, Minn. Stats. §§ 169.42,
609.671, subd. 13, 115A.99; mandatory that City provide for solid waste collection, Minn. Stats. § 115A.941.
----------
DIVISION 1. Generally.
Section 66-81. Intent.
It is the intent of the City Council, by means of this Article, to establish a complete
system for collection of garbage, other refuse, white goods, recyclables, and yard waste
throughout the City so that the disposal of such materials is accomplished in a sanitary
manner and so that the health and sanitary conditions of the residents of the City are
properly safeguarded and so that the City is in compliance with the State and/or the
County's recycling and solid waste reduction mandates.
Section 66-82. Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases when used in this Article shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this Section except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
Aluminum recyclables means containers fabricated primarily of aluminum and commonly
used for soda, beer, or other beverages.
Can recyclables means containers fabricated primarily of metal, or a metal alloy other
than aluminum, or tin.
Collection means the aggregation of garbage, other refuse, white goods, recyclable or
yard waste, from the place at which it is generated and includes all activities up to the
time when the material is delivered to a designated facility.
Commercial establishment means any premises where a commercial or industrial
enterprise of any kind is carried on, and shall include restaurants, hotels, clubs, churches,
and schools where food is prepared or served.
Commerical/Industrial/Multiple Dwelling Collection means collection occurring on
premises where a multiple dwelling, commercial or industrial enterprise of any kind is
carried on, and shall include restaurants, hotels, clubs, churches, and schools where food
is prepared or served.
Corrugated cardboard means heavy paper with alternating ridges and grooves for use in
packing or boxing materials.
Garbage means all putrescible wastes, excluding animal offal and carcasses of dead
animals, human excreta, sewage, and other water-carried wastes.
Glass or plastic recyclables means jars, bottles, and containers which are primarily used
for packaging and bottling of various matter.
Mixed Municipal Solid Waste means garbage, refuse and other solid waste form
residential, commercial, industrial, and community activities that the generator of the
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 66; ARTICLE III; DIVISION 1
2 of 5
waste aggregates for collections, but does not include auto hulks, street sweepings, ash,
construction debris, mining waste, sludge, tree and agricultural waste, tires, lead acid
batteries, used oil, and other materials collected, processed and disposed of as separate
waste streams.
Mixed paper recyclables means boxboard (cake, cracker, cookie boxes), junk mail,
magazines, newsprint, newspaper supplements, and telephone books.
Multiple residential dwelling means any building used for residential purposes consisting
of more than four dwelling units with individual kitchen facilities for each.
Other refuse means ashes, non-recyclable glass, crockery, cans, paper, boxes, rags, and
similar non-putrescible non-recyclable wastes but excluding sand, earth, brick, stone,
concrete, trees, tree branches and wood.
Recycling means the process of collecting and preparing recyclable materials and reusing
the materials in their original form or using them in manufacturing processes that do not
cause the destruction of recyclable materials in a manner that precludes further use.
Recycling facility means an organization or business that collects recyclable materials.
Residential Collection means collection occurring on the premises of any single building
consisting of one, two, three, or four dwelling units, with individual kitchen facilities for
each.
Residential dwelling means any single building consisting of one, two, three, or four
dwelling units with individual kitchen facilities for each.
Separation or to separate mean to place and store other recyclable materials in containers
provided by the City in a manner determined by the City Council.
Single sort container means the sole container specified to store all curbside recyclables
until collection.
Special pickup means any collection of materials other than garbage, other refuse,
recyclable or yard waste including white goods, furniture, over sized materials, and
construction materials.
Targeted recyclables means aluminum and tin cans, glass bottles (clear, green, and
brown) with neck, plastic bottles with neck, mixed paper, and corrugated cardboard, or
other materials as defined by Council resolution.
Waste stream means the manner of disposal particularly prescribed by this Article for
each of the types of materials specifically defined in this Section.
White goods means large appliances, furniture, oversize materials, construction materials,
sand, earth, brick, stone, crockery, trees, tree branches, and other materials collected,
processed, and disposed of as a separate waste stream.
Yard waste means garden wastes, leaves, lawn cuttings, weeds, shrub and tree waste and
prunings.
Cross reference--Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Section 66-83. Exceptions.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 66; ARTICLE III; DIVISION 1
3 of 5
Nothing in this Article shall prevent persons from hauling garbage, other refuse,
recyclables, yard waste, or white goods from their own residence or business properties
provided that the following rules are observed:
(a) All garbage shall be hauled in containers that are watertight on the bottom and
all sides and with tight fitting covers on top;
(b) All other refuse and recyclables shall be hauled in vehicles with leak proof
bodies and completely covered or enclosed by canvas or other material so as to
completely eliminate possible cargo loss;
(c) All garbage and other refuse shall be dumped or unloaded only at a County
designated disposal facility, pursuant to County and State regulations;
(d) Recyclables shall be disposed of at a recycling facility, or an organized
recyclable drive, or through the City’s organized curbside collection recycling
program;
(e) Yard waste may be composted privately, be disposed of at the County
composting facilities, or through the City's curbside collection with a licensed
hauler.
Section 66-84. Disposal generally.
(a) All residents and owners of commercial and multiple residential dwellings shall
make provisions for the sanitary disposal of garbage, other refuse, mixed
municipal solid waste and white goods by means of a licensed private collector
unless they have provided for adequate disposal which meets the approval of the
City Council and which complies with all Ordinances and regulations of the
City, County, and State.
(b) No person shall permit garbage, other refuse, mixed municipal solid waste,
white goods, recyclables, or yard waste to accumulate or remain upon property
owned or occupied by that person except when stored in required containers,
and kept out of sight and smell, and such storage or accumulation shall not
continue for more than two weeks. Outside storage containers and single sort
containers shall be located in the side or rear yard next to the garage or house.
Containers and single sort containers may be kept in the front of the house if
kept in an enclosure or screened from the street or upon the driveway directly in
front of the garage the furthest possible distance from the house. Containers
may be placed next to the street or curb on the days scheduled for collection but
shall be returned to the place of storage within twelve (12) hours after collection.
(c) All yard waste shall be disposed of in compliance with all applicable State and
County laws and regulations. No person shall dispose of yard waste into the
waste streams for garbage, other refuse, recyclables, or white goods. Yard waste
shall be disposed of by:
(1) Curbside collection through a licensed hauler;
(2) The resident transporting the yard waste to the County compost sites; or
(3) Composting the yard waste on private property with the owner's
consent.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 66; ARTICLE III; DIVISION 1
4 of 5
(d) No person shall permit garbage, other refuse, recyclables, or yard waste to be
removed from their property by an unauthorized or unlicensed collector.
(e) No person shall discharge garbage, other refuse, recyclables, yard waste,
hazardous waste, or white goods on any street, alley, drive, park, playground,
other public place or any privately owned lot in the City. Persons who violate
this provision shall be subject to the cost of removing and disposing of the
material in addition to any other penalties imposed.
(f) No person or business shall scavenge or otherwise collect garbage, other refuse,
recyclables, white goods, or yard waste which have been placed at the curb or
from recyclable containers other than a duly authorized employee of the City or
collectors authorized by the City under this Article.
State law reference--Littering, Minn. Stats. §§ 169.42, 609.671, subd. 13, 115A.99.
Section 66-85. Penalties.
A violation of subSection 66-84(b), (c), (d), (e), or (f) shall be a petty misdemeanor,
except that the third and each succeeding violation of any petty misdemeanor provision
of this Article, within a period of three years, shall be a misdemeanor. Each day during
which the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Any other violation of
this Article shall be a misdemeanor.
Section 66-86. Storage and placement for collection.
(a) The occupant of a residential dwelling and the owner of multi-residential
dwellings shall insure the provision of containers with covers for the collection
of garbage and other refuse sufficient to keep odors in and insects and vermin
out. Such containers shall be constructed of metal or other approved materials
and shall be watertight so that they hold without leakage of material or odors all
the garbage that may accumulate between times of collection. Nothing but
garbage and other refuse as defined in this Article shall be placed therein.
Except when filling or emptying such containers, covers shall be kept tight
thereon.
(b) Every owner, operator or lessee of an industrial and/or commercial business who
provides his/her own garbage and/or refuse containers shall keep the containers
in a storage area or building which can be locked except on the day of
collection. Every owner, operator, or lessee of an industrial and/or commercial
business who uses a container provided by the licensed private collector shall
keep the container so located as to be out of the public view as far as possible
except on the day of pick up. Containers shall not be filled to the extent that the
garbage or refuse placed therein can drop or spill from such containers.
Section 66-87. Provision of collection.
(a) Yard Waste. The removal and disposal of yard waste is the sole responsibility
of the property owner or party responsible for the property.
(b) Recyclables. It is unlawful for any person other than a duly authorized
employee of the City or collectors authorized by the City to collect or remove
recyclable which have been placed at the curb for pick up.
Section 66-88. Payment and rates.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 66; ARTICLE III; DIVISION 1
5 of 5
Charges for recyclable collection shall be as determined by the Council and shall be
billed to the property owner.
Secs. 66-89--66-105. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 66; ARTICLE III; DIVISION 2
1 of 4
CHAPTER 66. UTILITIES
ARTICLE III. Solid Waste Collection and Disposal.
DIVISION 2. Private Collectors.
Section 66-106. License.
(a) No person shall haul garbage, other refuse, recyclables, yard waste, or white
goods for hire without a license therefore from the city, or haul garbage, other
refuse, recyclables, or yard waste from their own residence or business
properties other than as excepted in this Chapter.
(b) There shall be two license categories, defined by the type of account served:
Commercial/Industrial/Multiple Dwelling Collection and Residential Dwelling
Collection, both as defined in Chapter 66, Article III, Division 1. The City
Council shall establish license fees. Licenses shall be issued for one calendar
year, from January 1 through December 31. Each vehicle for which a hauler's
license is issued shall exhibit such license in a prominent position on such
vehicle. No collector licensed pursuant to this article shall acquire any vested
right in a license. The City may, upon finding that public necessity requires,
determine to establish other means of refuse collection.
(c) Prior to the issuance of a license an applicant must obtain and provide proof of
all the insurance required within this Article. All costs and expenses are the
responsibility of the applicant. All insurance coverage is subject to approval by
the City and shall be maintained by the Licensee for the full term of the license.
No activity under this license shall be commenced until the requirements of this
Article have been satisfied.
(1) The Licensee shall obtain and maintain statutory Worker’s
Compensation Coverage as required under the laws of the State of
Minnesota.
In the event the Licensee is a sole proprietor and has not elected to
provide Worker’s Compensation Coverage, Licensee shall be required
to execute and submit an affidavit of sole proprietorship in a form
satisfactory to the City.
(2) The Licensee shall obtain and maintain the following minimum
coverage for comprehensive general liability (including premises’
operations; independent contractors’ protective; products and
completed operations; broad form property damage:
Bodily Injury: $1,000,000 per occurrence.
$1,000,000 products/completed operations
Property Damage: $1,000,000 per occurrence
(3) Licensee shall obtain and maintain the following minimum insurance
coverage for personal injury liability (with employment related
exclusion deleted):
Limit: $1,000,000 per occurrence
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 66; ARTICLE III; DIVISION 2
2 of 4
(4) Licensee shall obtain and maintain the following minimum insurance
coverage for comprehensive automobile liability (owned, non-owned,
hired):
Bodily Injury: $1,000,000 per person
$1,000,000 per occurrence
Property Damage: $1,000,000 per occurrence
(5) Insurance certificates evidencing that the insurance required by this
Article is in force with companies acceptable and licensed in the State
of Minnesota, and in amounts required, shall be submitted for
examination and approval by the City prior to the execution of the
license. Thereafter, the certificates shall be filed with the City. The
insurance certificates shall specifically provide that a certificate shall
not be modified, canceled or non-renewed, except upon thirty (30)
days’ prior written notice to the City. Neither the City’s failure to
require or insist upon certificates, or other evidence tending to show a
variance from the coverages specified in this section shall change a
Licensee’s responsibility to comply with these insurance requirements.
(d) Each applicant shall file a schedule of rates to be charged by the hauler during
the license period for which the application is made. The schedule of rates must
include a base rate and all other charges to the consumer listed as a service fee,
surcharge, or other similarly described fee. The schedule of rates must be
submitted on a Schedule of Rates Form provided by the City, which is included
in the license application and renewal packet. Every Licensee shall provide
prior notification to the City of any change in rates to be implemented during the
licensed period. Residential dwelling hauling rates shall include, at a minimum,
a rate structure for the following services:
(1) 30 to 40 gallon service;
(2) 80 to 90 gallon service;
(3) Walk up service;
(4) Handicapped service;
(5) White goods;
(6) Bi-weekly pick-up rate;
(7) Senior Citizen Discount Rate;
(8) Organized Neighborhood Collection Rate. A description of what meets
the criteria for organized neighborhood collection must be listed on the
Schedule of Rates Form.
(e) Hauler licenses shall be granted only upon the condition that the Licensee have
watertight packer-type vehicles to prevent the loss in transit of liquid or solid
cargo, that the vehicle be kept clean and as free from offensive odors as possible
and not be allowed to stand in any street longer than reasonably necessary to
collect garbage, other refuse, or white goods. The Licensee shall also ensure that
the collection site is left tidy and free of litter. No hauler operating on a route in
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 66; ARTICLE III; DIVISION 2
3 of 4
a residential district shall operate a truck on any street when the weight of such
vehicle exceeds eight tons per axle.
(f) Upon recommendation by the City Manager, the City Council may suspend or
revoke the license of any Licensee whose conduct is found to be in violation of
the provisions of this Article. Suspension or revocation may also be based on
other health, safety, and welfare concerns arising out of the performance of the
Licensee, its employees and agents, and/or its vehicles and equipment. The
City’s receipt of five (5) or more formal complaints, filed against a License,
within a twelve-month period, which have been administratively reviewed and
verified by City staff for accuracy, may also result in suspension or revocation
of a license. Revocation or suspension of a license by the Council shall be
preceded by a public hearing. The City Council may appoint a hearing examiner
or may conduct the hearing itself. The hearing notice shall be mailed at least ten
days prior to the hearing to the address given on the license application, shall
include notice of the time and place of the hearing, and shall state the nature of
the allegations against the Licensee.
State law reference--Licensing of solid waste collection, Minn. Stats. § 115A.93.
Section 66-107. Limitation on Number of Licenses.
(a) Purpose. It is the intent of the City to reduce the number of Solid Waste Collection
Licenses issued. The means of this reduction will be through attrition. Said
limitation is deemed necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the City
and its residents.
(b) No more than three (3) Residential collection licenses and three (3) Commercial
collection licenses may be in force at any time, except that all companies licensed by
the City as of September 1, 2015, may be relicensed according to the following
conditions:
(1) The Licensee has conformed to all City, County, State and Federal Laws related
to solid waste collection;
(2) There is no lapse in the license period;
(3) The Licensee submits a fully completed annual renewal form, payment and all
required documentation by the due date for renewals. Incomplete applications
shall be returned to the Licensee and must be resubmitted by the original due
date. Failure to submit a renewal, payment and all required documentation by
the original due date will be cause for the City to deny the renewal of the
license.
(4) Licenses are non-transferrable, except whereby an existing Licensee undergoes
incorporation, sale or merger with another existing City of Anoka licensed
collector, so long as the ownership, control, and interest in the license remain
with a pre-existing Licensee.
(5) The type of service offered, i.e. commercial/industrial/multi-family or
residential has not increased from the previous license period.
(6) There has been no increase in the number of trucks as listed in the application
for the previous year license.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 66; ARTICLE III; DIVISION 2
4 of 4
(7) License must not have been suspended more than two (2) times in a 12-month
period, or revoked.
Section 66-108. Collection days and hours.
(a) Residential dwelling hauling Licensees shall make weekly collection of
separated garbage and other refuse, unless the consumer has entered into an
agreement with the Licensee for bi-weekly pick-up service.
(b) No residential collection of garbage, other refuse, or white goods shall be made
except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
Saturday collection during these hours is permissible in weeks which include
recognized national holidays. Customers shall be notified of a specific day for
collection of their garbage, other refuse, or white goods and the Licensee shall
collect the materials within those time periods. Commercial, industrial, and
institutional collection of garbage, other refuse, and white goods shall be made
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day of the week and as
often as is necessary to protect the public's health, safety and welfare.
Residential "special pickup" as defined in section 66-82 may take place on any
day, Monday through Friday, 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. as arranged by the resident
and licensed hauler.
Section 66-109. Duties and obligations of licensed collector.
A licensed collector must comply with the following operational requirements. Failure to
observe any of these provisions may be a basis for suspension or revocation of a license.
(a) A Licensee shall operate in a manner consistent with its application materials
and provide notice to the City within 15 days of any change of information,
forms, rate structures, or certificates filed as a part of the license application
process.
(b) The Licensee shall comply with all City, County and State laws and regulations,
as well as this Article.
(c) Upon the city's request, haulers shall be required to provide evidence that they
have disposed of garbage, other refuse, and white goods at sites and in the
manner authorized by law.
Secs. 66-110--66-130. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 66; ARTICLE IV
1 of 1
CHAPTER 66. UTILITIES
ARTICLE IV. Water System*
----------
*State law reference--Authority to regulate use of waterworks, Minn. Stats. §§ 410.33, 410.231, subd. 11.
----------
Section 66-131. Watering restriction(s).
(a) Upon the determination of City staff that water restrictions are necessary to
protect water reserves, or to protect the publics’ health, safety and/or welfare,
the City staff may order the restriction or ban of watering, using City supplied
water, which shall include but not be limited to the use of irrigation systems and
the watering of grass, trees and shrubs.
(b) The person in whose name the account for City water is kept by the City for
each property within the City shall be responsible to maintain compliance with
this section on such property. Upon any violation of the restrictions imposed by
this article, the Department of City may issue written warning sand
administrative fines. For cases of repeat or continued violations, the city may
prosecute or terminate water service to the subject property Service may be
restored upon payment of all fines and associated service restoration fees.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 70; ARTICLE I
CHAPTER 70. VEGETATION
ARTICLE I. In General
Section 70-1. Penalty.
Any person who violates subsection 70-64(c), section 70-68, or section 70-69, is guilty of
a misdemeanor. A violation of any other section of this chapter shall be guilty of a petty
misdemeanor.
Secs. 70-2--70-30. Reserved.
1 of 1
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 70; ARTICLE II
1 of 2
CHAPTER 70. VEGETATION
ARTICLE II. Tall Grass, Brush or Noxious Vegetation*
----------
*State law reference--Minnesota Noxious Weed Law, Minn. Stats. § 18.75 et seq.
----------
Section 70-31. Unlawful vegetation.
It shall be unlawful for any property owner, lessee, or occupant having control of any
property within the City to permit or maintain on any property, or on or along the
sidewalk, street or alley adjacent to the property, between the property line and the curb
or middle of the alley, any uncultivated, or uncontrolled growth of weeds, grass, brush or
other vegetation, which is not part of an orderly landscape design, to a greater height than
six inches or any accumulation of dead weeds, grass, or brush. It shall also be unlawful
for any such person or persons to cause or allow noxious weeds as defined by the statutes
of the State to exist on any property within the City limits. Vegetation declared unlawful
by this section is a public nuisance.
Section 70-32. Duty of owner, lessee or occupant.
It shall be the duty of every owner, lessee or occupant of any property within the City to
cut, destroy, remove, or eradicate all nuisance vegetation as often as may be necessary to
comply with the provisions of Section 70-31 and whenever the weed inspector or his
assistants notify such owner, lessee or other occupant of the nuisance.
Section 70-33. Permitting a nuisance.
(a) Notice. When an owner, lessee, or occupant permits a nuisance to exist in
violation of Sections 70-31 and 70-32, the Weed Inspector may serve, by
certified mail or hand delivery, written notice upon the owner, lessee or
occupant of such property ordering compliance within seven (7) days after the
posting date of such notice. The notice also shall state that in the event of
noncompliance the Weed Inspector may order the work to be done by the
Inspector or his/her assistants at the property owner's expense and further that
the person has the right to appeal the order as provided in subsection (c) of this
section.
(b) Noncompliance with notice. If such person fails to comply with the notice, the
Weed Inspector or his/her assistants shall take such action as is necessary to
abate the nuisance. All costs, including administration, inspections, and work
whether contractual or other, may be recovered by the City Council, at its
direction, either by billing the person directly or by extending the cost of such
work as a special assessment against the property which assessment shall be
certified to the County Auditor for collection as other special taxes.
(c) Appeal. Any person aggrieved by an order of the Weed Inspector or his/her
assistants, may appeal that order to the City Council by filing a written request
with the Weed Inspector within five (5) days of service of the notice provided in
this section. The Weed Inspector shall within five (5) days cause the appeal to
be placed on the next regular City Council agenda and shall notify the appellant
of the date, time, and place of such meeting. The City Council shall have
authority to affirm, amend, or reject the order of the Weed Inspector or his/her
assistants.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 70; ARTICLE II
2 of 2
Section 70-34. Obstructing City employees.
No person shall obstruct the Weed Inspector, or his/her assistants, in the cutting, removal,
or eradication of weeds or grass.
Secs. 70-35--70-60. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 70; ARTICLE III
CHAPTER 70. VEGETATION
ARTICLE III. Diseased Trees*
----------
*State law reference--Shade tree disease control, Minn. Stats. § 18.023.
----------
Section 70-61. Declaration of policy.
The City Council has determined that the health of elm and oak trees within the City
limits is threatened by fatal tree diseases commonly known as Dutch elm and oak wilt
diseases. It has been further determined that the loss of elm and oak trees growing upon
public and private property would substantially depreciate the value of the property
within the City and impair the safety, good order, general welfare and convenience of the
public. It is declared to be the expressed goal and objective of the Council to control and
prevent the spread of these diseases of shade trees and other epidemic diseases of shade
trees, and this article is enacted for that purpose.
Section 70-62. Administration.
(a) Administrator. A qualified person within the park and recreation department
shall be designated as the administrator by the City Council. The administrator
shall exercise the powers and duties necessary to enforce the provisions of this
article. The administrator shall be a certified pesticide applicator and tree
inspector under the laws of the State. The powers and duties of the administrator
may be assigned to other qualified persons in the park and recreation department
in his absence.
(b) Duties of administrator. It is the duty of the administrator to coordinate under
the direction and control of the Council all activities of the City relating to the
control and prevention of Dutch elm disease, oak wilt disease and other
epidemic diseases of shade trees. By January 15th of each year, he shall
recommend to the designated tree board and City Council the details of a
program for the control of such diseases and shall perform the duties incident to
such a program adopted by the Council.
(c) Tree inspector. There shall be designated persons or employees within the
department of park and recreation as tree inspectors to carry out the enforcement
of this article. The inspectors shall be certified upon the passing of an
examination prescribed by the state commissioner of agriculture for the purpose
of determining that the applicant possesses the necessary qualifications to
enforce the rules set forth in this article.
(d) Duties of tree inspectors. It is the duty of the tree inspectors, under the direction
and control of the administrator, to know the appropriate state laws and rules
relative to oak wilt, Dutch elm and other epidemic diseases of shade trees and to
know the approved control methods of these diseases. The tree inspectors must
know the proper method of collecting samples of diseased diagnosis. The tree
inspector must plan, direct, and supervise all requirements for controlling shade
tree disease within the geographical limits of his control area.
Cross reference--Administration, ch. 2.
1 of 5
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 70; ARTICLE III
Section 70-63. Epidemic disease program.
Intent. It is the objective of the tree commission and the City Council to conduct a
program of plant pest control pursuant to the authority granted by Minn. Stats. § 18.022.
This program is directed specifically at the control and elimination of the Dutch elm
disease fungus, elm bark beetles, oak wilt fungus, and other injurious insects or diseases
of shade trees and it is undertaken at the recommendation of the State Commissioner of
agriculture. The administrator shall act as coordinator between the State Commissioner of
agriculture, the tree commission, and the City Council in the conduct of this program.
Section 70-64. Nuisances declared.
(a) Public nuisances. The following things are public nuisances whenever they may
be found within the City:
(1) Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected to any degree
with the Dutch elm fungus, ceratocystis ulmi (buisman) moreau, or
which harbors any of the elm bark beetles scolytus miltistraiatus
(eichh), or hylurgophinus refipes (march).
(2) Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including but not limited to, logs,
branches, stumps, roots, firewood or other elm material, which has not
been stripped of its bark or burned, chipped or buried.
(3) Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected to any degree
with mycelium mats or pads.
(4) Any dead oak tree or part thereof, which in the opinion of the tree
inspector constitutes a hazard, including but not limited to, logs,
branches, stumps, roots, firewood or other oak material, which has not
been stripped of its bark and burned or cut into lengths not greater than
24 inches and split into quarters, or into smaller pieces if originally
greater than 16 inches in diameter (for the period of July 1st through
March 1st of the following year). Any of this wood left unburned after
March 1 must be sealed in a sheet of clear plastic of at least four mils in
thickness, and must remain contained in plastic throughout the period
of March 1st through July 1st. Any wood not utilized by April 1st, will
be removed by the City and the cost assessed to the private property
owner.
(5) Other shade trees with injurious insects or diseases as determined by
the tree inspectors.
(6) Elm firewood. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to store
bark-bearing elm firewood during the period April 1st through
September 15th.
a. Elm firewood cannot be brought in from outside of a City or
control area for use as firewood (Plant Quarantine No. 78-1
Elm Wood.)
b. Bark-bearing elm logs from trees cut within the boundaries of
a City or control area can be kept from September 15th through
April 1st, of the following year.
2 of 5
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 70; ARTICLE III
c. During the period September 15th through April 1st, of the
following year, bark-bearing elm firewood may be stored on
homesteaded property so as to be in plain view and accessible
for inspection by the tree inspectors.
d. Such woodpiles are subject to inspection by the City tree
inspector prior to April 1st. Such inspections shall be
conducted after written notice to each property owner or
occupier is provided.
e. Any elm wood not utilized by April 1st, will be removed and
disposed of by the City, or by authorized representatives of the
City and the cost assessed to the private property owner.
f. This section does not include elm firewood that has been
rendered pest-risk free by debarking as described in 3MCAR
1.0109.
(b) Abatement. It is unlawful for any person to permit any public nuisance, as
defined in this section, to remain on any premises owned or controlled by him
within the city. Such nuisances may be abated in the manner prescribed by this
article.
(c) Violations. Any owner of real estate in the City who is notified of the existence
of a diseased tree on his property as provided in section 70-67, must within 20
days from the mailing of such notice, cut down such diseased tree, either by
himself, licensed private contractor, or City contractor. All remaining stumps on
private and public property must be completely debarked to the ground line or
chipped down to six inches below ground level. All parts, branches and brush
shall be removed by the property owner, licensed private contractor, or
contractor contracted by the City, to a designated disposal site, designated from
time to time by the state commissioner of agriculture, county or city, if it is
possible to obtain use of such place, and there such diseased material will be
burned, buried, or chipped. The City shall be responsible for the proper removal
and disposal of all diseased trees on property legally designated as public rightof-
way or boulevard and private property when authorized by the tree inspectors
for performance of both. The City shall not be responsible for the disposal of
diseased trees and tree parts from private property if the property owner cuts
down such trees either by himself or by licensed contractor.
Section 70-65. Inspection and investigation.
(a) Annual inspection. The tree inspector shall inspect all public and private places
within the City, which might harbor plant pests, as defined in Minn. Stats. §
18.46, subd. 13, as often as practicable to determine whether any condition
described in section 70-64 exists thereon. The tree inspector shall investigate all
reported incidents of infection or infestation by the Dutch elm fungus, elm bark
beetles, oak wilt fungus or any other epidemic diseases of shade trees. The term
"private place" means every place except the private home.
(b) Entry on public and private places. The tree inspector may enter upon all public
and private places at any reasonable time for the purposes of carrying out any of
the duties assigned him under this article.
3 of 5
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 70; ARTICLE III
(c) Diagnosis. The tree inspector shall, upon finding symptoms indicating Dutch
elm or oak wilt infestation, or other epidemic diseases of shade trees,
immediately report such findings to the administrator who will notify the owner
or occupier of the property of the existence of a diseased tree on his property
and inform him of his responsibility to effectively remove such diseased
material from the property in accordance with subsection 70-64(c). Diagnosis
shall be made by field examination, as specified by the state commissioner of
agriculture, unless a state agriculture pest lab is requested by the property owner.
Except as provided in section 70-67, no action to remove infected trees or wood
shall be taken until positive diagnosis is made.
Section 70-66. Abatement of epidemic tree disease nuisances.
In abating the nuisances defined in section 70-64, the administrator shall cause the
infected tree or wood to be removed, burned, buried or chipped, or otherwise effectively
treated so as to destroy and prevent as fully as possible the spread of epidemic diseases of
shade trees, including but not limited to, the Dutch elm disease and the associated elm
bark beetles, and oak wilt disease. To prevent root graft transmission of the diseases, a
barrier should be created between diseased and healthy trees, with vapam or other
effective and recognized root graft barrier chemicals, or by digging a trench 30 inches
deep in the soil surrounding the diseased trees. Such abatement procedure shall be carried
out in accordance with current technical and expert opinions and plans as may be
designated by the State Commissioner of Agriculture.
Section 70-67. Procedure for removal of infected trees and wood.
(a) Whenever the administrator is notified with reasonable certainty that the
infestation defined in section 70-64 exists in any tree or wood in any public or
private place in the City, he shall proceed as follows:
(1) If the administrator finds that the danger of infestation of other elm or
oak trees is not imminent because of the dormancy of the infected tree
or trees, he shall declare such trees as being in noncompliance with this
article as of April 1st, of the following year and then shall proceed as
follows:
a. Abating the nuisance as a public improvement under Minn.
Stats. ch. 429; or
b. Abating the nuisance as provided in subsection 70-64(a).
(2) If the administrator finds that danger of infestation of other elm or oak
trees is imminent, he shall notify the property owner by certified mail
that the nuisance must be abated within a specified time, not more than
20 days from the date of mailing of such notice. After the expiration of
the time limited by the notice the administrator may abate the nuisance.
(b) The administrator shall keep a record of the costs, and costs of abatements done
under this article and shall report all work done to the City Clerk or other
appropriate officer for which assessments or billings are made, stating and
certifying the description of the land, lots, parcels involved and the amount
assessable to each.
(c) On or before September 1st of each year, the clerk shall list the total unpaid
charges for each abatement against each separate lot or parcel to which they are
4 of 5
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 70; ARTICLE III
attributable. The Council may then spread the charges or any portion thereof
against the property involved as a special assessment under Minn. Stats. §
429.101, and other pertinent statutes, for certification to the county auditor and
collection the following year along with current taxes unless provided for
otherwise by consent and action of the City Council. Such assessment shall be
payable in a single installment, pursuant to Minn. Stats. § 429.101, subd. 2.
Section 70-68. Transporting elm wood prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to transport within the City any bark-bearing elm without
having obtained a permit from the administrator. The administrator shall grant such
permits only when the purposes of this article will be served thereof.
Section 70-69. Interference prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the administrator or his
agents while they are engaged in the performance of duties set forth in this article.
Secs. 70-70--70-90. Reserved.
5 of 5
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 70; ARTICLE IV
CHAPTER 70. VEGETATION
ARTICLE IV. Trees on Public Property*
----------
*Cross reference--Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 50.
State law reference--Authority to regulate trees, shrubs and flowers on public property, Minn. Stats. §§
410.33, 412.231, subd. 8.
----------
Section70-91. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
Boulevard means that part of a street or highway not covered by sidewalks or other
paving, lying between the right-of-way line and that portion of the street or highway
usually used for vehicular traffic.
Public property means all lands owned by the city.
Right-of-way line means the outer edge of a street or highway.
Cross reference--Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Section 70-92. Tree commission.
The City Park and Recreation Advisory Board is hereby designated as the City Tree
Commission. The Tree Commission shall study the problems and determine the needs of
the City concerning a tree planting and management program. The Tree Commission
shall provide recommendations to the City Council concerning such a program and
disseminate information regarding the selection, planting, maintenance and general use of
trees within the City on public and private property.
Cross reference--Boards and commissions, § 2-151 et seq.
Section 70-93. Master street tree plan.
The Tree Commission shall prepare a master street tree plan with the aid of the
administrator. Such plan shall specify where and under what circumstances trees may be
planted on public streets or other public property of the City. The City Engineer, Utility
Superintendent, City Planner, Building Official, Police Chief, Fire Chief and other
appropriate departments and boards shall officially comment on the plan prior to
recommendation by the Tree Commission for adoption. The City Council may, upon
recommendation of the Tree Commission, adopt the master street tree plan and establish
arboriculture specifications and standards of practice governing the maintenance of trees.
Section 70-94. Appeals.
Property owners may appeal administrative decisions of the tree management provisions
to the Tree Commission.
1 of 3
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 70; ARTICLE IV
Section 70-95. Emergencies.
In the case of emergencies, such as damaged utilities or natural disasters, all provisions of
this article may be waived by the City Manager or Acting Manager so that the
requirements of this article would in no way hinder private or public work to restore
order to the City. This work shall follow maintenance standards as adopted by the City
Council.
Section 70-96. Municipal departments.
Work performed by the City Electric Utility, Public Works, or Park and Recreation
Departments, that affect public trees or shrubs shall be reviewed by the administrator
prior to performance of the work. The work of trimming or other operations affecting
public trees shall be limited to the actual necessities of the service of the city electric
utility, public works, or park and recreation departments and shall be performed
according to the arboriculture specifications and standards of practice.
Section 70-97. ` Improper work.
Whenever any tree is planted, pruned, removed or otherwise disturbed in violation of the
provisions of this article, the administrator shall provide written notice of such improper
work to the adjacent property owner with orders to take corrective action within ten days.
If the adjacent owner fails to remedy the improper work within the prescribed time, the
administrator may remove or cause removal of the improper work or take corrective
action as he deems necessary to conform to the provisions of this article after providing
written notice to abutting property owners. Any person performing such act shall be
liable for the costs incurred by the city in taking such corrective action, and if the tree is
located on a boulevard adjacent to property owned by such person, such costs may be
assessed to the adjacent property.
Section 70-98. Planting or removal.
No person shall plant or remove a tree on a public street or other public lands without
authorization from the administrator or his agents. Such authorization shall be either
written or verbal and shall be entered into the daily record of the management program
by the administrator. Such planting or removal shall be done in accordance with the
master street tree plan and the arboriculture specifications and standards of practice.
Section 70-99. Maintenance.
(a) Maintenance of street trees by adjacent property owners may be undertaken
without prior authorization but must be done in accordance with the
arboriculture specifications and standards of practice. Such maintenance work is
subject to section 70-97 concerning improper work.
(b) The maintenance and care of street trees shall be the responsibility of the City.
Such responsibility may be assigned to abutting property owners only under the
provisions of the master street tree plan and the arboriculture specifications and
standards of practice. The city may undertake a program of street tree
maintenance. The cost of such program may be assessed upon abutting property
as a special assessment, or may be paid out of the general fund.
2 of 3
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 70; ARTICLE IV
Section 70-100. Review of construction, moving and other permits.
(a) The administrator shall review or inspect and officially comment upon the
issuance of any permits involving:
(1) The move of any building or other object along any street, which may
endanger public trees.
(2) Any construction which may endanger public trees.
(3) The deposit, placement, storage or maintenance upon any public place,
of any materials which may impede the free passage of water, air and
fertilizer to the roots of any tree growing therein.
(b) The administrator shall determine if the work can be completed without serious
injury to or destruction of public trees. The administrator may recommend
denial of any necessary permits on the basis of anticipated serious injury to or
destruction of public trees. Conditions may be placed on the permit which
address the protection, trimming or removal of public trees. Such conditions
may include replacement of trees removed. All work shall be performed in
accordance with the conditions of the permit. All tree trimming or removal of
trees necessary under the permit shall be carried out by the City employees or
contract basis at the expense of the applicant. A bond or escrow fund adequate
to cover the costs of trimming, removal and replacement of trees or shrubs by
the City, as determined by the administrator, shall be deposited with the City
before the permit is issued.
Section 70-101. Abuse or mutilation of public trees.
Unless authorized by the administrator, no person shall damage, cut, carve, transplant, or
remove any public tree, attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters, or other
contrivance to any public tree, allow any gaseous liquid, or solid substance which may be
harmful to such trees to come in contact with them; or set fire or permit any fire to burn
when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any public tree.
Section 70-102. New planting by the City.
The City Council may authorize the Parks and Recreation Department to plant trees
within the limits of any street in accordance with provisions of the master street tree plan.
The cost of such trees and planting may be paid by adjacent property owners or may be
assessed upon the property fronting on such improvements as a special assessment, or the
City Council may fund the cost of such trees and plantings out of general funds as part of
a reforestation program.
3 of 3
CITYOF ANOKA
CITYCODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE I
1 of 19
CHAPTER 74. ZONING*
ARTICLE I. In General
Section 74-1. Intent and purpose.
The intent of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the
City and its people through the establishment of minimum regulations governing land
development and use. This chapter shall divide the City into use districts and establish
regulations in regard to location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use
of structures and land. Such regulations are established to provide adequate light, air and
convenience of access to property; to prevent congestion in the public right-of-way; to
prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures by regulating
land, buildings, yards and density of population; to provide for compatibility of different
land uses; to provide for administration of this chapter, to provide for amendments; to
prescribe penalties for violation of such regulations; to define powers and duties of the
City Council, the board of adjustment and appeals, and the planning commission, in
relation to this chapter.
Section 74-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section:
Abutting means making contact with or separated only by public thoroughfare, railroad,
or public utility right-of-way.
Accessory building means a subordinate building, or a portion of the main building which
is located on the same lot or parcel as the main building and the use of which is clearly
incidental to that of the main building or to the use of the premises.
Accessory use or structure means a use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature
customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure.
Addition means an extension or increase in floor area or height of a building or structure.
Address sign means a sign communicating street address only, whether written or in
numerical form.
Advertising signs means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service,
activity or entertainment not necessarily conducted, sold or offered upon the premises
where such sign is located.
Alley means a public right-of-way 33 feet or less in width, affording a secondary means
of access to abutting property.
Animals domestic pets means dogs, cats, birds, and other commonly known house pets.
Apartment means a room or suite of rooms rented, leased, or similar tenancy, with
cooking facilities available which is occupied as a residence by a single family, or a
group of individuals living together as a single family unit. This includes any unit in
buildings with more than two dwelling units.
Apartment building means three or more dwelling units or apartments grouped in one
building with a common entryway.
CITYOF ANOKA
CITYCODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE I
2 of 19
Assisted living facility means a premise operated by a legal entity holding a state
license permitting the operation of a personal care home, in which food, shelter, and
personal assistance or supervision are provided for four or more aged adults who do
not required hospitalization or skilled or intermediate nursing care, or the services in
or of a state-licensed long term care facility.
Automobile car wash means a building, or portion thereof, containing facilities for
washing more than two automobiles, using production line methods, including, but not
limited to, steam cleaning device or other mechanical devices.
Automobile repair means general repair, rebuilding or reconditioning engines, motor
vehicles or trailers; collision service, including body, frame or fender straightening or
repair; overall pointing or paint job; vehicle steam cleaning; upholstering.
Automobile service station means a place where gasoline, stored only in underground
tanks; kerosene; motor oil and lubricants for operation of automobiles, are related directly
to the public on premises, and including minor accessories and services for automobiles,
but not including automobile major repairs and rebuilding.
Automobile wrecking or junk yard means any place where two or more vehicles not in
running condition and/or not licensed, or parts thereof are stored in the open and are not
being restored to operation; or any land, building or structure used for wrecking or
storing of such motor vehicles or parts thereof; and including any commercial salvaging
and scavenging of any other goods, articles or merchandise.
Awning and canopy mean a structure made of cloth, metal, or other material affixed to a
building in such a manner that the structure may be fixed, raised, or retracted to a position
against the building.
Basement means a portion of a building partially underground but having less than half
its floor to ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. Each room or
area in a basement shall be at least 7½ feet from floor to ceiling.
Bed and breakfast means a private residence that offers sleeping accommodations to
lodgers in eight or fewer rooms for rent, in the owner/operators principal residence
while renting rooms to lodgers, and serves breakfast in a common area at no extra cost
to its guests.
Block means all property abutting one side of a street between the two nearest
intersecting streets or other natural or manmade barriers.
Boarder and/or roomer mean a person who regularly receives room and/or meals at
another's home for pay or services.
Boardinghouse (room or lodging house) means a building or dwelling unit other than a
motel or hotel, where, for compensation and by prearrangement, meals, and/or lodgings
are provided for three or more persons not to exceed 25 persons or such arrangements
covers a minimum period of seven consecutive days.
Boathouse means a structure used solely for the storage of boats or boating equipment,
and not used for habitation.
Brewery, Micro is a facility with a capacity to manufacture less than 15,000 barrels of
alcoholic and nonalcoholic malt liquor a year. This definition does not include a
brewpub.
CITYOF ANOKA
CITYCODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE I
3 of 19
Brewery, National is a facility with a capacity to manufacture over 250,000 barrels of
alcoholic and nonalcoholic malt liquor a year. This definition does not include a
brewpub.
Brewery, Regional is a facility with a capacity to manufacture between 15,000 and
249,999 barrels of alcoholic and nonalcoholic malt liquor a year. This definition does not
include a brewpub.
Brewpub is a small brewery operated in conjunction with a bar or restaurant provided the
beer is sold for consumption on the premises and not sold to other bars, restaurants or
wholesalers, except that an establishment licensed under Minn. Stat. §304A.301, subd.
6(d) may sell “growlers” off-sale with appropriate City license.
Broadcasting antenna, radio and television means commercial, public or private
broadcasting towers exceeding the district height limitations, or more than one tower of
any height located on the same lot or parcel.
Buffer means the use of land, topography, difference in elevation space, fences, or
landscape planting to screen or partially screen a use or property from another use or
property, and thus reduce undesirable influences, such as site, glare, noise, dust, and other
external affects.
Buildable area means the space remaining on a lot after the minimum setback, drainage
provisions, ponding, compensatory storage, soils, open space and other site constraint
requirements of this chapter have been met.
Building means any structure having a roof which may provide shelter, support,
protection, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind, and when such
structures are divided by party walls without openings, each portion of such building so
separated shall be deemed a separate building.
Building height means the vertical distance to be measured from the grade of the building
line to the top, to the cornice of a flat roof directly above the highest wall of a shed roof,
to the uppermost point on a round or other arch type roof, to the average distance
between the ride and the eave of the highest gable on a pitched or hip roof.
Building line means an imaginary line separating buildable area and the required yards as
defined in this section.
Building line, shore land means a line measured across the width of the lot where the
main structure is placed in accordance with setback provisions from the ordinary high
water mark, as designated by the state department of natural resources.
Building setback means the minimum horizontal distance between the building and lot
line or the normal high water mark, as designated by the department of natural resources.
Business means any occupation, employment or enterprise, wherein merchandise is
exhibited or sold, or where services are offered for compensation.
Carport means an automobile shelter having one or more sides open.
Cellar means that portion of a building having more than one-half of the floor to ceiling
height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. Each room or area in a cellar
shall be at least 7½ feet from floor to ceiling.
CITYOF ANOKA
CITYCODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE I
4 of 19
Channel means a natural or artificial depression of perceptible extent, with definite bed
and banks to confine and conduct water either continuously or periodically.
Church means a building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons
regularly assemble for religious worship and which building, together with its accessory
buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain
public worship.
Clear cutting means the removal of an entire stand of trees.
Club or lodge means a nonprofit association of persons who are bonafide members
paying annual dues, use of premises being restricted to members and their guests. It shall
be permissible to serve food and meals on such premises providing adequate dining room
space and kitchen facilities are available.
Cluster housing means the development pattern and technique whereby structures are
arranged in closely related groupings to make the most efficient use of natural amenities
of the land.
Commercial use means activity involving the sale of goods or services carried out for
profit.
Compost facility means a site or facility for the controlled microbial degradation of leaves
and/or grass clippings to yield a humus-like soil conditioner product.
Comprehensive plan means a computation of goals, policy statements, standards,
programs and maps for guiding the physical, social, and economic development, both
public and private, as defined in the state municipal planning act, and includes any part of
such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof.
Conditional use means a use classified as conditional generally may be appropriate or
desirable in a specific zone, but requires approval because if not carefully located or
designed, it may create special problems such as excessive height or bulk or abnormal
traffic congestion.
Condominium means a form of individual ownership within a building which may entail
joint ownership and responsibility for maintenance and repairs of the land and other
common property of the building.
Corner lot means a lot situated at the junction of and fronting on two or more streets.
Covenant means a contract between two individuals which constitutes a restriction of a
particular parcel of land.
Deck means a structural platform without a roof, directly adjacent and accessible to a
principal building.
Decorative masonry means individual units lain in and bound together by mortar, a
masonry veneer, like brick masonry that is primarily decorative, not structural.
Decorative masonry may include rock-faced concrete block, but not smooth surface
concrete block.
Demolition debris means solid waste resulting from the demolition of buildings, roads,
and other structures including, but not limited to concrete, brick, bituminous concrete,
untreated wood, masonry, glass, trees, rock and plastic building parts.
CITYOF ANOKA
CITYCODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE I
5 of 19
Demolition debris land disposal facility means a site used to dispose of demolition debris.
Density means a number expressing the relationship of the number of dwellings to an
acre of land.
Development Lot means a parcel or abutting parcels of land, that have definite
boundaries, which is improved and operated as a single unit of use.
Disposal facility means a waste facility that is designed or operated for the purpose of
ultimate and complete disposal of waste on or in the land.
Distilled spirits means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, spirits of wine, whiskey,
rum, brandy, gin, and other distilled spirits, including all dilutions and mixtures thereof,
for non-industrial use.
District means a section of the City for which the regulations governing the height, area,
use of buildings and premises are the same.
Diversion means a channel that intercepts surface water runoff and that changes the
accustomed course of all or part of a stream.
Draining means the removal of surface water or groundwater from land.
Dredging means to enlarge or clean out a water body, watercourse or wetland.
Drive-in means any use where products and/or services are provided to the customer
under conditions where the customer does not have to leave the car or where fast service
to the automobile occupants is a service offered regardless of whether the service is
provided within the building.
Duplex means a building, as referred to as a two-family dwelling, designed as a single
structure, containing two separate dwelling units, each of which is designed to be
occupied as a separate permanent residence for one family on one lot.
Dwelling, multi-family means three or more dwelling units in one structure. This may
include, but is not limited to quad homes, apartment buildings, condominiums, multiplefamily
dwellings, and assisted or independent living facilities.
Dwelling, single-family attached means two dwelling units, each owned in fee and
located on individual lots but joined along a single lot line, each of which is totally
separated from the other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof.
Dwelling, single-family detached means a detached dwelling unit owned in fee and
located on an individual lot which is not attached to any other dwelling unit by any
means.
Dwelling unit means a residential building or portion thereof intended for occupancy by a
single family.
Easement means a grant by a property owner for use of a strip of land by the public or
any person for any specific purpose or purposes of construction and maintaining utilities,
including, but not exclusive of the following: sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines,
telephone lines, other transmission lines, storm sewer, storm drainage ways, gas lines,
other service utilities, etc.
CITYOF ANOKA
CITYCODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE I
6 of 19
Electronic Cigarette/Vaporizer Shop means a retail establishment that derives more than
50 percent (50%) of its gross revenue from the sale of any product, or any component
part of a product, whether or not marketed or sold separately, containing or delivering, or
designed to deliver, nicotine, lobelia, or any other substance intended for human
consumption that can be used by a person to simulate smoking in the delivery of nicotine
or any other substance through inhalation of vapor from the product.
Energy recovery facility means a facility used to capture the heat value of solid waste for
conversion to steam, electricity, or immediate heat by direct combustion or by first
converting it into an intermediate fuel product.
Essential services means underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water
distribution systems; collection, communication, supply or disposal system including
poles, wires, mains, drains, sewer, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, traffic
signals, hydrants or other similar equipment and accessories in conjunction therewith; but
not including buildings or transmission services.
Event Center means a room, series of rooms, or building used for the hosting of parties,
banquets, weddings or other receptions or social events.
Exterior Material Calculation means the percentage of architectural materials required by
calculating the gross surface area of each elevation exclusive of windows, doors, or
garage doors.
Family means an individual or a group of two or more persons each related by blood,
marriage, adoption, or foster care arrangement living together as a single housekeeping
unit, or a group of not more than four persons not so related, maintaining a common
household, and using common cooking and kitchen facilities.
Fence means any partition, structure, wall, or gate erected as a divider marker, barrier or
enclosure and located along the boundary, or within the required yard.
Floor area means the area included within the surrounding exterior walls of a building or
portion thereof, including the sum of the gross horizontal areas of several floors of a
building including interior balconies, mezzanines, basements, and attached buildings,
exclusive of vent shafts, courts, utility rooms, stairs, escalators, or the like.
Floor area ratio means the numerical value obtained through dividing the gross floor
area of a building or buildings by the lot area on which such building or buildings are
located.
Frontage means the boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated public street.
Garage means an attached or detached accessory building that is designed primarily for
parking and storage of vehicles.
Garage, public means any premises, except those described as a private garage, used for
the storage or care of power driven vehicles or where any such vehicles are equipped for
operation, repaired or kept for remuneration, hire or sale.
Garage, repair means a building or space for the repair or maintenance of vehicles, but
not including factory assembly of such vehicles, auto wrecking establishments or
junkyards.
CITYOF ANOKA
CITYCODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE I
7 of 19
Gasoline service station means any building or premises used for the dispensation, sale or
offering for sale at retail of any motor fuels, oils, or lubricants. When the use is incidental
to the conduct of a public garage, the premise is classified as a public garage.
General floodplain districts means those areas designated as unnumbered A Zones on the
flood insurance rate map.
Grade (adjacent ground elevation) means the lowest point of elevation of the finished
surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the building and the
property line, or when the property line is more than five feet from the building, between
the building and a line five feet from the building.
Grading means changing the natural or existing topography of land.
Greenbelt means a planned barrier consisting of dense vegetation used for the purpose of
separation and screening of land uses.
Greenhouse means a building or structure constructed chiefly of glass, glasslike or
translucent material, cloth or lath, which is devoted to the protection or cultivation of
flowers, shrubbery, vegetables, trees, or other horticultural and floricultural products
are grown.
High water level means the high water elevation reached by the 1965 flood and set forth
on the attached floodplain map.
Holiday signs means signs or displays which contain or depict a message pertaining to a
national or state holiday, and no other matter.
Home occupation means any occupation or profession carried on by a member of the
family residing on the premises, provided that the use is clearly incidental and secondary
to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, does not change the character of the
dwelling, and does not utilize more than 25 percent of the building's gross floor area.
Hotel means any building or portion thereof where lodging is offered to transient guests
for compensation and in which there are more than five sleeping rooms with no cooking
facilities in an individual room or apartment.
House trailer means a vehicle, used or capable of being used for sleeping or living
quarters for one or more persons, having no foundation other than wheels or jacks and
propelled by its own or by another power-driven vehicle to which it may be attached.
Impervious Surface means an artificial or natural surface through which water, air or
roots cannot penetrate.
Independent living facility. See assisted living facility.
Indoor Self-Storage Facility means a climate controlled building with controlled access
that contains varying sizes of internally accessible individual, compartmentalized, and
stalls or lockers for the storage of tenants’ goods or wares.
Industrial solid waste means all solid waste generated from an industrial or
manufacturing process and solid waste generated from nonmanufacturing activities such
as service and commercial establishments. Industrial solid waste does not include office
materials, restaurant and food preparation waste, discarded machinery, demolition debris,
or household refuse.
CITYOF ANOKA
CITYCODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE I
8 of 19
Industrial solid waste land disposal facility means a site used to dispose of industrial
solid waste in or on the land.
Initiation of Construction. The first placement of permanent evidence of a structure on a
site pursuant to a duly issued building permit, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, or
any work beyond the state of excavation, grading or demolition, including the relocation
of a structure. “Initiation of Construction” does not include the installation of streets,
walkways, sidewalks, or parking lots; the excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations; or the installation on the property of temporary buildings, such as garages,
sheds, or trailers.
Junk means, but is not limited to, old or scrap signs, copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries,
rubber debris, waste, or junked, dismantled appliances or parts thereof, or wrecked
automobiles, farm, or construction machinery or parts thereof, iron, steel, and other old or
scrap ferrous or nonferrous material which is stored, disassembled or sold without being
processed for recycling.
Junk Vehicle means any motor vehicle, part of a motor vehicle, or former vehicle stored
which is (1) unusable or inoperable because of lack of or defects in component parts; (2)
damage from collision, deterioration, or otherwise; (3) beyond repair, and, therefore, not
intended for future use as a motor vehicle; (4) being retained on the property for possible
use of salvageable parts; or (5) is not properly and currently licensed for operation.
Junkyard means an establishment, place of business, or place of storage or deposit, which
is maintained, operated, or used for storing, disassembly, keeping, buying, or selling
unprocessed junk or storing, keeping, buying, or selling wrecked, scrapped, ruined or
dismantled motor vehicles for the purpose of selling used motor vehicle parts. Junkyard
does not include a metal recycling facility.
Lot means land occupied or to be occupied by one principal building or use and its
accessory buildings, together with such open spaces as are required under the provisions
of this chapter, having not less than the minimum area required by this chapter for a
building site in the district in which such lot is situated and having its principal frontage
on a street, or a proposed street approved by the City Council.
Lot area means the land area within the lot lines.
Lot depth means the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear
lot line of a lot.
Lot, double frontage means an interior lot having frontage on two streets.
Lot, frontage means the front of a lot shall be that boundary abutting a public right-ofway.
Lot, interior means a lot other than a corner lot.
Lot, through means a lot fronting on two parallel streets.
Lot line means a lot line is the property line bounding a lot, except that where any portion
of a lot extends into a public right-of-way or a proposed right-of-way, the line of such
public right-of-way shall be the lot line.
Lot line, front means that boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated public
street. In no case shall there be more than two front lot lines applied to any lot. Any other
CITYOF ANOKA
CITYCODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE I
9 of 19
lines abutting a public right-of-way shall be designated by the zoning administrator as
either a side or rear lot line.
Lot line, rear means that boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line. If the rear
lot line is less than ten feet in length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line
shall be a line ten feet in length within the lot, parallel to, and at the maximum distance
from, the front lot line.
Lot line, side means any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
Lot of record means any lot which is one unit of a plat duly approved and filed, or one
unit of an auditor's subdivision or a registered land survey, that has been recorded in the
office of the county recorder prior to January 18, 1965.
Lot width means the maximum horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot
measured on or within the front yard setback requirements.
Manufacturing means an establishment of activity primarily engaged in
manufacturing or production or assembly which does not involve on the premise,
the use of heat, excessive noise, or odor generating production processes which
can be detected off site. Production is predominately from previously prepared
materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication,
assembly, treatment, and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales,
and distribution of such products entirely within a building. Manufacturing does
include the creation of food products and malt beverage, wine, distilled and
blended liquors.
Marquee means a permanent roof-like structure extending from part of the wall of a
building but not supported by the ground, and constructed of durable material such as
metal or glass.
Mean flow level means the average flow elevation of a stream or river computed as the
midpoint between extreme low and extreme high water.
Medical uses means those uses concerned with the diagnosis, treatment, and care of
human beings. These include: hospitals, dental services, medical services, or clinic,
nursing or convalescent home, orphan homes, rest home, sanitarium.
Merchandising services means the installation and setup of displays, signs, fixtures,
cabinets, checkout, etc. that need to be installed in a retail environment. It may also
include merchandising, stocking, retail surveys, point of sale integrity, space management
analysis, consulting, retail plans, and label development.
Metal recycling facility means a facility at which recyclable materials are received and
prepared or processed into a substantially different form and separated into the base
component metals from which it is composed with the resulting metal product being
shipped directly to consumers to be melted and made into new metal.
Metes and bonds description means a description of real property which is not described
by reference to a lot or block shown on a map, but is described by starting at a known
point and describing the bearings and distances of the lines forming the boundaries of the
property or delineates a fractional portion of the section, lot or area by described lines or
portions thereof.
Microdistillery means a distillery operated within the state producing premium, distilled
spirits in total quantity not to exceed 40,000 proof gallons in a calendar year.
CITYOF ANOKA
CITYCODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE I
10 of 19
Mining means the extraction of sand, gravel, rock, soil or other material from the land in
the amount of 1,000 cubic yards or more and the removal thereof from the site. For the
purpose of this chapter, mining shall not include: the removal of materials associated with
the construction of a building, the removal of excess materials in accordance with
approved plats or utility and highway construction, minor agricultural and sod removal
except as further regulated in this chapter.
Mining operation means the removal from the land of stone, sand and gravel, coal, salt,
iron, copper, nickel, granite, petroleum products or other material for commercial,
industrial, or governmental purposes.
Mixed municipal recyclable materials means materials that are separated from mixed
municipal solid waste for the purpose of recycling, including items such as paper, glass,
plastics, automobile oil and batteries. Refuse derived fuel, material destroyed by
incineration or junk as defined by this chapter are not recyclable materials.
Mixed municipal recycling facility means a facility at which recyclable materials
separated from mixed municipal solid waste are prepared for reuse in their original form
or for use in manufacturing process that do not cause the destruction of the materials in a
manner that precludes further use.
Mixed municipal solid waste means garbage, refuse and other solid waste from
residential, commercial, industrial, and community activities that the generator of the
waste aggregates for collection. Mixed municipal solid waste does not include auto
hulks, street sweepings, ash, construction debris, mining waste, sludges, tree and
agricultural wastes, tires, lead acid batteries, motor and vehicle fluids and filters, and
other materials collected, processed, and disposed of as separate waste streams.
Mobile homes, trailer coach, trailer or automobile trailer means any vehicle or structure
designed and constructed in such a manner as will permit occupancy thereof as a
dwelling, or sleeping quarters for one or more persons, or the conduct of any business or
profession, occupation or trade for use as a selling or advertising device, and so designed
that it is or may be mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance on highways or City
streets, propelled or drawn by its own or other motive power, or it may be a structure as
designed and constructed in such a manner that it can be transported in one or several
segments by some other means other than its own power, excepting a device used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
Mobile home park means any park, trailer park, trailer court, trailer camp, trailer camp
site, court, lot, parcel or track of land designed, maintained or intended for the purpose of
supplying a location or accommodations for any mobile home coach or mobile home
coaches and upon which any mobile home coach or mobile home coaches are parked and
shall include all buildings used or intended for use as part of the equipment thereof,
whether a change is made for the use of the mobile home park and its facilities or not.
"Mobile home park" shall not include automobile or mobile home sales lots on which
unoccupied mobile homes are parked for purposes of inspection and sale.
Mobile home stand means that part of an individual lot which has been reserved for the
placement of a mobile home.
Mobile home unit means a section of ground in a mobile home park of not less than 5,000
square feet of unoccupied space in an area designed as the location for one mobile home,
off-street parking space for two automobiles and other uses considered pertinent to the
establishment and use of a mobile home residence as permitted by this chapter.
CITYOF ANOKA
CITYCODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE I
11 of 19
Motel means a building or groups of buildings used primarily for the temporary residence
of motorists or travelers.
Municipal water and sewer systems means utility systems serving a group of buildings,
lots, or an area of the city, with the design and construction of such utility systems as
approved by the director of public works.
Natural drainage system means all land surface areas which by nature of their contour
configuration, collect, store, and channel surface water run-off.
Natural obstruction means any rock, tree, gravel or analogous material matter that is an
obstruction and has been located within a water body, watercourse, or wetland by a
nonhuman cause.
Noise means one, or a group of, loud, harsh non-harmonious sounds or vibrations that are
present and irritating to the ear.
Noise, ambient means that all encompassing sounds associated with a given environment,
which may be either a composite of sounds, transmitted by any means from many sources
near and far or from a single-predominant source.
Noxious means matter which is capable of causing injury or is in any way harmful to
living organisms, or is capable of causing detrimental effect upon the health, the
physiological and social or economic well-being of human beings.
Nuisance is as defined in Chapter 38, Article II, 38-30 through 38-32.
Nursery means an establishment for the growth, display, and/or sale of plants, shrubs,
trees, and materials used in indoor or outdoor planting.
Nursing home, rest home or convalescent home mean a building with facilities for the
care of children, the aged, inform, or place of rest for those suffering bodily disorder, but
not containing equipment for surgical care or for treatment of disease or injury. A nursing
home shall be licensed by the state board of health, as provided for in Minn. Stats. §
144.50.
Off-street loading space means a space accessible from the street, alley, or way, in a
building or on the lot, for the use of trucks while loading or unloading merchandise or
materials. Such space shall be of such size as to accommodate one truck of the type
typically used in the particular business.
Open sales lot means land devoted to the display of goods for sale, rent, lease,
advertising, merchandising, or trade where such goods are not enclosed within a building,
including, but not limited to, flea markets.
Open space means any open area not covered by structures or parking.
Open space, common means a parcel or parcels of land or an area of water not required
for storage of the regional flood or a combination of such land and water area within the
site designated for private open space for the sole benefit, use and enjoyment of the
homeowners within a planned unit development or similar developments associated with
common open space area.
Open space, private means any open space owned by a person or persons.
CITYOF ANOKA
CITYCODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE I
12 of 19
Open space, public means any open space publicly owned.
Open storage means storage of any material outside of the building and/or structure.
Orientation means the placement of a structure on its lot with regard to other structures,
natural elements such as sun, window and impacts from noise, glare, and similar adverse
elements.
Ordinary high water level means the boundary of public waters and wetlands, and shall
be an elevation delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a
sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly that point
where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly
terrestrial. For watercourses, the ordinary high water level shall be the elevation of the
top of the bank of the channel. For reservoirs and flowages the ordinary high water level
shall be the operating elevation of the normal summer pool.
Outdoor activities means outdoor activities such as loading and unloading from a vehicle
to a commercial, manufacturing or processing use. Outdoor activities do not include an
individual person(s) accessing individual mini-storage units.
Outdoor Self-Storage Facility means a building or group of buildings in a controlled
access and fenced facility that contains varying sizes of externally accessible individuals,
compartmentalized, and stalls or lockers for the storage of tenants’ goods or wares.
Outdoor storage means the keeping of any goods, material, merchandise, or vehicles in
the same location for more than seven (7) consecutive days outside of a building and/or
structure. This includes storage yards for contractors, equipment, lumber, landscaping
materials, construction materials and shipping materials.
Parking ramp means an accessory structure or use for the storage of motor vehicles at,
below and/or above grade.
Parking space means an area of not less than 8½ feet in width and 20 feet in length,
enclosed in the main building, in an accessory building, or unenclosed, sufficient in size
to store one automobile which has adequate access to a public street or alley and
permitting satisfactory ingress and egress of an automobile.
Party wall means a common wall which divides two independent structures.
Pedestrian way means a public or private right-of-way across or within a block, to be
used by pedestrians.
Performance standards means criteria established to control environmental conditions
such as, but not limited to, odor, smoke, toxic or noxious matter, vibrations, fire and
explosive hazard, glare, runoff generated by or inherent in use of land or building.
Permitted use means a use which may be lawfully established in a particular district or
districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations, and performance
standards (if any) of such districts.
Place of worship means a church, synagogue, temple, mosque, or other facility that is
used for prayer by person of similar beliefs; a special-purpose building that is
architectural designed and particularly adapted for the primary use of conducting formal
religious services on a regular basis
CITYOF ANOKA
CITYCODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE I
13 of 19
Plan, comprehensive means a compilation of policy statements, goals, standards, and
maps for guiding the physical, social and economic development, both private and public,
of the municipality and its environs and may include, but is not limited to, the following:
statements of policies, goals, standards, a land use plan, a community facilities plan, a
transportation plan, and recommendations for plan execution. A comprehensive plan
represents the planning agency's recommendations for the future development of the
community.
Plan, concept means a report in map and text form submitted as the first step of a
planning unit development (PUD) proposal, depicting the location, general purpose,
general type of land use, and circulation pattern, primary relationship between site
elements and between the proposed development and surrounding development, proposed
general schedule of development and information on the proposed developer.
Plan, site means a map or graphics prepared to scale depicting the development of a tract
of land, including, but not limited to, the location and relationship of the structures,
streets, driveways, recreation areas, parking areas, utilities, landscaping, existing and
proposed grading, walkways, and other site development information as related to a
proposed development.
Planned unit development means a development, having two or more principal uses or
structures on a single tract or tracts of land, developed according to a plan approved by
the city, under single ownership or unified control. A planned unit development allows
for flexibility not available under normal zoning district requirements. A planned unit
development may include a combination of land uses.
Planning Commission means the duly appointed planning advisory group with duties as
defined by Minnesota Statutes and the Anoka City Council.
Plaza means an open space that may be improved or landscaped, used for public
purposes such as outdoor seating, outdoor gathering areas or landscaped courtyard,
usually surrounded by streets and buildings and is not used for outdoor sales, storage or
for a parking space or drive lane.
Practical difficulties means that the property owner proposes to use the property in a
reasonable manner not permitted by this ordinance, the plight of the landowner is due to
circumstances unique to the property not created by the landowner, and the variance, if
granted would not alter the essential character of the locality. Economic considerations
alone do not constitute practical difficulties. Practical difficulties also include access to
direct sunlight for solar energy systems.
Plat means a map, graphics or drawing which graphically delineates the boundary of land
parcels for the purpose of identification and record title. The plat is a recorded legal
document and must conform to all state laws.
Porch means a roofed area, which may be glazed, screened, or open air with direct
access to or from a building.
Prefabricated home means a non-mobile housing unit, the walls, floors and ceilings of
which are constructed at a central factory and transported to a building site where final
construction is completed, permanently affixing the unit to the site.
Principal structure or use means one which determines the predominant use as contrasted
to accessory use or structure.
CITYOF ANOKA
CITYCODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE I
14 of 19
Principal use means the primary or main use of land or buildings as distinguished from
subordinate, incidental or accessory uses.
Private garage means a building or structure, or part thereof, used or designed to be
used for the parking and storage of vehicles owned by the residents of the primary
dwelling on site.
Property line means the legal boundaries of a parcel of property which may also coincide
with the right-of-way of a road, cartway and the like.
Public building means a building owned and operated by the City including but not
limited to, fire stations, wells, City hall, public works, senior citizen facility and police
facilities.
Public façade means side(s) of a building that is visible from and within two-hundred feet
(200’) of a public street, rail line, public park, public plaza or other public open space.
Public land means land owned or operated by municipalities, school district, county,
state, or other governmental unit.
Public uses means uses owned or operated by municipal, school districts, county, state or
other governmental units.
Public waters means any waters of the State which serve a beneficial public purpose, as
defined in Minn. Stats. § 103F.511, subd. 8. However, no lake, pond, or flowage of less
than ten acres in size and no river or stream having a total drainage area less than two
square miles need be regulated by the municipality for the purposes of these regulations.
A body of water created by a private user where there was no previous shore land, as
defined in this section, for a designated private use authorized by the commissioner and
the state department of natural resources shall be exempt from the provisions of these
regulations.
Quadhome means a four unit multiple residence building with private entrances to each
unit.
Reclamation, land means the improvement of land by the depositing of material to
elevate the grade. Any parcel upon which 400 cubic yards or more of fill are deposited
shall be considered as reclaimed land.
Registered land survey means a survey map of registered land designed to simplify a
complicated metes and bounds description designating the land description into tract or
tracts of registered land survey number.
Religious use means a structure or place in which worship, ceremonies, rituals, and
education pertaining to a particular system of beliefs are held.
Residence means a building used exclusively as a home, except for accessory uses.
Riparian lot means a lot which has a front, rear, or sideline contiguous to or below the
ordinary high water level of a river. Such line shall be the front lot line.
Road means a public right-of-way affording primary access by pedestrians in vehicles to
abutting property whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road,
avenue, boulevard, land, place, or however otherwise designated. Egress and ingress
easements shall not be considered roads.
CITYOF ANOKA
CITYCODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE I
15 of 19
Rowhouse see townhomes.
Selective cutting means the removal of single scattered trees.
Self-service storage facility (mini-storage) means a building or group of buildings
divided into individual, self-contained units leased to individuals, organizations, or
businesses for self-storage of personal property and may include refrigerated facilities.
Such facilities to be used for storage only.
Shore Impact zone means land located between the ordinary high water level of public
waters and a line parallel to it at a setback of 50 percent (50%) of the required structure
setback or 50 feet (50’) landward of the ordinary high water level in areas of agricultural
use.
Shore land means land located within the following distances from public water; (i) 1,000
feet from the normal high water mark of a lake, pond, or flowage; or (2) 300 feet from a
river or stream or floodplain designated by ordinance on such a river or stream,
whichever is greater. The practical limits of shore lands may be less than the statutory
limits whenever the waters involved are bounded by natural topographic divides which
extend landward from the water for lesser distances. Public waters shall be any existing
body of water, wetland, drainage way as designated by the state department of natural
resources.
Shore land alteration means grading and filling in shore land areas or any alteration of
the natural topography where the slope of the land is towards a public water or water
course leading to a public water.
Shore land setback means the minimum horizontal distance between the structure and the
normal high water mark.
Solid waste means garbage, refuse, sludge from a water supply treatment plant or air
contaminant treatment facility, and other discarded waste materials and sludges, in solid,
semisolid, liquid, or contained gaseous form, resulting from industrial, commercial,
mining, and agricultural operations, and from community activities.
Solid waste land disposal facility means a facility used to dispose of solid waste in or on
the land.
Solid waste management facility means a facility for the storage, collection,
transportation, processing or reuse, conversion, or disposal of solid waste.
Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the
surface of the next floor above it or if there is no floor above it, the space between the
floor and the ceiling next above it.
Story, half means that portion of a building under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall
plates of which, on at least two opposite exterior walls, are not more than two feet above
the floor of such story.
Street means a public right-of-way 34 feet or more in width, affording a primary means
of access to abutting property.
Street, arterial, or major means a street which serves, or is designated to serve, heavy
flows of traffic which is used primarily as a street route for traffic between communities
and/or other heavy traffic generating areas.
CITYOF ANOKA
CITYCODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE I
16 of 19
Street, collector means a street which services, or is designed to serve, as a traffic way for
a neighborhood or as a feeder to a major roadway. Direct driveway access is limited to
the greatest extent possible.
Street, local means a street intended to serve primarily as access to abutting properties.
Street frontage means the proximity of a parcel of land to one or more streets. An interior
lot has one street frontage and a corner lot has two frontages.
Street pavement means the wearing or exposed surface of the roadway used by vehicular
traffic.
Street right-of-way means the width of the right-of-way, measured at right angles to the
centerline of the street.
Street width means the width of street surface measured at right angles between the curbs
or edge of pavement.
Structural alteration means any change, other than incidental repairs, which would
prolong the life of supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns,
beams, girders, or foundations.
Structure means anything which is built, constructed or erected on the ground or attached
to the ground; an edifice or building of any kind; or any piece of work artificially built up
and/or composed of parts jointed together in some definite manner whether temporary or
permanent in character, including decks and signs.
Subdivision means the division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or
more lots, either by plat, metes and bounds, or by registered land survey.
Substandard use means any use existing prior to the date of this chapter which is
permitted within the applicable zoning district but does not meet the minimum lot area,
frontage, setbacks, water frontage length, or other dimensional standards of this chapter.
Taproom is an area on the premises of or adjacent to one brewery location owned by the
brewer that allows the on-sale of malt liquor produced by the brewer for consumption.
Such use shall be accessory to the primary use of a national, regional or micro brewery
and may be a restaurant.
Tobacco Shop means retail establishment that derives more than 50 percent of its gross
revenue from the sale of any product, or any component part of a product, whether or not
marketed or sold separately, containing or delivering, or designed to deliver, nicotine,
lobelia, or any other substance intended for human consumption that can be used by a
person to simulate smoking in the delivery of nicotine or any other substance through
inhalation of vapor from the product.
Topsoil means black dirt composed of unconsolidated material, largely undecomposed
organic matter.
Towing service means an establishment that provides for the removal and temporary
outdoor storage of vehicles complying with state law but does not include
disassembly, salvage, or accessory storage of inoperable vehicles.
Townhouses means structures housing three but not more than eight dwelling units,
contiguous to each other and entirely surrounded by open space and owned by an
CITYOF ANOKA
CITYCODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE I
17 of 19
individual or owned in common by a homeowners association. Each dwelling unit
shall have separate and individual front and rear entrances, each unit shall be served
by individual utilities.
Townhouse, detached means a dwelling unit that is entirely surrounded by open space
and owned by an individual or owned in common by a homeowners association.
Toxic and hazardous waste means waste materials including, but not limited to: poisons,
pesticides, herbicides, acids, caustics, pathological wastes, radioactive materials,
flammable or explosive materials, and similar harmful chemicals and waste which
requires special handling and must be disposed of in a manner which conserves the
environment and protects the public health and safety.
Transfer station means a facility in which solid waste or demolition debris is collected,
sorted, or temporarily deposited to await transportation to the final disposal site or
facility.
Use means the purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is designated,
arranged, or intended, for which it is occupied, utilized, or maintained.
Use, permitted means a public or private use which of itself conforms with the purposes,
objectives, requirements, regulations, and performance standards of a particular district.
Use, principal means the main use of land or buildings as distinguished from subordinate
or accessory uses. A principal use may be either permitted or conditional.
Useable open space means a required ground area or terrace area on a lot which is
graded, developed, landscaped and equipped and intended and maintained for either
active or passive recreation or both, available and accessible to and useable by all persons
occupying a dwelling unit or rooming unit on the lot and their guests. Such areas shall be
grassed and landscaped or covered only for a recreation purpose. Roofs, driveways and
parking areas shall not constitute useable open space.
Variance means a modification or variation of the provisions of this chapter where it is
determined that by reason of special and unusual circumstances relating to a specific lot,
that strict application of this chapter would cause practical difficulties.
Vehicle.
1. Midsize vehicle means any motorized vehicle or trailer more than eight (8) feet and
up to nine (9) feet in height or more than twenty-two (22) feet and up to twenty-five
(25) feet in length, or more than 12,000 pounds and up to 15,000 pounds gross
vehicle weight.
2. Oversized vehicle means any motorized vehicle or trailer more than nine (9) feet in
height, or more than twenty-five (25) feet in length, or more than 15,000 pounds
gross vehicle weight.
3. Stored vehicle means a parked vehicle that has remained in the same location for
seven (7) consecutive days or more. Any vehicle moved less than 300 feet shall be
deemed to have remained in the same location.
4. Height is measured from the ground to the highest point on the vehicle at
recommended tire pressure. All accessories, attachments, and materials carried on
the vehicle are considered part of the vehicle.
CITYOF ANOKA
CITYCODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE I
18 of 19
5. Length is measured at the longest point of the vehicle or, if the vehicle is a trailer, the
horizontal distance between the front and rear edges of the trailer bed. All
accessories, attachments, and materials carried on the vehicle are considered part of
the vehicle.
Water body means a body of water (lake, pond) in a depression of land or expanded part
of a river, or an enclosed basin that holds water and is surrounded by land.
Watercourse means a channel or depression through which water flows, such as rivers,
streams, or creeks, and may flow year around or intermittently.
Watershed means the area drained by the natural and artificial drainage system, bounded
peripherally by a bridge or stretch of high land dividing drainage areas.
Watershed management or flood control structure means a dam, floodwall, wingdam,
dike, diversion channel, or an artificially deepened or widened stream channel following
the same or approximately the same course as the natural channel, or any other structure
for altering or regulating the natural flow condition of a river or stream. The term
"watershed management or flood control structure" does not include pilings, retaining
walls, gabion baskets, rock riprap, or other facilities intended primarily to prevent erosion
and which must be authorized by period from the commissioner of the state department
of natural resources.
Warehouse means a use engaged in storage, wholesale, and distribution of
manufactured products, supplies, and equipment for commercial purposes which may
include accessory office space.
Wellness Center means an establishment that offers a range of health services under one
roof for the body and mine. Wellness centers include, but are not limited to, fitness,
personal and group training, nutrition consulting, chiropractic, acupuncture, and holistic
medicine.
Wetland means land which is annually subject to a periodic or continuing inundation by
water and commonly referred to as a bog, swamp, or marsh.
Yard means a required open space on the lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed by a
structure from its lowest level to the sky except as permitted in this chapter. A yard
extends along the lot line at right angles to such lot line to a depth or width specified in
the setback regulations for the zoning district in which such lot is located.
Yard, front means a yard extending along the full width of the front lot line between the
side lot lines and extending from the abutting street right-of-way to the depth required in
the setback regulations for the zoning district in which such lot is located.
Yard, rear means an open space unoccupied except for accessory buildings on the same
lot with a building, between the rear lines of the building and the rear line of the lot, for
the full width of the lot.
Yard, side means the yard extending along the side lot line between the front and rear
yards to a depth or width required by setback regulations for the zoning district in which
such lot is located.
Zero lot line split means the instance where a structure is allowed to be constructed over a
lot line of two adjoining lots.
CITYOF ANOKA
CITYCODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE I
19 of 19
Zoning administrator means the officer charged with the administration and enforcement
of this chapter.
Zoning amendment means a change of the zoning map or zoning text authorized by the
City, either in the allowed use within a district, or in the boundaries of a district.
Zoning district means an area or areas within the limits of the City for which the
regulations and requirements governing use are uniform.
Zoning district, overlay means a zoning district containing regulations superimposed
upon other zoning district regulations and superseding the underlying zoning district use
regulations.
Zoning map means the map or maps incorporated into this chapter as a part thereof,
designating the zoning districts.
Cross reference--Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Section 74-3. Applicability of chapter.
From and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the
use of all land and every building or portion of a building erected, altered and with
respect to height and area, added to, or relocated, and every use within a building or use
accessory thereto, in the City shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
Section 74-4. Interpretation of chapter.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of this chapter impose greater
restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this
chapter shall be controlling. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or
regulation impose greater restrictions than this chapter, the provisions of such statute,
other ordinance or regulation shall be controlling.
Section 74-5. Vacations.
Any landowner seeking vacation of an interest of the City in real property within the City
may institute appropriate proceedings by paying such fees to cover administrative costs
as are determined by the council by resolution. Additionally, the applicant shall
reimburse the City for all out-of-pocket expenses, including attorneys fees, incurred in
connection with vacation proceedings. Such fees and expenses shall be nonrefundable,
whether or not the vacation is completed.
Charter reference--Vacating streets, § 13.06.
State law reference--Vacating streets, Minn. Stats. § 440.135.
Secs. 74-6--74-30. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE II
1 of 16
CHAPTER 74; ZONING
ARTICLE II. Administration and Enforcement.*
----------
*Cross reference--Administration, Ch. 2.
----------
Section 74-31. Violations and penalties.
(a) Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or
who resists enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.
(b) In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in
violation of this chapter, the zoning administrator in addition to other remedies,
may institute any proper action or proceedings in the name of the city, and
hereby shall have the powers of a police officer to prevent such unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance or use, to remain correct or abate such violations to prevent the
occupancy of the building, structure or land; or to prevent any illegal act,
conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
State law reference--Authority to enforce zoning ordinances and provide penalties for
violations, Minn. Stats. § 462.362.
Section 74-32. Zoning administrator.
The office of the zoning administrator is hereby established. It shall be the duty of the
zoning administrator to enforce this chapter through the proper legal channels.
Cross reference--Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq.
Section 74-33. Zoning District Classification, Zoning District Boundaries, and Zoning Ordinance
Text Amendments.
(a) Authority. This Ordinance and the Zoning District classification or zoning
boundaries may be amended from time to time by an Ordinance duly enacted by
the City Council in accordance with the procedures of this Section. Such
amendments shall not be issued indiscriminately, but shall only be used as a
means to reflect changes in the goals and policies of the City as found in the
Community (Comprehensive) Plan or changes in conditions in the City. Any
change in the Zoning Ordinance shall be in compliance with the Community
(Comprehensive) Plan.
(b) Initiation.
(1) Text Amendments. Proposed text amendments may be initiated by the
City Council, the Planning Commission, the Community Development
Department, any owner(s) or person(s) with an interest in the real estate
in the affected district in the City.
(2) Zoning district classification or boundary amendments. Proposed
zoning district classification or boundary amendments may be initiated
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE II
2 of 16
by the City Council, by the Planning Commission, by the Community
Development Department, or by any owner(s) or person(s) with an
interest in the real estate in the affected district in the City.
(c) Procedure.
(1) Pre-Application Meeting. Prior to submission of a zoning amendment
application, the applicant may meet with the Community Development
staff to discuss the zoning amendment application. Through the preapplication
meeting, the Community Development staff will summarize
the informational requirements and issues related to the specific zoning
amendment request.
(2) When any proposed change or amendment is initiated by the Council or
City staff, such request and all related information shall be referred to
the City of Anoka Planning Commission for consideration.
(3) When any proposed change or amendment is initiated by any owner(s)
or persons with an interest in the real estate in the affected district in
the City, an application for such amendment shall be filed in the
Community Development Department. A non-refundable application
fee to cover administrative costs, established from time to time by the
City Council, shall accompany the application. The applicant shall also
be responsible for payment of actual costs incurred by the City for
legal, engineering or other professional services related to review of the
zoning amendment request.
(4) All applications shall contain the following information:
a. The applicant’s name, address and phone number.
b. The suggested wording of any proposed amendment to the text
of this Ordinance.
(5) In the event that the proposed amendment would change the zoning
classification or zoning district boundary, the following additional
information shall be submitted:
a. A legal description and street address of the property proposed
to be rezoned;
b. The name, address and phone number of the owner or owners
of the property;
c. Evidence of ownership or an interest in the property;
d. The present zoning district classification and existing uses of
the property proposed to be rezoned;
e. The area of the property proposed to be rezoned, stated in
square feet or acres, or fraction thereof;
f. A map drawn to scale clearly showing the property proposed
to be reclassified; and
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE II
3 of 16
g. Materials explaining the proposed use of the property that
address the criteria in subpart (h) of this Section.
h. If an application for a change in the boundaries of a zoning
district would result in the creation of a zoning district which
is inconsistent with the land use designation of the property in
the comprehensive plan, the zoning amendment application
must be accompanied by an application for an amendment to
the comprehensive plan.
i. Any other information as determined by staff.
(6) The amendment request shall be referred to the Community
Development staff for a written report and recommendation to be
presented to the Planning Commission.
(7) The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing for all zoning
map amendments and text amendments. Notice of the time and place of
the public hearing shall be given not more than thirty (30) days nor less
than ten (10) days in advance of the public hearing by publishing a
notice in the official newspaper of the City and by mailing a notice of
the public hearing to the owner or owners of the property under
consideration and, when an amendment involves changes in district
boundaries affecting an area of five acres or less, a similar notice shall
be mailed to all property owners within three hundred fifty (350) feet of
the subject property. This notice shall describe the particular change
and shall contain a description of the property. Individual notice to
property owners is not required for text amendments.
(8) Failure of a property owner to receive said notice shall not invalidate
any such proceedings as set forth within this ordinance provided a bona
fide attempt to notify has been made.
(9) The Planning Commission and City Council shall consider the
following criteria when considering a change to the zoning
classification or zoning district boundary:
a. Whether the proposed amendment corrects an error or
addresses a changing condition, trend or fact.
b. Whether the proposed amendment is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan policies.
c. Whether the proposed amendment will protect the health,
safety and welfare of the public.
d. Whether the City and other service providers will be able to
provide sufficient public safety, transportation and utility
facilities and services to the subject property, while
maintaining sufficient levels of service to existing
development.
e. Whether the proposed rezoning will have significant adverse
impacts on the natural environment, including air, water,
noise, storm water management and vegetation.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE II
4 of 16
f. Whether the proposed amendment will have significant
adverse impacts on other property in the vicinity of the subject
tract.
g. The suitability of the subject property for the existing zoning
classification and proposed zoning classification.
h. The need for the proposed use at the proposed location.
i. Any other criteria which reasonably relates to the application.
(10) The Planning Commission and City Council may request additional
information from the applicant if the Commission or Council deem
such information would be helpful in review of the proposal.
(11) The City Council may require a development agreement for a change in
the zoning classification, zoning map or change in the zoning district
boundary in those instances where an amendment may be appropriate
only under conditions which will prevent traffic congestion, public
safety risks, undue concentration or density of people, transportation
impediments or other risks to the general public health, welfare and
safety.
(1l) The City Council, upon receiving a recommendation from the Planning
Commission, shall take action to either approve, deny or approve the
application with conditions. The City Council shall reach a decision
according to the deadlines established under Minnesota Statutes 15.99,
or successor statute.
(12) The City shall notify the applicant of the City’s decision in writing.
(d) Consideration after Denial. Whenever an application for an amendment under
this section has been considered and denied by the City Council, a new and
substantially identical application affecting the same property shall not be
accepted by City staff or considered again by the Planning Commission or City
Council for at least one (1) year from the date of its denial, unless, for good
cause shown, the City Council, by majority vote of all its members, permits a
new and substantially identical application to be processed and considered prior
to the expiration of such period.
State law references--Zoning amendments, Minn. Stats. § 462.357, subds. 3, 4; time
limits to approve or deny written requests relating to zoning, Minn. Stats. § 515.99.
Section 74-34. Interim use permits.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of an interim use permit is to allow a temporary use that is
not designated as permitted or conditionally permitted but is acceptable for a
limited period of time subject to conditions set forth in this section. An "interim
use" is defined as a temporary use of property until a particular date, until the
occurrence of a particular event, or until zoning regulations no longer permit it.
An interim use is granted to a particular individual and does not accrue to the
subject property.
(b) Application. Subject to the provisions of this chapter, all interim uses shall
comply with the provisions of this section.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE II
5 of 16
(c) Inspection. The city hereby reserves the right, upon approval of an interim use,
to inspect the premises in which an interim use is being conducted to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this section or any additional conditions
imposed.
(d) Violations. After two nuisance or code violation complaints have been made and
verified with written notice to the holder of the interim use permit, a public
hearing may be called within 60 days of the last complaint to reconsider the
interim use.
(e) Revocation. An interim use permit may be revoked if (i) the property is found to
be in violation of the conditions listed in the interim use permit or (ii) if access
to the property for the purpose of making an inspection is refused to the zoning
administrator or their designee. The same process established for granting an
interim use permit shall be followed when considering revocation of an interim
use permit.
(f) Penalty. Violations of the interim use standards shall be subject to the
enforcement and penalty provisions as contained in this chapter.
(g) Criteria for granting an interim use permit. In granting an interim use permit,
the Planning Commission and City Council shall consider the effect of the
proposed use upon the health, safety and general welfare of occupants of
surrounding properties. The Planning Commission and City Council shall
consider and make findings regarding the following factors:
(1) The proposed use meets the applicable zoning regulations; and
(2) The proposed use will terminate upon a date or event that can be
identified with certainty; and
(3) The proposed use will not impose additional costs on the public if it is
necessary for the public to take the property in the future; and
(4) The proposed use will be subjected to, by agreement with the property
owner, any conditions that the City Council deems appropriate for
permission of the proposed interim use, including a condition that the
owner will provide an appropriate surety to cover the cost of removing
the interim use and any interim structures upon the expiration of the
interim use.
(h) Termination. An interim use permit shall terminate upon the occurrence of any
of the following events, whichever comes first:
(1) The date or event stated in the permit;
(2) The use has been discontinued for one year; or
(3) There is a change in ownership of the property for which the interim
use permit was issued. If it is believed that a violation of the conditions
of approval has occurred, the Planning Commission and City Council
may take action to revoke the interim use permit through the public
hearing process, including notification to the property owner of the
city's intent to consider revocation the permit.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE II
6 of 16
(i) Conditions of approval. In permitting a new interim use permit or amending an
existing interim use permit, the Planning Commission may recommend and the
City Council may impose, in addition to the standards and requirements
expressly specified by this section, additional conditions which the Planning
Commission or City Council consider necessary to protect the best interest of
the surrounding area or the community as a whole. These conditions may
include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Increasing the required lot size or yard dimension;
(2) Limiting the height, size or location of buildings;
(3) Controlling the location and number of vehicle access points;
(4) Increasing the street width;
(5) Increasing the number of required off-street parking spaces;
(6) Limiting the number, size, location or lighting of signs;
(7) Requiring diking, fencing, screening, landscaping or other facilities to
protect adjacent or nearby property;
(8) Designation of open space;
(9) Annual review, if deemed appropriate by the city council.
Any change involving structural alterations, enlargement, intensification of use,
or similar changes not specifically permitted by the interim use permit shall
require an amended interim use permit and all procedures shall apply as if a new
permit were being issued. The zoning administrator or their designee shall
maintain a record of all interim use permits including information on the use,
location and conditions imposed by the city council, time limits, review dates,
and such other information as may be appropriate.
(j) Procedure.
(1) Applications for interim use permits will not be accepted from anyone
who is not the owner of the land for which the application is made.
(2) The person applying for an interim use permit shall fill out and submit
to the community development department an interim use permit
application, appropriate supplementary information, and a filing fee as
established by the city council.
(3) The community development department staff shall refer the
application to the Planning Commission for review and
recommendation to the city council.
(4) The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposal.
Notice of the public hearing shall be as provided by Minn. Stats. §
462.357, subd. 3, as amended. The Planning Commission shall make a
recommendation to the City Council to either approve or deny the
request. The City Council shall take final action on the request.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE II
7 of 16
(5) The petitioner or representative shall appear before the Planning
Commission in order to present information concerning the requested
interim use permit.
(6) If the Planning Commission recommends granting the proposed interim
use permit, it may recommend conditions to the City Council that the
commission considers necessary to protect the public health, safety and
general welfare of the surrounding area along with findings supporting
the recommendation to approve. If the Planning Commission
recommends denial of the proposed interim use permit, it shall
recommend findings in support of the denial to the city council.
(7) An amended interim use permit application shall be administered in a
manner similar to that required for an interim use permit. Requests for
an amendment to an interim use permit shall include the requested
changes related to the interim use and information in support of the
requested changes.
(8) No application for an interim use permit shall be resubmitted for a
period of six months from such order of denial.
(9) Where applicable, granted interim use permits shall become void if the
applicant does not proceed substantially on the work within six months.
To proceed substantially means to make visible improvements to the
property. One or more extensions for not more than six months each
may be granted by the City Council for good cause.
State law references--Interim uses, Minn. Stats. § 462.3597; time limits to approve written request relating to
zoning, Minn. Stats. § 15.99.
Section 74-35. Interim use permit for Low-Impact Office in a Residential District.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a mechanism to allow a
change in use of residential properties to low-impact office as a way to respond
to the changing market for residential properties along heavily traveled
roadways. The intent in allowing low-impact office use is that the traffic
generated from such use will be comparable to the residential use of the property
and will not contribute to further traffic congestion or access issues. In addition,
the performance standards are intended to assist in preserving the residential
character of the property.
(b) Area of Application. An interim use permit to allow low-impact office use in a
residential district shall be limited to areas determined by the City Council.
(c) Performance Standards. To grant an interim use permit for office use of a
residential structure, the following performance standards must be met:
(1) The average daily trips (ADT) generated from office use of the
property shall be equal to or less than the ADT of the permitted
residential use of the property.
(2) Parking shall be minimized to the extent possible to minimize
stormwater runoff and the impact of parking lots on the residential
character of the property. Where possible, parking shall not occur in the
front yard and any parking areas shall be screened from neighboring
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE II
8 of 16
residential properties as approved through the interim use permit
process. Vegetative screening is generally preferred.
(3) Exterior alterations or additions to the residential structure(s) shall
maintain the residential character except where required to comply with
State fire and building code regulations.
(4) No retail sales are permitted.
(5) Signage shall be limited to one free-standing sign no more that twentyone
(21) square fee in area and six (6) feet in height. The sign shall be
located parallel to the street. The exact location of the sign shall be as
approved through the Interim use Permit process.
(6) Hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. unless
otherwise approved through the interim use process.
(7) The owner must obtain an amendment to the interim use permit in
order to change any of the conditions set forth in the interim use permit
or to change the mix of uses on the property.
(8) The owner of the property shall obtain any necessary permits or
licenses.
(9) The property shall be subject to annual inspection and review.
(d) Inspection. The City of Anoka hereby reserves the right, upon approval of an
interim use permit to allow office use of a residential structure, to inspect the
premises in which such office use is being conducted to insure compliance with
the provisions of this subdivision or any conditions imposed in issuance of the
interim use permit.
(e) Termination. An Interim Use Permit that allows office use of a residential
property shall terminate upon the following: (1) Sale of the property; (2)
Conversion of the property to residential use.
(f) Revocation. An Interim Use Permit that allows office use of residential property
may be revoked if (1) the property is found to be in violation of the conditions
listed in the approved Interim Use Permit; or (2) if access to the property for the
purpose of making an inspection is refused to the Zoning Administrator or the
Zoning Administrator’s designee.
(g) Penalty. Violation(s) of the performance standards set forth in this section shall
be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions as contained in this
Chapter.
Section 74-36. Interim Use Permit for Accessory Structure or Use Predating Principal Structure or
Use.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a mechanism to allow
accessory structures or uses to be established on residential lots before
establishing a principal use or structure. The intent is to allow a use or structure
on a vacant lot that is accessory to a principal use established on a contiguous
lot. In addition, the performance standards are intended to preserve the vacant
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE II
9 of 16
lot for future development of a principal structure or use and to ensure the
residential character of the property and structures are maintained.
(b) Eligibility. An interim use permit to allow accessory structures or uses to be
established on lots before establishing a principal use or structure shall be
limited to vacant lots contiguous to lots that have an established residential
principal use or structure and have the same property owner.
(c) Performance Standards. To grant an interim use permit for an accessory
structure or use as allowed under this Article, the following performance
standards must be met:
(1) The vacant lot shall be contiguous to a lot that has an established
residential principal use or structure.
(2) The proposed structure or use shall be accessory to the principal
structure or use on the contiguous lot.
(3) Both lots shall be within a residential zoning district.
(4) The proposed accessory use and/or structure must meet all zoning,
building and fire code requirements.
(5) The location of the proposed accessory structure or use shall not
interfere with the future construction of a principal use or structure.
(6) Outside storage shall be prohibited.
(7) The accessory structure or use shall not be related to a home
occupation, business, office, commercial or industrial use.
(8) The proposed structure shall be similar in color, style and exterior
materials as surrounding residential properties.
(9) The owner of the property shall obtain any necessary permits or
licenses.
(10) The property shall be subject to annual inspection and review.
(d) Inspection. The City of Anoka hereby reserves the right to inspect the premises
upon which an accessory use or structure established under this Subdivision is
located or conducted to insure compliance with the provisions of this
Subdivision or any conditions imposed in issuance of the interim use permit.
(e) Revocation. An interim use permit granted under this Subdivision may be
revoked when:
(1) The property is found to be in violation of the conditions listed in the
approved interim use permit; or
(2) The property owner or interim use permit holder refuses access to the
property for the purpose of making an inspection to the Zoning
Administrator or the Zoning Administrator’s designee.
(f) Termination. An interim use permit granted under this Subdivision shall
terminate upon the occurrence of any of the following events:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE II
10 of 16
(1) There is a change in ownership of either the lot with the accessory
structure or use for which the permit was granted, or the contiguous lot
with the principal structure or use; or
(2) A principal structure or use is established on the lot for which the
permit was granted; or
(3) The lot is combined into one tax parcel; or
(4) The date or event identified in the permit; or
(5) The use has been discontinued for one (1) year;
(g) Penalty. Violation(s) of the performance standards set forth in this section shall
be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions as contained in this
Chapter.
Section 74-37. Appeals and variances.
(a) Application. Application for a variance shall be made to the Planning
Department on forms provided by the City. The application shall be
accompanied by the following:
(1) A plat or to-scale map of the property which shows, at a minimum, all
lot lines, existing and proposed structures, driveways and parking areas,
significant topographical features and mature trees;
(2) Evidence of ownership or an interest in the property;
(3) Documentation explaining the practical difficulties;
(4) The fee as required by the city code; and
(5) Such other information as may be required by the city to assist in
review and analysis of the requested variance.
State law reference--Authority for above, Minn. Stats. § 462.354, subd. 2.
(b) Variances. A variance may be granted from the requirements of this ordinance
including restrictions placed on nonconformities.
(1) Variances shall only be considered when:
a. The proposed variance is in harmony with the general purpose
and intent of the zoning ordinance; and
b. The proposed variance is consistent with the comprehensive
plan.
c. That granting the requested variance will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood and will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that would be denied by this
ordinance to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same
district.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE II
11 of 16
d. That the proposed actions will be in keeping with the spirit
and intent of this ordinance.
(2) Variances may be granted when the applicant for the variance
establishes that there are practical difficulties in complying with the
zoning ordinance. A variance granted under this sub-section shall also
meet the standards in subpart (1) above.
a. Practical difficulties means:
1. That the property owner proposed to use the property
in a reasonable manner not permitted by this
ordinance; and
2. That the plight of the landowner is due to
circumstances unique to the property not created by
the landowners; and
3. The proposed variance, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the locality.
b. Practical difficulties also include inadequate access to direct
solar energy systems.
c. Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical
difficulties.
(3) Variances must be granted for:
a. Earth sheltered construction as defined in State law when such
construction is in harmony with this ordinance (M.D.
216C.06, subd. 14)
b. The temporary use of a one-family dwelling as a two-family
dwelling.
(4) No variance may be granted that would allow any use that is not
allowed in the zoning district in which the property is located.
(5) The City may impose conditions in the granting of a variance. A
condition must be directly related to and must bear a rough
proportionality to the impact created by granting the variance.
State law reference--Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. § 462.357, subd. 6(3).6(1)
(c) Procedure. The City Council shall decide upon requests for variances by
approving or denying the same in part or in whole. The procedure for processing
variances is as follows:
(1) Notice to effected property owners. Upon submission of a completed
application, including all items in subsection (a) of this section, the
request for a variance will be placed on the next agenda of the Planning
Commission occurring after twenty one (21) days from the date of
submission. The Planning Commission shall consider the application
only after notice has been sent by mail to adjacent property owners as
required by Minn. Stats. § 462.357, subd. 3, as amended.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE II
12 of 16
(2) Planning Commission action. The Planning Commission shall make a
recommendation to the City Council to either approve or deny the
requested variance. The recommendation shall include findings of fact
in support of the Planning Commission decision. The Planning
Commission may suggest the imposition of conditions in granting
variances to effect the intent of this ordinance and to protect adjacent
properties. The petitioner or representative may appear before the
Planning Commission in order to present information or to answer
questions.
(3) City Council action. The City Council, acting as the board of
adjustment, may grant a variance if it has been established that practical
difficulties exists. The City Council shall, on all variance applications,
whether granted or denied, record findings of fact in writing that are
consistent with section 74-37 and state the City Council's reasons for
such action. A copy of the City Council resolution regarding final
action on the request shall be mailed to the applicant.
(4) Time line for action by the City. The City Council must approve or
deny the application for a variance within sixty (60) days of the City
receiving all required information. The 60-day time limit starts over
only if the City sends notice, within fifteen (15) business days, of
receipt of the request, telling the applicant what information is missing.
The city may extend the 60-day time limit before the end of the initial
time limit by providing written notice of the extension to the applicant.
The notification to the applicant must state the reasons for the extension
and its anticipated length, which may not exceed 60 days, unless
approved by the applicant. Failure of the City Council to deny an
application within 60 days, without an extension, is deemed approval of
the request. Findings of fact stating the reasons for either an approval or
a denial must be made in writing at the time of the action.
(5) Time limitations. Unless otherwise specified by the City Council at the
time it is authorized, a variance shall expire if the applicant fails to
utilize such variance by initiation of construction, within one (1) year
from the date of its authorization. After the variance has expired, it
must be revoked by the City Council, resulting in the variance
becoming null and void. The applicant and/or owner may file a written
request with the Planning Department for an extension prior to the
expiration of the variance. The Planning Commission shall make a
recommendation t the City Council, who then may extend the deadline
for initiation of construction upon finding that the interest of the owners
of neighboring properties will not be adversely affected by such
extension. Once the variance is utilized as approved, the variance
becomes perpetual.
(6) Specific project. A variance shall be valid only for the reason for which
it was granted. Construction of any project shall be in substantial
compliance with the building plans and specifications reviewed and
approved by the City Council.
(d) Appeals. Any person aggrieved by an order, requirement, decision or
determination first made by the Zoning Administrator may have such decision
reviewed if a request for review is submitted to the Zoning Administrator within
ten (10) days of the date of the decision. The appeal shall be in writing and shall
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE II
13 of 16
include a statement of the alleged errors or omissions. The City Council, acting
as the Board of Adjustment, shall hear and decide such appeals. Upon receipt of
an appeal, a hearing shall be set before the City Council and the appellant shall
be notified by mail of the time and place of the meeting. The City Council may
reverse or affirm w holly or in part any ruling, decision, or determination of the
Zoning Administrator.
(e) District Court Appeals. An aggrieved person wishing to seek review of an
action pursuant to Minnesota Statute §462.361, Subdivision 1, as amended, may
file an appeal with the Anoka County District Court. No appeal shall be
effective unless it is served and filed within 60 days as follows: (1) For an
appeal from the adoption or amendment of an ordinance, rule, or regulation, -
from the effective date of the ordinance; (2) For an appeal from an order - from
the issuance of the order; (3) For an appeal from any other decision governed by
this Chapter and/or referenced in Minnesota Statute §462.361, Subdivision 1, as
amended - from the decision of the City Council.
State law reference--Similar provisions, Minn. Stats. § 462.357, subd. 6(1).
State law reference--Time limits to approve or deny written requests relating to zoning,
Minn. Stats. § 15.99.
Section 74-38. Building permits; site plans.
(a) Building permits shall be required as specified in the requirements set forth in
the state building code which is incorporated into section 18-32.
(b) Before building permits are issued for the development or alteration of multiple
family, commercial, industrial, or non-residential structures, a site plan shall be
reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council.
(c) Site plan review may be initiated by submitting a Planning and Zoning
Application form provided by the Planning Department. Such form shall
include the following:
(1) Applicant information;
(2) Owner information;
(3) Site information (address, legal description, P.I.N.);
(4) Signature of owner and applicant;
(5) A site plan shall be included that contains the following information:
a. A certified site survey drawing by a registered engineer or
land surveyor showing property boundaries and dimensions.
b. Building locations and dimensions (existing and proposed) on
and within 50 feet of subject property. Also identify adjacent
property land use.
c. Adjacent roadways and proposed entrances and exits for
vehicles.
d. Grading plan (existing and proposed two feet or five feet
topographical contours); spot elevations may be sufficient for
sites of less than one-quarter acre in area with no slopes
greater than 12 percent.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE II
14 of 16
e. Drainage plan (catch basins, culverts, ponding areas), indicate
drainage pattern.
f. Parking areas (indicate type of surface, arrangement and
dimension of spaces), truck loading docks and maneuvering
areas, sidewalks, retaining walks, refuse storage, service areas,
and other manmade features.
g. Landscape/Tree Preservation plan (existing significant
vegetation to be removed and to remain, including street trees,
by size and species; proposed trees, shrubs and ground cover
by size and species). The developer is responsible for planting
the street trees specified by the city forester for the boulevard
areas adjacent to the parcel.
h. Utility plan (existing and proposed sanitary sewer, water,
hydrant location, storm sewer, and electric).
i. Location of all easements and building and parking setbacks.
j. Designation of snow storage area.
k. Development summary indicating lot area, building square
footage, lot coverage, building height, number and size of
dwelling units and parking spaces provided.
l. In specific cases, the planner may require building elevations
indicating building height and building materials (facade and
roof).
(d) Site plans shall be accompanied by such review fees as are determined by the
Council.
(e) The City Council may require a performance bond or other security, in form
approved by the city attorney, to guarantee completion of any of the site plan
improvements other than construction of the primary structure. Such security
shall be provided prior to issuance of the building permit and shall be in an
amount 1.25 times the approved estimated cost of labor and materials for the
exterior site plan improvements. Failure to complete the site plan improvements
within the time permitted by council shall entitle the city to the security which
may be applied toward completion of the improvements, including all costs
incurred by the city associated with performing or causing such work to be
performed.
(f) Conditions and Restrictions. The Planning Commission may recommend and
the City Council may impose such conditions and restrictions as deemed
necessary to protect the public interest and to secure compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
(g) Administrative approval.
(1) Site plan approval/review may be approved administratively provided
that the applicant can demonstrate that all provisions of this chapter
have been met and additionally comply with the following conditions:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE II
15 of 16
a. The development will not cause an increase in need for
parking spaces.
b. The existing development is in compliance with all zoning or
other regulations.
c. The proposed development will not change the drainage
patterns.
(2) Planning staff, in consultation with other city staff members shall
notify the building inspector that the applicant meets or exceeds the
city's land use and zoning requirements and may proceed with the
building permit application.
(3) Applications for administrative review may be submitted to the
Planning Department and will be processed within two weeks from
submittal date. Planning Staff in consultation with other appropriate
city staff will determine the site plan requirements and information
needed. Cost for administrative review will be as set by the city
council.
(4) Plans which do not comply with the provisions of this section and this
chapter must receive Planning Commission review and City Council
approval in accordance with this section.
(5) An applicant may file an appeal to the City Council concerning the
interpretation or requirements placed on the project by city staff. The
appeal shall follow the public hearing process as established in
subsection 74-35(c).
(6) City staff will report annually to the Planning Commission and City
Council on the number and description of administratively approved
site plans.
(h) Time Limitations. Unless otherwise specified by the City Council at the time it
is approved, a site plan shall be valid for one (1) year to allow for the initiation
of construction. If initiation of construction is not started within one (1) year, or
within any extension granted hereafter, the approval shall expire. After the site
plan has expired, it must be revoked by the City Council, resulting in the site
plan becoming null and void. The Planning Department must notify the
applicant and/or owner sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the site plan by
regular and certified mail. The applicant and/or owner may file a written request
with the Planning Department for an extension prior to the expiration of the site
plan. The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the City
Council who then may extend the site plan approval for periods of not more than
twelve (12( months each upon finding that:
(1) The proposed use, or uses, is consistent with the City's Comprehensive
Land Use Plan current at the time the request for an extension is
considered; and,
(2) The project design meets the applicable City Code standards in effect at
the time the request for an extension is considered, or the design is
modified to satisfy those standards.
Secs. 74-39--74-60 Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE II
16 of 16
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE III
CHAPTER 74. ZONING
ARTICLE III. Zoning Districts Established, Zoning Map
Section 74-61. Districts enumerated.
(a) For the purpose of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into classes of districts
which shall be designated as follows:
(1) Residence districts. Residence districts shall be as follows:
R-F Farm Residence District.
R-1 Single-Family Residential District.
R-2 One- and Two-Family Dwellings District.
R-3 Low Density Multiple Family District.
R-4 High Density Multiple Family District.
R-5 Residential Flex District.
R-6 Mobile Home Park Residence District.
(2) Business districts. Business districts shall be as follows:
B-1 Highway Business District
B-2 Shopping Center Business District.
B-3 General Business District.
B-4 Limited District.
(3) Industrial districts. Industrial districts shall be as follows:
M-1 Light Industrial District.
M-2 General Industrial District.
(4) Other districts. Other districts shall be as follows:
Planned Unit Development District.
Adult Establishment District.
(b) Any landowner seeking a rezoning of real property within the City may institute
appropriate proceedings by paying such fees as are determined by the Council.
State law reference--Time limits to approve or deny written requests relating to zoning,
Minn. Stats. § 15.99.
1 of 4
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE III
Section 74-62. Zoning map.
The location and boundaries of the districts established by this chapter are hereby set
forth on the zoning map and such map is hereby made a part of this chapter, which map
shall be known as the "City of Anoka Zoning Map". Such map and all notations,
references and data shown thereon are hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter
and shall be as much a part of it as if all were fully described in this chapter. It shall be
the responsibility of the zoning administrator to maintain the map and amendments
thereto shall be recorded on the zoning map within 30 days after official publication of
amendments. The official zoning map shall be kept on file in the city hall.
Section 74-63. District boundaries.
The boundaries between districts are, unless otherwise indicated, either the centerlines of
streets, alleys or railroad rights-of-way, or such lines extended or lines parallel or
perpendicular thereto. Where figures are shown on the zoning map between a street and a
district boundary line, they indicate that the district boundary line runs parallel to the
street line at a distance there from equivalent to the number of feet so indicated, unless
otherwise indicated.
Section 74-64. Classification of annexed land.
Any land annexed to the City in the future shall be placed in the R-F, farm residence
district, until placed in another district by action of the City Council after
recommendation of the City Planning Commission.
Section 74-65. Official Maps.
(a) Intent and Purpose. It is the intent of the City Council to establish an Official
Map for the purpose of showing lands and facilities identified for future public
facilities. For purposes of this ordinance, “public facilities” is defined as streets,
alleys, curbs, gutters, pedestrian ways including sidewalks and trails, medians,
street-lighting systems, traffic control systems, drainage facilities, storm water
management systems, fire hydrants, open space improvements and other
miscellaneous improvements to be owned by a public entity that are required to
be constructed and accepted within public rights-of-way or public easement.
Public improvements may also include the dedication and construction of park
facilities to be accepted by the City.
It is the purpose of this section of the ordinance to provide a uniform procedure
for the proper use of official maps as authorized by the Minnesota Statutes, §
462.351 to §462.36.
(b) Official Map Defined. “Official map” as used in this ordinance means a map
adopted in accordance with this ordinance showing existing streets, proposed
future streets, and the area needed for widening of existing streets within the
City. An official map may also show the location of existing and future land and
facilities within the City. An official map may cover the entire City or any
portion of the City.
(c) Initiation of Proceedings. Proceedings for adoption, amendment, or repeal of an
official map or any part thereof may be initiated by (1) the City’s Planning
Department; (2) a recommendation of the Planning Commission; or (3) by
action of the City Council.
2 of 4
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE III
(d) Reference to the Planning Commission. Every proposed official map or change
in a map shall be referred to the Planning Commission to hold a public hearing
and to make recommendation thereon. Such recommendation shall be submitted
to the City Council along with the report of the Commission on the effect of the
proposal on the comprehensive plan of the City. The City Council shall take
final action to approve or deny the request.
(e) Notice and Hearing.
1. Notice. A notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing and a
description of the property to be included in the official map shall be
published in the official newspaper once, at least ten (10) days prior to
the date of the hearing. At least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, the
City shall also mail a copy of the notice to each land owner situated
with or abutting the area shown on the official map. For purposes of
this notice, the owners shall be determined by the records of the City
Assessor and the notice shall be addressed to the last know address as
shown in the assessor’s records. Failure to serve any such notices shall
not invalidate the proceedings.
2. Hearing. At the time and place specified in the notice, the Planning
Commission shall hear evidence and arguments concerning the
proposal. The hearing may be continued from time to time without
further notice.
(f) Preparation and Filing of Maps. The official map or maps shall be prepared in
sufficient detail to permit the establishment of future acquisition lines on the
ground. In unplatted areas a minimum of a centerline survey shall be made prior
to the preparation of the final draft of the official map. The accuracy of the
future acquisition lines shown on the official map shall be attested to by a
licensed land surveyor. After enactment of any ordinance adopting an official
map or amending or repealing a previous map amendment, a certified copy of
the official map or section to which the ordinance relates together with an
attached copy of the ordinance shall be filed with the Anoka County Recorder.
(g) Effect. After an official map has been adopted and filed, the issuance of building
permits by the City shall be subject to the provisions of this ordinance. The City
shall deny every application for a permit to construct a new building or structure
or expand an existing building or structure within any area designated on the
official map for street or other public purposes. Whenever any street or highway
is widened or improved or any new street is opened, or any interest in land for
other public purposes is acquired by the City, the City is not required in such
proceedings to pay for any building or structure placed without a permit or in
violation of conditions of a permit within the limits of the mapped street or
outside of any building line that may have been established upon the existing
street or within any area thus identified for public purposes. The adoption of the
official maps does not give the City any right, title or interest in the areas
identified for public purposes thereon, but the adoption of the map does
authorize the City to acquire such interest without paying compensation for
buildings or structures erected in such areas without a permit or in violation of
the conditions of a permit.
(h) Appeals. Whenever a building permit is denied pursuant to this ordinance, an
administrative law judge may, upon appeal filed with it by the owner of the land,
grant a building permit in an area designated on the official map for a street or
3 of 4
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE III
other public purpose in any case in which the administrative law judge finds,
upon the evidence and arguments presented to them:
1. That the entire property of the appellant of which the area designated
for public purposes forms a part cannot yield a reasonable return to the
owner unless such building permit is granted; and
2. That balancing the interest of the City in preserving the integrity of the
official map and of the comprehensive plan and the interest of the
owner in the use of said property and in the benefits of ownership, the
grant of such permit is required by considerations of justice and equity.
If the administrative law judge authorizes issuance of a building permit,
the City shall have six (6) months from the date of the Council decision
to institute proceedings to acquire such land or interest therein, and if
no such proceedings are started within that time, the City shall issue the
building permit if the application otherwise conforms to the City Code.
(i) A penalty section is already included in the city code and does not need to be
repeated in this section.
Secs. 74-66--74-90. Reserved.
4 of 4
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IV; DIVISION 1
1 of 1
CHAPTER 74. ZONING
ARTICLE IV. Conditional Uses*
----------
*State law reference--Conditional uses, Minn. Stats. § 462.3595.
----------
DIVISION 1. Generally.
Section 74-91. Definition.
Conditional uses are those uses authorized by this chapter which require special planning
consideration due to traffic circulation and access needs or impacts, operational
characteristics, proximity to other similar uses, impact on neighboring property, etc., and
which therefore need special conditions imposed to establish or control these factors in
order to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to assure compliance and
harmony with the comprehensive plan of the City.
Cross reference--Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Secs. 74-92--74-110. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IV; DIVISION 2
1 of 5
CHAPTER 74. ZONING
ARTICLE IV. Conditional Uses
DIVISION 2. Permit.
Section 74-111. Situations for issuing.
Conditional use permits may be issued for any of the following:
(a) Any of the uses or purposes for which such permits are required or permitted by
the provisions of this chapter.
(b) Public utility or public service uses or public building in any district when found
to be necessary for the public health, safety, convenience or welfare.
(c) Commercial excavating of natural materials used for building or construction
purposes, in any district, as regulated in Division 3 of this Article.
(d) To classify as a conforming use any nonconforming institutional use existing in
any district at the time of the establishment of such district.
(e) To allow more than one (1) principle building on a lot.
Section 74-112. Application.
(a) Application for the issuance of a conditional use permit shall be made in writing
to the City Planning Department; however, any proceedings to classify certain
uses as conforming uses may be initiated either by such application or by the
City Council or by the City Planning Commission. An application for a
conditional use permit shall be accompanied by payment of a fee as determined
by the Council in addition to the regular building permit fee, if any.
(b) Site plan and supplementary graphic or written material shall be provided with
the application, containing the following information:
(1) Name and address of project/development.
(2) Location map, including area within one-half mile of the site.
(3) Name and mailing address of developer/owner and engineer/architect.
(4) Date of plan preparation.
(5) Scale and a north point indicator.
(6) Boundary line of property with their dimensions.
(7) Location, identification and dimensions of existing and proposed:
a. Topographic contours of minimum intervals of two feet.
b. Adjacent streets and on-street right-of-way.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IV; DIVISION 2
2 of 5
c. On-site streets and street right-of-way.
d. All utility and utility right-of-way easements.
e. Lighting plan, showing the lighting of parking areas, walks,
security lights and driveway entrance lights.
f. Building and structures, including:
1. Elevation drawings of all proposed buildings and
structures with dimensions.
2. Elevation, height above mean sea level of all floors
and roofs, when structure is sited in an area prone to
flooding as determined by the city engineer.
3. Gross square footage of existing and proposed
buildings and structures.
4. Exterior finish materials.
5. Type of business, proposed number of employees,
and times of operations.
g. All parking facilities.
h. Water bodies and drainage ditches.
i. Fences and retaining walls.
j. Landscape plan, showing size and species of each planting.
k. On and off site traffic flow.
l. Parking plan.
(8) Site statistics including square footage, percentage of coverage,
dwelling unit density, and percentage of park or open space.
(9) Additional or lessor information may be required by the zoning
administrator in particular cases.
Section 74-113. Planning Commission hearing.
The City Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing after giving notice of such
hearing in the manner provided by law.
Section 74-114. General and special requirements.
(a) The Planning Commission shall consider to what extent the applicant's plan
minimizes possible adverse effects of the proposed conditional use, what
modifications to the plan and what conditions of approval could further
minimize the adverse effects of the proposed use. The following development
standards shall be considered general requirements for all conditional use
permits except as hereinafter provided:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IV; DIVISION 2
3 of 5
(1) The land area and setback requirements of the property containing such
a use or activity meet the minimums established for the district.
(2) When abutting a residential use, the property shall be screened and
landscaped.
(3) Where applicable, all city, county, state and federal laws, regulations
and ordinances shall be complied with and all necessary permits
secured.
(4) Signs shall not adversely impact adjoining or surrounding residential
uses.
(5) Adequate off-road parking and loading shall be provided. Such parking
and loading shall be screened and landscaped from abutting residential
uses.
(6) The road serving the use or activity must be of sufficient design to
accommodate the proposed use or activity, and such use or activity
shall not generate such additional extra traffic as to create a nuisance or
hazard to existing traffic or to surrounding land use.
(7) All access roads, driveways, parking areas, and outside storage, service,
or sales areas shall be surfaced or grassed to control dust and drainage.
(8) All open and outdoor storage, sales and service areas shall be screened
from view from public streets and from abutting residential uses or
districts.
(9) All lighting shall be designed to prevent any direct source of light being
visible from adjacent residential areas or from the public streets.
(10) The use or activity shall be properly drained to control surface water
runoff.
(11) The architectural appearance and functional plan of the building and
site shall not be so dissimilar to the existing buildings or area as to
cause impairment in property values or constitute a blighting influence.
(12) The proposed water, sewer and other utilities shall be capable of
accommodating the proposed use.
(b) These standards shall be strictly applied unless the City Council finds in the
particular case that the community safety, health and welfare can as well or
better be served by modifying them. Any special requirements applicable to the
particular case which are imposed elsewhere in this chapter shall be met in each
case.
Section 74-115. Planning commission recommendation.
Following the hearing, the City Planning Commission shall recommend to the City
Council whatever action it deems advisable, including all recommended conditions on the
granting of the conditional use permit.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IV; DIVISION 2
4 of 5
Section 74-116. Action by the City Council.
In considering applications for conditional use permits, the City Council shall consider
the advice and recommendations of the City Planning Commission and the effect of the
proposed use upon the health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and welfare of the
occupants of the surrounding lands, existing and anticipated traffic conditions, including
parking facilities on adjacent sites. The City Council may hold whatever public hearings
it deems advisable or may return the application to the Planning Commission for further
consideration.
(a) Approval. If it is determined that the general and special requirements of this
chapter will be satisfied by applicant's plan, the Council, by resolution, may
grant such permit and may impose conditions relating to the general and special
requirements in each case.
(b) Denial. Conditional use permits may be denied by resolution of the City
Council. Such resolution shall state the reasons for denial, but may incorporate
by reference the minutes and recommendations of the Planning Commission,
staff reports, hearing testimony and any other material relevant to the Council's
decision.
State law reference--Time limits to approve or deny written requests relating to zoning,
Minn. Stats. § 15.99.
Section 74-117. Termination.
A conditional use permit may be revoked by resolution of the City Council if:
(a) Initiation of construction or use has not commenced upon the subject property
within one (1) year or alternative date set by the City Council. Time shall be
calculated as beginning on the day the conditional use permit was approved by
the City Council;
(b) An existing conditional use ceases operation for a period of one (1) year. Time
shall be calculated as beginning on the day following the last day in which the
use was in normal operation;
(c) The conditional use is being operated and maintained in a manner that violates
any City, State or Federal ordinances, statutes, rules or laws, and/or does not
comply with any conditions of approval of the conditional use permit; or
(d) The use of the property changes to a permitted or different conditional use in
that district.
The City Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing prior to the City Council
action, after giving notice of such hearing in the manner provided by law and sending the
property owner notification of the public hearing via registered mail.
Section 74-118. Performance bond.
The City Council may require a performance bond or other security, in form approved by
the City attorney, to guarantee performance of the conditions in any case where such
performance is not otherwise guaranteed. Such security shall be provided prior to the
issuance of building permits or initiation of work on the proposed improvements or
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IV; DIVISION 2
5 of 5
development and shall be in an amount 1.25 times the approved estimated costs of labor
and materials for the proposed improvements or development.
Secs. 74-119--74-135. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IV; DIVISION 3
CHAPTER 74. ZONING
ARTICLE IV. Conditional Uses
DIVISION 3. Permits for Commercial Excavations
Section 74-136. Definitions.
Unless otherwise indicated, words used in this section shall be considered as used with
their ordinary meaning, but all definitions contained in this chapter shall be applicable in
this division, particularly with reference to mining and soil processing.
Excavation means any artificial excavation of the earth, dug, excavated, or made by the
removal from the natural surface of the earth of soil, sand, gravel, stone or other matter or
made by tunneling or breaking or undermining the surface of the earth, of 500 cubic
yards or more.
Land reclamation means the deposition of 500 cubic yards or more of earth materials on
a site in such manner as to elevate the grade.
Section 74-137. When required; renewal.
(a) Excavation, deposition and processing of natural earth products regulated in this
division shall be permitted only upon issuance of a conditional use permit as
provided for in division 2 of this article. The conditional use permit shall be
renewed the first January after issuance and every January thereafter for
operations to occur beyond the first renewal period. Only that information in the
application which is changed from the previous application is required for the
annual renewal.
(b) Conditional use permits may be issued for commercial excavating of natural
materials used for building or construction purposes, in any district, subject to
the standards and conditions hereinafter set forth. Such permits are required for
the purpose of:
(1) Establishing reasonable and uniform standards and review procedures
in the extraction, deposition and processing of sand, gravel, soil, rock
and other natural earth products or the impounding of waters;
(2) Controlling noise, dust, hazards, effects on adjacent property and other
related adverse factors in the extraction, deposition and processing of
sand, gravel, soil, rock and other natural earth products or the
impounding of waters;
(3) Providing for the restoration of sites in the extraction, deposition and
processing of sand, gravel, soil, rock and other natural earth products or
the impounding of waters.
(c) A permit under this division will not be required for the following:
(1) The excavation, removal or storage of rock, sand, dirt, gravel, clay or
other material preparatory to construction of a building thereon
pursuant to a duly issued building permit;
Page 1 of 5
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IV; DIVISION 3
(2) Moving dirt for construction of roads or to provide for surface water
drainage as provided on an approved plat;
(3) Moving dirt for landscaping purposes on a lot already occupied by a
residential structure;
(4) Excavation or dirt removal incidental to construction of sewer and
water mains, highway construction or other public projects;
(5) Minor agricultural excavation or storage or minor conservation work.
Section 74-138. Application.
(a) Application for a conditional use permit for excavation, deposition, or
processing in accordance with this section shall follow the procedure established
for conditional use permits in Division 2 of this Article.
(b) The applicant shall furnish such information as is required by Division 2 of this
Article, and additionally shall include:
(1) The true name and address of the applicant, and/or owner of the
property under construction.
(2) The period of time for which the operation is estimated to continue.
(3) A full description of the total parcel and the specific area of the parcel
in which the applicant intends to conduct the activities for which the
permit is requested.
(4) The purpose of proposed excavation, deposition or processing.
(5) The estimated quantity of materials to be excavated, extracted, removed
from or deposited on the area for which the permit is requested.
(6) The long range re-use plans of the applicant for the future development
of the area for which the permit is requested.
(7) The location of public road access and egress to and from the
excavation or deposition site and the anticipated primary routing of all
vehicles hauling extracted material within one-half mile of the site.
(8) The topography in the area for which the proposed permit applies. The
required surveys shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor or
engineer, shall be drawn to a scale of not more than 100 feet to an inch
and shall be drawn with contour intervals of not more than two feet
and/or cross section maps on a grid that will accurately show the
configuration of the site:
a. As it exists at the time of application;
b. As it will appear at the end of the one year permit; and
c. As it will exist upon completion of the operation.
Page 2 of 5
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IV; DIVISION 3
(9) Plans for the following shall be submitted indicating how the items
shall be established, constructed or provided for at the site.
a. A source of water, disposal of water and re-use of water.
b. Test results indicating the exact nature and source of the
materials to be extracted, stored, processed or used for fill.
c. Plans for drainage, erosion control, sedimentation control and
dust control.
(10) A comprehensive re-use plan showing that suitable provision will be
made for the restoration of the area so that it will not become a health
or safety hazard or a nuisance. Such plan shall include the final
elevations, slopes and a plan for the replacement of subsoil and topsoil.
Where the City deems it practical and necessary, such plans shall
include adjoining related areas where excavations have previously been
made and remain under the control of the owner of the land on which
the excavation is to be done or under the control of the person or party
to do the excavating.
Section 74-139. Special Requirements.
(a) Excavations made to a water producing depth must meet the following
requirements:
(1) The depth must be such that a permanent water body will be
established.
(2) All banks shall be sloped to the water line at a slope which shall not be
steeper than three feet horizontal to one foot vertical.
(3) All banks shall be sodded or surfaced with a soil of quality at least
equal to the topsoil of land areas immediately surrounding and to a
depth of at least three inches; or approved rip-rapping, where
applicable.
(4) Such topsoil as required shall be planted with trees, shrubs, legumes, or
grasses upon the parts of such area where revegetation is possible.
(b) Excavations not made to a water-producing depth must be graded or backfilled
and shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Such grading or backfilling shall be made with non-noxious,
nonflammable, noncombustible solids.
(2) The graded or backfilled area shall not collect and permit stagnant
water to remain there; unless ponding areas are created as part of the reuse
plan with a specific function proposed.
(3) The peaks and depressions of the area shall be reduced to a surface
which will result in a gently rolling topography in substantial
conformity to the land area immediately surrounding; and which will
minimize erosion due to rainfall.
Page 3 of 5
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IV; DIVISION 3
(4) Such graded or backfilled area shall be sodded or surfaced with soil of
a quality at least equal to the topsoil of land areas immediately
surrounding, and to a depth of at least three inches.
(5) Such topsoil as required in subsection (b)(4) of this section shall be
planted with trees, shrubs, legumes or grasses upon the parts of such
area where revegetation is possible.
Section 74-140. Conditions of Permit.
Prior to the granting of a permit or after a permit has been granted, in addition to the
special requirements enumerated in this Article, the Council may require the applicant to
whom such permit is issued or the owner or user of the property on which the excavation,
deposition, processing or impounding of waters are located, to:
(a) Fences: Properly fence any pit or excavation;
(b) Slopes: Slope the banks and otherwise properly guard and keep any pit or
excavation in such condition as not to be dangerous from caving or sliding
banks;
(c) Drainage: Properly drain, fill or level any pit or excavation, after created, so as
to make the pit or excavation safe and healthful as the City Council shall
determine;
(d) Containment: Keep any excavation, deposition, or impounded waters within the
limits for which the particular permit is granted;
(e) Transporting materials: Transport material to, from and within one-half mile of
the excavation or deposition site, only upon and along such highways, streets or
other public ways as the City Council shall order and direct;
(f) Impounded waters: Provide, for the purpose of retaining impounded water, a
container of sufficient strength and durability and maintain such container in
safe and proper condition;
(g) Crushing: Conduct no activities of crushing gravel, rocks or any other materials
or substances without first receiving the expressed consent of the City Council;
(h) Hours of operation: All operations shall be conducted only between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., except in the case of public emergency such as floods
or whenever any reasonable or necessary repairs to equipment are required to be
made;
(i) Setback: Extraction and processing shall not be conducted closer than 50 feet to
the boundary of any parcel on which such operations are in process, unless the
adjoining parcel is owned or under the control of the mining operator.
Excavation and processing shall not be made closer than 50 feet to the right-ofway
line of any existing or platted street, road, or highway, except that
excavating may be conducted within such limits in order to reduce the elevations
thereof in conformity to the existing or platted street, road, or highway.
(j) Noise: All equipment used for excavation and reclamation and processing shall
be constructed, maintained and operated in such manner as to eliminate, as far as
Page 4 of 5
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IV; DIVISION 3
is practicable, noises and vibrations which are injurious or substantially
annoying to persons living in the vicinity. The use of explosives shall require
specific City approval, upon reasonable conditions.
(k) Dust and dirt: All equipment shall be constructed, maintained and operated in
such a manner as to minimize, as far as is practicable, dust conditions which are
injurious or substantially annoying to persons living in the vicinity. All
operations shall meet the standards of the state pollution control agency. All
access roads on the site operating to public highways, roads, or streets or to
adjoining property shall be paved, treated or watered as far as is practicable, so
as to minimize dust conditions.
(l) Progress surveys: Prepare and submit progress surveys of current ground
elevations, upon the request of the City Council.
(m) Inspection: At all reasonable times permit the City Manager or any designee of
the City Manager to enter upon any premises, for which an application is
pending or issued, for the purpose of making inspection to enforce this chapter.
(n) Bond: Post a surety bond, in such form and sum as the City Council may
require, conditioned to pay the City:
(1) The cost and expense of repairing any highways, streets, or other public
ways within the City made necessary by the special burden resulting
from hauling and transporting thereon by the applicant in the removal
of rock, sand, dirt, gravel, clay or other like material;
(2) The cost and expense expended by the City, in case of abandonment or
failure to complete the project specified by the permit, for returning the
site to a safe and usable condition, and further, to comply with all the
requirements of this section and the particular permit;
(3) To save the City free and harmless from any and all suits or claims for
damages resulting from the negligent excavation, removal or storage of
rock, sand, dirt, gravel, clay or other like materials with the City;
(4) Applicant shall fulfill such other requirements as the City Council shall
from time to time deem proper and necessary for the protection of the
citizens and the general welfare; and
(5) Applicant shall secure required permits from other involved agencies
prior to commencing operation under the terms of this chapter.
Section 74-141. Records.
Accurate weekly records of site operations shall be maintained. Volume of materials in
tons or cubic yards shall be recorded in a manner acceptable to the City and shall include
the type of materials extracted, processed or deposited. These records shall be available at
all times for review and inspection by the City.
Sections 74-142 – 74-160. Reserved.
Page 5 of 5
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IV; DIVISION 4
CHAPTER 74. ZONING
ARTICLE IV. Conditional Uses
DIVISION 4. Miscellaneous Conditional Use Permits
Section 74-161. Moving of Buildings.
(a) Generally. It is unlawful for any person to move a building within the City
without first obtaining a conditional use permit. Prior to submission of a request
for a conditional use permit to the planning commission and City Council, the
building inspector must certify compliance with the following:
(1) The building, after being moved, must be worth at least 50 percent of
the cost of a similar new building.
(2) The City Manager or his designee has certified that all sewer, water,
and electric bills against the property on which the building in currently
located are paid, that all sewer connections have been plugged, all
water connections have been disconnected, and all taxes against the
property are paid in full, if the site is located in the City.
(3) The building to be moved complies in all respects with the building
code, this chapter, and all other applicable ordinances. The owner of
the building to be moved must submit detailed plans showing changes
that will be made to the building to the building inspector for review
and approval.
(4) The building to be moved is structurally safe to move without
endangering persons or property in the City.
(b) Application for a conditional use permit. A person seeking issuance of a moving
permit must first file an application for a conditional use permit to the Planning
Director. The application must include the following:
(1) A certificate from the building inspector that the building or structure
meets the requirements of the building code.
(2) The legal description of the premises from which the building is to be
moved.
(3) The legal description of the premises to which the building will be
moved.
(4) A certificate of survey from a registered land surveyor showing the
proposed location of the building on the premises to which the building
will be moved.
(5) A rendering showing the proposed:
a. Grade and elevation as it relates to adjacent lots;
b. Elevation of the first floor; and
c. Drainage and fill requirements.
Page 1 of 3
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IV; DIVISION 4
(6) Photos showing:
a. All sides of the building or structure; and
b. The proposed building location.
(7) The highways, streets, and other property over which the building is
proposed to be moved.
(8) Evidence that the applicant has no charges or fees owing to the City
and that all taxes and other charges against the lot to which, and from
which, the building is to be moved are currently paid, if the lot or lots
are located in the City.
(9) Evidence, such as a bill of sale, showing that the applicant is entitled to
move the building.
(10) The application fee as established by the City Council.
(11) A bond, letter of credit, or certified check from the property owner for
$5,000.00, payable to the City, to insure that the structure is properly
removed from the former property, located on the proposed property,
and attached to the foundation in compliance with the permit, building
code, and this chapter.
(12) Any additional information requested by the City necessary to review
the conditional use permit request.
(c) Conditional use permit approval. In reviewing a request for a conditional use
permit to allow the moving of a structure, the Planning Commission and City
Council shall determine that the following conditions are met:
(1) That the structure will, in the new location, conform to the general
neighborhood character. The following is a nonexclusive list of factors
to be considered in determining neighborhood compatibility.
a. The main entry feature (which should not be the garage door)
is prominently placed on the elevation facing the street.
b. A linear, repetitive streetscape appearance and building
facades are avoided by providing variation between the front
elevations or through landscaping.
c. Front yard landscaping plans are submitted and approved and
will be completed as part of the project.
d. The structure is compatible in scale, mass, form and color with
adjacent structures and the pattern of the surrounding area.
e. The actual or apparent height of the structure has been
considered in relation to adjoining structures. This is
especially applicable where buildings are located very close to
each other.
Page 2 of 3
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IV; DIVISION 4
f. The structure is architecturally compatible.
(2) Placement of the structure, as well as the structure itself, conforms to
all City Codes and ordinances.
(d) Denial. The City Council may refuse to issue a conditional use permit to allow
the moving of a building into the City if the Council finds that:
(1) Any requirement of any fee or deposit requirement has not been met.
(2) The building is too large to move, or that no routes are available to be
used, without endangering persons or property or seriously
inconveniencing traffic in the City.
(3) The proposed route includes use of private property, and no consent
from the owner has been obtained.
(4) For any reasons, persons or property in the City would be endangered
by the moving of a building.
Sections 74-162—74-190. Reserved.
Page 3 of 3
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 1
Page 1 of 13
CHAPTER 74. ZONING
ARTICLE V. District Regulations
DIVISION 1. Generally
Section 74-191. Uses and activities restricted to specific districts.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter:
(a) Charitable gaming. Establishments in which charitable gambling has been
licensed by the State, pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Chapter 349, shall not be
located in a residential district.
Section 74-192. Planned unit developments.
(a) Application and short name.
(1) Application. This section shall apply to planned unit development
zoning districts.
(2) Short name. The term "planned unit development" may be referred to
as PUD in this Code.
(b) Purpose and intent. Planned unit development districts are designed to achieve
the following purposes:
(1) To provide for various types and combinations of land uses that take
advantage of large-scale site planning.
(2) To allow diversification of land uses as they relate to each other in a
physical and environmental arrangement, while insuring compliance
with the provision of this Code.
(3) To encourage and permit unified planning to achieve a compatible
mixture and variety of land uses within the planned unit development
district and with the existing and anticipated development in the
surrounding area.
(4) To promote economical and efficient land use, an improved level of
amenities, appropriate and harmonious variety, creative design and
sensitivity to the natural environment. Planned unit development
districts may be established where tracts suitable in location, area, and
character will be planned and developed on a unified basis. Suitability
of tracts for the development proposed shall be determined with
reference to the existing and prospective character of surrounding
development.
(5) The procedures established in this section are intended as a substitute
for strict application of the underlying zoning district standards in
recognition of the fact that traditional density, bulk, spacing and use
regulations, may impose inappropriate and unduly rigid restrictions
upon the development or redevelopment of parcels which lend
themselves to an individual, planned approach. In addition, a
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 1
Page 2 of 13
development plan should be designed to ensure that the following
general goals will be achieved:
a. The design of the proposed development promotes
achievement of the stated purposes of the City community
plan (comprehensive plan);
b. The proposed development efficiently utilizes the available
land while protecting and preserving the natural features;
c. The proposed development provides for harmonious and
coherent site and building design that creates a sense of place;
d. The proposed development provides greater densities and
variety in the type of environments available to City residents;
and
e. The proposed development provides transitions in land use in
keeping with the character of adjacent land uses.
(c) Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to planned unit developments:
Density means the number of residential dwelling units per acre.
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms in a dwelling designed for occupancy
by one family for living purposes and having its own permanently installed
cooking and sanitary facilities.
Dwelling, attached (group, row or townhouse) means a dwelling joined to one
or more other dwellings by a party wall or walls.
Dwelling, detached means a dwelling unit entirely surrounded by open space.
Integrated design means a harmonious selection of uses in groupings of
buildings, services, parking areas, traffic and pedestrian circulation and open
spaces, all planned and designed as an integrated unit.
Intensity means the extent of development considering such factors as land
coverage by buildings, the number of stories, the floor area ratio, the bulk of the
buildings, the proximity of buildings on a site in relation to each other, etc.
Planned commercial development (PCD) means a planned development to
accommodate retail, service, commercial, or office uses, or a combination of
such uses, and appurtenant common areas and accessory uses incidental to the
predominant uses.
Planned development means an area of a minimum contiguous size, as specified
by ordinance, to be planned, developed, operated, and maintained according to
plan as a single entity and containing one or more structures with appurtenant
common areas.
Planned industrial development (PID) means a planned development consisting
of primarily of industrial uses, but may include retail service uses as well as
recreational facilities to accommodate the work force.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 1
Page 3 of 13
Planned residential development (PRD) means a planned development
containing one or more residential structures or planned unit residential clusters;
appropriate commercial, public, or quasi-public uses may be included if such
uses are primarily for the benefit of the residential development.
Planned transit-oriented development (PTOD) means a planned development
containing one or more residential clusters and one or more areas of retail,
service and office uses or industrial uses or a combination of such uses designed
to accommodate area mass transit services and including appurtenant common
areas and accessory uses incidental to the predominant uses.
Planned unit development (PUD) means an area of minimum contiguous size, as
specified by ordinance, to be planned, developed, operated, and maintained as a
single entity and containing one or more residential clusters or planned unit
residential developments or one or more public, quasi-public, commercial, or
industrial areas in such ranges or ratios of nonresidential uses to residential uses
as specified in the ordinance.
Open space, common means land within or related to a development, not
individually owned or dedicated for public use, that is designed and intended for
the common use or enjoyment of the residents and their guests and may include
such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and
appropriate.
Open space, private means common open space, the use of which is normally
limited to the occupants of a single dwelling or building or property.
Open space, public means open space dedicated to the City and maintained by it
for the use and enjoyment of the general public.
Original district means the zoning district from which land is proposed to be
rezoned to a planned unit development.
Street, private means a street on the interior of a development which is jointly
owned, constructed and maintained by the developer or homeowner's
association, is designed and constructed in conformance with the specifications
determined by the City engineer, and is not an essential part of the circulation
plan of the City.
Street, public means a street which is dedicated to and maintained by the City.
Unified control means property in single ownership or under the management
and supervision of a central authority, or otherwise subject to such long-term
leases or other ownership controls as the Council deems necessary.
(d) General regulations.
(1) Effect of planned unit development district approval. Approval of a
planned unit development district shall constitute an amendment to the
zoning map. PUD approval affecting lands within the Mississippi River
Critical Area Corridor or the Rum River Management District is
contingent upon approval by the Department of Natural Resources in
accordance with legal procedures. Designation of a property as one of
the types of planned unit development districts in accordance with an
approved development plan shall supersede all existing overlay districts
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 1
Page 4 of 13
such as the Mississippi River Critical Area Corridor, the Rum River
management District, the Floodplain Management District, or the
Shoreland Management District. Such property shall, for zoning
purposes, be identified by the letters for the appropriate planned unit
development district, followed by an identifying number.
(2) Departure from original zoning district regulations. Except for lands
within the Mississippi River Critical Area Corridor, the Rum River
Management District, the Floodplain Management District, or a
Shoreland Management District, the various zoning regulations and
requirements (e.g. use, building setback, height, etc.) which may apply
to the original zoning district may be considered as guidelines only and
may be departed from in the approval of a planned unit development.
More restrictive zoning regulations and requirements for the lands
within the Mississippi River Critical Area Corridor, the Rum River
Management District, the Floodplain Management District, or the
Shoreland Management District shall apply, except as approved by the
Department of Natural Resources.
(3) Design and unified control. All planned unit developments shall
include integrated design and shall be developed under unified control.
(4) Coordination with subdivision regulations. Subdivision review of this
Code shall be carried out simultaneously with review of a proposed
planned unit development.
(5) Minimum district area. Planning unit development districts (PCD, PID,
PRD, PTOD), which may consist of a parcel or contiguous parcels of
land, will not be less than two acres in size. Tracts of less than two
acres shall be approved only if the Applicant can demonstrate that a
project of superior design can be achieved or that greater compliance
with comprehensive pan goals and policies or adopted master plans can
be attained through the creation of a PUD district.
(6) Uses and densities permitted. The development plan shall specify, both
for the project as a whole and/or for subareas within the project, those
principal and accessory uses and development densities that are to be
permitted. The City Council may include or exclude uses from the
development plan or include uses with attached conditions as
determined appropriate to achieve the intent of this section. In making
the determination of the uses and development densities to be permitted
within the planned unit development district, the Council shall consider
the compatibility and relationship of uses within the project, the
compatibility and relationship of permitted uses adjoining or in
proximity to the planned unit development district, the appropriateness
of permitted uses for the area in general and their overall impact on the
community, and the consistency of the permitted uses with the City
community plan and other adopted plans and policies.
(e) Planned unit development districts and allowable uses.
(1) Establishment of planned unit development districts. The following
table denotes the types of planned unit development districts, the
abbreviations for such planned unit development districts, and the
allowable uses within each planned unit development district:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 1
Page 5 of 13
PUD Districts Abbreviations Allowable Uses
Planned Commercial District PCD Retail uses listed in the B-1, B-
2, B-3, and B-4 district
standards
Planned Industrial District PID Industrial uses listed in the M-1
district standards.
Planned Residential District PRD Single-family attached or
detached dwellings, duplexes,
townhomes, condos, apartments,
and assisted and independent
living facilities.
Planned Transit Oriented District PTOD Small lot, single-family attached
or detached dwellings;
townhomes, duplexes, condos,
and apartments; assisted or
independent living facilities and
child daycare service; and local
retail, civic uses, offices with
high employee/acre ratio, park
and ride facilities, public
gathering spaces, on-street
transit stops, and sheltered bus
stops.
(2) Mixed land uses. Uses other than the allowable uses listed in subsection
(e)(1) of this section are permitted in a planned unit development
district, provided that:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 1
Page 6 of 13
a. The use is one that is authorized in one of the four types of
planned unit development districts; and
b. Such additional use shall not occupy more than one-third of
the area within the planned unit development.
(f) Planned unit development concept proposal statement. Any person requesting to
establish a planned unit development district shall first submit a planned unit
development concept statement to the planning director. The purpose of the
planned unit development concept proposal statement is to afford such person an
opportunity to have the general feasibility of a planned unit development
proposal informally reviewed by the City, without incurring substantial expense.
(1) Required information. A planned unit development concept proposal
statement shall provide the following information:
a. Name and address of persons requesting establishment of the
planned unit development district;
b. An original and six copies of the sketch plan which identifies
the location and delineates the boundary line of the proposed
planned unit development district;
c. A detailed written description of the proposed planned unit
development, which includes project funding and the planning
objectives to be achieved;
d. Conceptual schematic drawings of the proposed planned unit
development;
e. Anticipated development timing for each stage of
development; and
f. Any additional information that would help the City determine
the feasibility of the proposed planned unit development.
(2) Response to the planned unit development concept proposal statement.
Within 20 days after receiving a completed planned unit development
concept proposal statement, the planning director shall produce a
written response to such statement which may include comments and/or
recommendations. A planned unit development application may
proceed only after a response has been submitted to the applicant.
Acceptance of, or response to, the planned unit development concept
proposal by the planning director, shall not constitute, approval of the
planned unit development application, planned unit development
rezoning, final development plan, or related approvals.
(g) Planned unit development application.
(1) Required materials. Upon completion of the required actions in
subsection (f) of this section, the applicant for a planned unit
development shall submit an original and six copies of the application
materials outlined in this subdivision.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 1
Page 7 of 13
a. Materials related to rezoning. Consistent with this chapter, the
applicant shall submit an application and all related materials
to support a rezoning from the original district to one of the
four types of planned unit development districts.
b. Subdivision materials. If the land within a planned unit
development is to be platted, replatted, or subdivided, the
applicant shall submit an application and all related materials
for review of a subdivision consistent with chapter 54 of this
Code.
c. Ownership. A tract of land to be developed as a planned unit
development shall be under the control of:
1. A single owner; or
2. A group of landowners where each owner agrees in
advance to be bound by the conditions and
regulations which will be effective within the district
and to record such covenants, easements and other
provisions with the county recorder/registrar of titles.
d. Project identification materials. The following information
shall be submitted in regard to project identification:
1. A list identifying all current owners, legal and
equitable, of land or improvements within the
proposed planned unit development;
2. A list identifying all proposed owners, legal and
equitable, of land or improvements within the
proposed planned unit development;
3. A list identifying all developers and parties involved
in the development; and
4. Additional information as identified by the planning
director.
e. Preliminary plan submission materials. The following
materials shall be submitted:
1. A site plan indicating the following:
i. The boundaries, dimensions, and area of the
proposed planned unit development district;
ii. The location, dimensions, and gross floor
area of proposed structures;
iii. The proposed land uses for each parcel and
each building, the amount of floor area
devoted for each use, and all areas to be
designated for mixed land uses;
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 1
Page 8 of 13
iv. The location, arrangement, and number of
parking spaces, loading facilities, and mass
transit facilities including bus turnouts and
shelters;
v. The location and dimension of all curb cuts
and driveways, and their relationship to all
existing and proposed public streets; and
vi. The proposed location, design, and
dimension of pedestrian and bicycle
facilities, walks, skyways, plazas, courts or
other related areas.
2. Preliminary building plans, elevations, and general
specifications of materials, and unusual structural
systems, prepared by an architect registered in the
state;
3. A preliminary land/building use profile including
computations of gross and leasable square footage,
housing unit breakdown to square footage, bedrooms,
persons per unit, and parking requirements;
4. A preliminary storm water management plan and site
grading plan including an analysis of the adequacy of
surface drainage, storm sewer and catch basin
drainage, storm water retention, and erosion control;
5. A preliminary plan depicting natural features,
including those to be preserved, as well as existing
vegetation with detailed locations of trees 12 inches
or larger in diameter;
6. A preliminary utility plan showing easements, sewer,
water, and power services of all proposed uses;
7. A preliminary plan showing utilities and utility
easements to remain, to be installed, to be relocated,
and to be removed or vacated;
8. A preliminary landscape plan showing the proposed
location and dimensions of all walls, fences, and
landscape plantings;
9. A plan showing the proposed location and
dimensions of all signs and lighting fixtures,
including the illumination characteristics of all
lighting;
10. A soils map that depicts surface and subsurface
conditions that may affect construction; and
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 1
Page 9 of 13
11. Additional information as required by the planning
director.
f. Legal instruments. As part of the planned unit development
application, the applicant shall submit proposed declarations
of covenants, conditions and restrictions, articles of owners,
associations and all other such documents as the City may
deem necessary to ensure that adequate property control is
provided to protect the individual owner's rights and property
values, to establish responsibility for maintenance and upkeep,
and to ensure continuing compliance with the planned unit
development as approved. The City shall require that such
declarations of covenants, conditions and restrictions, or other
documents provide that, in the event any association or
corporation fails to maintain properties in accordance with the
applicable ordinances and regulations of the City, fails to pay
taxes or assessments on properties as they become due or, in
the event the City incurs any expenses in enforcing its
ordinances or rules or regulations, the City shall have the right
to assess each property its pro rata share of such expenses.
These assessments, together with interest thereon and costs of
collection, shall be a lien on each property against which each
such assessment is made.
(h) Review of planned unit development application.
(1) Procedure. Upon receipt of a completed planned unit development
application and the fee established by the City Council, the following
review procedure shall be followed:
a. Planning commission review. The Planning Commission shall
conduct a public hearing on the planned unit development
application according to the procedures set forth in Minn.
Stats. § 462.357, subd. 3. After the public hearing, the
Planning Commission shall submit its recommendation to the
City Council. The Planning Commission may recommend
approval of the proposal with or without modifications, or
may recommend denial of the planned unit development.
b. City Council consideration. Following action by the Planning
Commission, the City Council shall consider rezoning the area
described in the plan. If the planned unit development plan is
approved, the area shall be rezoned as one of the four types of
planned unit development districts. Pursuant to Minn. Stats. §
15.99, an application for a planned unit development approval
shall be approved or denied within 60 days from the date of its
official and complete submission unless notice of extension is
provided by the City or a time waiver is granted by the
applicant. If applicable, processing of the application through
required state or federal agencies shall extend the review and
decision-making period an additional 60 days unless this
limitation is waived by the applicant. Approval of a planned
unit development shall require a two-thirds vote of the City
Council.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 1
Page 10 of 13
c. Required findings. The findings necessary for approval of a
planned unit development application shall be as follows:
1. The proposed development conforms with the goals
and objective's of the City's community plan and any
applicable redevelopment plans;
2. The proposed development is in substantial
conformity with the purpose and intent of the original
district, and departures from the original district
regulations are justified by the design of the
development;
3. The proposed development is designed in such a
manner as to form a desirable and unified
environment within its own boundaries;
4. The development will not create an excessive burden
on parks, schools, streets, or other public facilities
and utilities which serve or are proposed to serve the
development;
5. The development will not have undue adverse
impacts on neighboring properties; and
6. The terms and conditions proposed to maintain the
integrity of the plan are sufficient to protect the
public interests.
(i) Final development plan. Upon approval of the first reading of the planned unit
development rezoning, but prior to commencement of any construction or
development of land, the applicant shall submit a final development plan which
is consistent with the planned unit development application and any
recommended changes made during the preliminary plan review. Approval of
such final development plan requires a second reading of the ordinance to
establish the planned unit development zoning.
(1) Contents of the final plan. A final development plan shall consist of the
following:
a. If required, a final plat of the land to be developed;
b. All materials required under subsection (g)(1)e, in "final"
form; and
c. Additional information as required by the planning director or
City Council.
(2) Legal instruments. As part of the final development plan, the applicant
shall submit "final" declarations of covenants, conditions and
restrictions, articles of owners, associations and all other such
documents as the City may deem necessary pursuant to subsection
(g)(1)e of this section.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 1
Page 11 of 13
(j) Compliance with the planned unit development plan and final development plan.
(1) Changes. The development of a planned unit development district shall
be in substantial compliance with the approved planned unit
development plan and final development plan. Compliance shall not be
considered substantial if there is:
a. More than ten percent change in floor area in any one
structure;
b. More than a ten percent change in the approved separation of
buildings;
c. Any change in the original approved setbacks from the
property line;
d. More than five percent change in the ground area covered by
the building; and
e. Any change in the ratio of off-street parking and loading space
to gross floor area.
(2) If it is determined that the final development plan is not in substantial
compliance, the final development plan will be referred to the Planning
Commission for review prior to approval by the City Council.
(3) Building permits. A building permit may not be issued for a structure
within the planned unit development district until the planning director
certifies that the structure conforms to the provisions and conditions of
the planned unit development plan and final development plan. Upon
approval by the planning director, the building permit application,
along with the appropriate information required for building permits,
shall be submitted to the building inspector who shall process the
building permit in conformance with the building code.
(4) Certificate of occupancy. Certificates of occupancy shall not be issued
for a structure with the planned unit development district until the
planning director certifies that the structure conforms to the provisions
and conditions of the planned unit development plan and final
development plan. Upon approval by the planning director, the building
inspector shall issue the certificate of occupancy.
(k) Cash escrow. The City Council may require an applicant to provide the City
with a cash escrow or letter of credit or bond prior to the issuance of any
building permits within a planned unit development. Such escrow amount shall
be in an amount of 1.25 times the approved estimated cost of labor and materials
for site improvements and shall be submitted to the planning director. Upon
satisfactory completion of all construction within the planned unit development,
the escrow shall be released by the planning director.
(l) Plan amendments. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on a
proposal to amend a final development plan as it may consider necessary, but at
least one public hearing shall be held. The Planning Commission shall
recommend to the City Council approval with or without modifications, or may
recommend denial of the amendment to the planned unit development. The
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 1
Page 12 of 13
Planning Commission and City Council may consider all factors considered in
connection with rezoning the planned unit development district as well as any
other factors relevant to the public health, safety, and welfare. Any planned unit
development amendment that changes the classification of the planned unit
development district shall require a two-thirds vote of the City Council.
(m) Fees. The application fee for a planned unit development or amendment thereto
shall be established by resolution of the City Council. In addition, legal fees,
consultant fees, and other reasonable costs incurred by the City in its review and
consideration of the planned unit development application shall be paid by the
applicant. The application fee shall be paid at the time of the submission of the
planned unit development application.
(n) Enforcement. If no construction has begun in the planned unit development
within 12 months from the date of approval of the planned unit development,
such approval shall lapse and be of no further effect. The Planning Commission,
upon showing of good cause by the developer, may extend the time for
beginning construction for periods of 12 months.
Section 74-193. Adult Establishment District.
(a) District Established.
(1) This article establishes the Adult Establishment District which overlies
a portion of the M-1 District. All provisions of the M-1 Light
Industrial District. All provisions of the M-1 Light Industrial District
of this Code apply to all uses within the Adult Establishments Districts.
(2) Adult Establishment District. The Adult Establishment District is the
area described as follows:
The south half of the Northeast quarter of Section 35,
Township 32, Range 25, and the Southwest quarter of the
Northwest quarter of Section 36, Township 32, Range 25,
Anoka County, Minnesota.
Sections 74-194 Raising of Crops.
The raising of crops, including community gardens, is permitted on vacant parcels within
the City, subject to the following:
(a) Accessory structures, fencing and other miscellaneous improvements are subject
of the standards of this ordinance.
(b) Dead plants and produce not to be used for composting or other garden
functions shall be removed from the site in a timely manner.
(c) Garbage and other trash shall be removed from the site in a timely manner.
(d) Plantings shall not obstruct any site triangle.
(e) Chemicals, fertilizers or other toxic materials may not drain onto adjacent
properties, into waterways, of onto public rights of way. Chemicals and
flammable materials must be disposed of in accordance with Federal and State
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 1
Page 13 of 13
requirements. If stored on site, they must be kept in a locked structure when
unattended.
Section 74-195 through 74-210. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 1 of 58
CHAPTER 74. ZONING
ARTICLE V. District Regulations.
DIVISION 2. Residential Districts.
Section 74-211. Special requirements for residence districts.
(a) Purpose and application.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish minimum standards
for residential use of properties in the City.
(2) Application of this section. The provisions of this section shall apply to
all R-F, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-5 residence districts.
(b) Floor area requirements.
(1) Single-family dwellings. For single-family dwellings the minimum
ground floor area of the main structure, exclusive of one-story open
porches and garages, shall be as follows:
a. For single-family dwellings built after July 31, 1982,
including manufactured homes built in conformance with
Minnesota Statutes, Section 327.31 to 327.35, that are built on
a full basement or cellar which is at least 7-1/2 feet from floor
to ceiling and underneath the entire structure, excepting
garages:
1. Single-story dwelling, 960 square feet.
2. Story and one-half dwelling, 960 square feet.
3. Two or more story dwelling, 832 square feet.
4. Split entry (or split foyer) dwelling, 960 square feet.
b. For single-family dwellings that are not built on a full
basement or cellar which is a least 7-1/2 feet from floor to
ceiling and underneath the entire structure, excepting garages:
1. Single-story dwelling, 1,200 square feet.
2. Story and on-half dwelling, 1,200 square feet.
3. Two or more story dwelling, 1,040 square feet.
4. Split entry (or split foyer) dwelling, 1,200 square
feet.
(2) Multiple-family dwellings. For multiple-family dwellings the minimum
net floor area shall be as follows:
a. Efficiency dwelling unit, 400 square feet.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 2 of 58
b. One bedroom dwelling unit, 600 square feet.
c. Two bedroom dwelling unit, 800 square feet.
d. Three or more bedrooms per unit shall have an additional 100
square feet of floor area for each bedroom in excess of two
bedrooms.
For purposes of measurement, the net floor area of a dwelling
unit shall mean that area within a building used as a single
dwelling unit, and shall be measured from the inside walls to
the center of partitions bounding the dwelling unit being
measured, but shall not include public stairways, public
entries, public foyers, public balconies, or unenclosed public
porches, separate utility rooms, furnace areas or rooms,
storage areas not within the apartment or garages.
(c) Design and construction requirements in multiple-family residence districts. The
design and construction requirements in multiple-family residence districts shall
be as follows:
(1) Design review. A site plan for a multiple-family dwelling must be
reviewed by the planning commission and approved by the City
Council prior to construction.
(2) Accessory buildings. The City Council may require common walls for
accessory buildings where common walls will eliminate unsightly and
hazardous areas. Exteriors of accessory buildings shall have the same
exterior finish as the main structure or some other compatible finish
approved during the site plan review.
(3) Recreation and open space. Multiple-family residential projects shall
contain an adequate amount of land for park, recreation or local open
space use, exclusive of sump and drainage areas, consistent with the
requirements of chapter 54 of this Code.
(d) Home occupations.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to prevent competition with
business districts and to provide a means, through the establishment of
specific standards and procedures, by which home occupations can be
conducted in residential neighborhoods without jeopardizing the health,
safety and general welfare of the surrounding neighborhood.
(2) Application. Subject to the nonconforming structure and use provisions
of this Chapter 74, all occupations conducted in the home shall comply
with the provisions of this subsection.
(3) Inspection. The City hereby reserves the right, upon approval of any
home occupation, to inspect the premises in which an occupation is
being conducted to insure compliance with the provisions of this
subdivision or any conditions additionally imposed.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 3 of 58
(4) Violations. After two nuisances or Code violation complaints have been
made and verified with written notices to the home occupation, a public
hearing may be called to reconsider the home occupation within 60
days of the last complaint.
(5) Revocation. An interim use permit for a home occupation may be
revoked if (i) the property is found to be in violation of the conditions
listed in the interim use permit or (ii) if access to the property for the
purpose of making an inspection is refused to the zoning administrator
or their designee. The same process established for granting an interim
use permit for a home occupation shall be followed when considering
revocation of a interim use permit for a home occupation.
(6) Penalty. Violation of the home occupation performance standards shall
be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions as contained in
this chapter.
(7) Performance standards. Performance standards for home occupations
shall be as follows:
a. The home occupation must be clearly incidental and
secondary to the residential use of the premises, shall not
change the residential character thereof, and shall not result in
incompatibility or disturbance to the surrounding residential
uses.
b. No home occupation shall require external alterations or
involve construction of features not customarily found in
dwellings except where required to comply with the state fire
and building code regulations.
c. No retail sales of products fabricated off the premises is
allowed except for occasional sales of retail products if the
dwelling serves as an office for a person regularly engaged in
retail sales outside the dwelling but has no other office and if
such occasional sales are incidental to and not the primary
purpose of the home occupation.
d. No stock in-trade other than that permitted under subsection
(d)(7)c of this section shall be kept or sold on the premises.
e. Only members of the family occupying the dwelling unit may
carry on the home occupation.
f. There shall be no exterior display, exterior signs, interior
displays or interior signs which are visible from outside the
dwelling, unless approved with an interim use permit and the
property fronts a road designated as an “A” Minor Arterial by
the Future Functional Classification Plan Map in the Anoka
Community Plan. Home occupation business signs may be
either wall or freestanding-type signs. Freestanding signs shall
be a maximum of five square feet in area, a minimum of five
feet from property lines, shall not be within the sight triangle
of any intersection or driveway, and shall be limited to six feet
in overall height.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 4 of 58
g. No outside storage or display is permitted.
h. No significant increase in levels of noise, dust, smoke, gas,
heat, vibration, glare, fumes, odor or electrical interference
shall be detectable to the normal senses off the premises.
i. No on street parking of vehicles related to the home
occupation is permitted.
j. No more than one client or customer may patronize the
dwelling unit at one time.
k. The space devoted to the occupation shall have an inside
entrance into the dwelling area.
l. All home occupations shall be conducted entirely within the
dwelling and not in an attached or detached garage or in an
accessory building.
m. No more than 25 percent of the gross floor area of the
dwelling unit shall be used for the occupation.
n. There is no increase in sewer, water, gas, electricity, or
garbage usage in excess of what is normal in a residential
neighborhood such that the neighborhood is adversely
affected.
o. No customer waiting areas are allowed.
p. All licenses or permits required to carry on the occupation
shall be obtained.
q. All home occupations shall be conducted at the sole risk of the
dwelling occupants conducting the home occupation. The
City shall not be responsible or liable to the dwelling
occupants or any third party as a result of the home
occupation, and the occupants conducting the home
occupation shall indemnify and hold the City harmless from
all claims and causes of action associated with the home
occupation.
(8) Permitted home occupations. The following home occupations and
similar occupations as determined by the City Council are permitted
accessory uses in all residential districts only if all conditions in
subsection (d)(7) of this section are fully observed.
a. Artist, author, composer, sculptor.
b. Home crafts, such as model making, rug weaving,
woodworking, and similar activities, provided that no
machinery or equipment shall be used or employed other than
that which would customarily be found in the home, including
machinery or equipment that would ordinarily be employed in
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 5 of 58
connection with a hobby or avocation not conducted for gain
or profit.
c. Dressmakers, seamstresses and tailors.
d. Beauticians and barber shops.
e. Home offices for accountants, architects, engineers, lawyers,
realtors, insurance agents, brokers, clergy, consultants,
contractors, land surveyors, musicians, salesman, sales
representative, manufacturer's representative, travel agent,
home builders and home repair contractors.
f. Mail order, not including retail sales from the site.
g. Music and art teachers or other tutoring services.
h. Telephone answering.
i. "Work at home" activities where employees of a business,
located at another location, perform work for the business in
their own residence, provided all physical contact between the
business and the employee occurs at the place of business and
not the residence, other than the initial installation of any
equipment or other work facilities. The work activities of the
employee shall conform with all other requirements of this
subsection.
j. Food preparation for sale, when registered with the
Department of Agriculture under the Cottage Food exemption
in Minnesota Statute 28A.152.
k. Other occupations that fully comply with the standards in
subsection (d) (7) of this section.
(9) Home occupations allowed with an interim use permit. The following
home occupations are permitted as an accessory use upon approval of
an interim use permit by the City Council after recommendation by the
planning commission:
a. Home occupations with the following characteristics:
1. A maximum of one outside employee.
2. Outside parking of no more than one commercial
type vehicle identified for business purposes not to
exceed one-ton capacity and used for both personal
and business transportation. The vehicle is to be
owned and registered to an occupant of the property
and parked in a screened location.
b. Ceramic classes with a kiln up to six cubic feet in size.
c. Domestic animal grooming.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 6 of 58
d. Other home occupations which substantially comply with the
standards set forth in subsection (d)(7) of this section.
e. Other proposed home occupations that are determined to be
similar in character to those listed in subsection (d)(8) of this
section.
(10) Particular home occupations prohibited. The following uses, and
similar uses, shall not be permitted as a home occupation in any
residential district:
a. Antique shops, boutiques, dress shops, and gift shops.
b. Photo studio, processing lab, and portrait studios.
c. Restaurants, coffee shops, and tearooms.
d. Offices for physicians, dentists, veterinarians, physical or
massage therapists, and chiropractors.
e. Animal hospital or kennel.
f. Auto repair and painting, including the repair of engines,
motor vehicles, motorcycles, and heavy equipment.
g. Dancing schools and studios.
h. Dispatching of transfer and moving vans at the site.
i. Furniture repair and refinishing.
j. Palm reading or fortune telling.
k. Preparation of food for sale, unless specifically permitted in
this Section.
l. Radio, television and appliance repair shops.
m. Raising of animals for sale.
n. Shops for contractors and tradesmen, such as electricians,
plumbers and carpenters.
o. Sign painting.
p. Boarding and lodging houses, unless specifically permitted by
the district regulations.
q. Tattoo business.
r. Tanning salons.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 7 of 58
s. Any occupation that requires a federal firearms license,
including the sale of firearms; except where each of the
following conditions exist:
1. An occupant residing on the premises holds a valid
and current federal firearms license and has held the
license continuously since December 31, 1995;
2. The occupant had an established occupation at the
premises that required a federal firearms license as of
December 31, 1995, and has not discontinued such
occupation; and
3. At the time of the most recent renewal of the
occupant's federal firearms license:
i. The premises were inspected by the City and
the City certified that the premises (i) were
equipped with an adequate security system
and (ii) were otherwise adequately protected
against theft of firearms from the premises;
ii. The occupant has met all the criteria for
licensing under the federal firearms code
and the individual, in the opinion of the City
police department, has been found to be
honest, reliable and of good character; and
iii. The police department has not received
more than three complaints within the past
five years related to this use of the premises.
t. Trash hauler operations other than a home office.
u. Any home occupation which does not substantially comply
with the standards set forth in subsection (d)(7) of this section.
(11) Application materials. Prior to the issuance of an interim use permit for
a home occupation an application must be submitted which contains the
following information:
a. The owner of the property and the person who will be
conducting the home occupation.
b. The street address of the dwelling.
c. The type of home occupation.
d. The type of equipment that will be used.
e. The days and hours which the home occupation will be
conducted.
f. A description of any motor vehicles which will be used in
connection with the occupation, and whether or not the
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 8 of 58
applicant has had any previous denials for a similar request
elsewhere.
g. A plan or drawing of the dwelling which shows clearly and in
reasonable detail the portion of the dwelling which is to be
used for the home occupation, the number of square feet of
living area contained in the dwelling, and the number of
square feet to be used for the home occupation.
The application for an interim use permit for a home
occupation will be processed according to section 74-34.
(12) Amendment to an interim use permit for a home occupation. The
applicant must seek an amendment to the permit in order to change the
conditions set forth in the home occupation interim use permit. The
amendment will be processed according to section 74-34.
(e) Division of two-family dwellings. Two-family dwellings may be divided into
single parcels of record with the party wall acting as the dividing lot line subject
to the following conditions:
(1) Each of the lots created in subdividing lands on which a two-family
structure is located shall be equal in area or as near equal as is
reasonably possible.
(2) Each lot so created shall contain no less than 40 percent of the
minimum land area requirement for each unit in a two-family dwelling,
and shall be shown on a registered survey.
(3) Except for setbacks along the common property line, all other setback
and yard requirements shall be met.
(4) To the extent reasonably feasible, separate services shall be provided to
each residential unit for sanitary sewer, water, electricity, natural gas,
telephone, and other utilities.
(5) The two-family units, either existing or proposed, must be constructed
in a side-by-side manner.
(6) To protect the safety and property of the owner and occupants of each
individual unit, no existing duplex structure may be split into two
separate ownerships unless and until the common party wall fire rating
is brought up to new construction standards contained in the state
building code which currently requires a one-hour rating for the party
wall and no opening shall be allowed in the party wall. Party walls
must provide sound transmission control ratings as per the state
building code.
(7) The owner of property to be subdivided shall execute and record at
their expense a declaration of covenant, conditions and restrictions, as
prepared by the City attorney. Such document is necessary to protect
the rights of the individual owners sharing a single structure and the
public as it relates to maintenance, repair, and construction in case of
damage to the original structure. The declarations, covenants,
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 9 of 58
conditions, and restrictions shall provide protection to the property
owners and the City on the following subjects:
a. Building and use restrictions.
b. Party walls.
c. Relationship among owners of adjoining living units,
including arbitration of disputes.
d. Separate or shared services.
The intent of these regulations is to promote harmony between
the neighbors sharing a single structure and to protect the City
and neighborhood from improper maintenance and/or disputes
such as the following examples: one living unit being painted
one color and the other unit having a different color or one
side of the structure having one roof color and type of roof and
the other side being of a different type and color. The City is
concerned that all such disputes be avoided and that the
regulations contained in this subsection are designed to
establish the rights of the parties prior to their entering into
joint ownership of one structure. The City shall be a
beneficiary of these declarations, covenants, conditions, and
restrictions.
(8) The authority to divide a single structure containing two dwelling units
shall be subject to chapter 54 this Code relating to park dedication and
other subdivision requirements and the City Council may impose other
reasonable conditions.
Section 74-212. R-F farm residence district.
(a) Permitted uses. In an R-F farm residence district, no building or land shall be
used or divided, and no building shall be erected, converted, or structurally
altered, unless otherwise provided in this chapter, except for one or more of the
following uses:
(1) Single-family dwellings.
(2) Nursery or growing fields, not to include retail sales.
(3) Public owned parks and public owned playgrounds.
(4) Golf courses.
(5) Railroad rights of way for through trains, but no switching, storage or
other railroad operations.
(6) A State licensed residential facility or a housing with services
establishment registered under Minnesota Statutes Chapter 144 D,
serving six (6) or fewer persons as allowed under Minnesota Statutes
462.357 Subd (7), as amended.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 10 of 58
(7) A State licensed daycare facility serving twelve or fewer persons as
allowed under Minnesota Statutes 462.357 Subd 7, as amended.
(8) A group family daycare facility licensed under Minnesota Rules
9502.0315 to 9502.0445, to serve fourteen (14) or fewer children as
allowed under Minnesota Statutes 462.357 Subd 7, as amended. A
conditional use permit obtained pursuant to Section 36-17 of the Code
is required for the operation of such schools or facilities on nonresidential
premises within this zone. Residential facilities whose
primary purpose is to treat juveniles who have violated criminal
statutes related to sex offenses or have been adjudicated delinquent on
the basis of conduct in violation of criminal statutes relating to sex
offenses shall not be considered a permitted use.
(9) Essential services, including electrical, gas, water, sewer, distribution
and collection lines, pumping facilities for water and sewer systems,
rights-of-way for transportation modes and telephone switching
facilities.
State law reference--Certain state licensed facilities as permitted uses, Minn. Stats. § 462.357, subd. 7.
(b) Accessory Structures and Uses. Within the R-F District, the following
accessory structures and uses shall be permitted provided they are subordinate
to, associated with and located on the same lot as a permitted use. An accessory
structure or use shall not predate a principal structure or use, unless granted an
interim use permit as permitted under this Chapter.
(1) Private recreation facilities – swimming pools, tennis courts, etc. for the
use and enjoyment of residents and guests.
(2) Uses customarily incidental to the permitted, conditional or interim
uses allowed in the district.
(3) Private garages and off-street parking and loading as regulated by this
Chapter.
(4) Signs as regulated by this Chapter.
(5) The operation of necessary facilities and equipment in connection with
schools, universities, hospitals, colleges, and other institutions
permitted or conditionally permitted in the district.
(6) Recreation, refreshment and service buildings in public parks and
playgrounds.
(7) Boarding or renting of rooms to not more than two (2) individuals per
dwelling unit as regulated by this Chapter and the Property
Maintenance Code of the City Code. A person providing home
healthcare shall not be considered as a boarder or renter for purposes of
this Ordinance.
(8) Home occupations as permitted by this Chapter.
(9) Recreational vehicles and equipment parking as regulated by this
Chapter.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 11 of 58
(10) Tool houses, sheds and other structures for the storage of domestic
supplies and equipment.
(11) Radio and televisions receiving antennas, including single satellite dish
TVRO’s (television receiving only) one meter or less in diameter,
short-waver radio dispatching antennas, and antennas necessary for the
operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers and
federally licensed amateur radio station if the antenna is thirty-five (35)
feet or less in height.
(12) Outdoor sales and fund-raising events sponsored by non-profit uses
allowed in this district and limited to six (6) events per calendar year,
no one event to exceed four (4) days.
(13) Garage and yard sales limited to three (3) events per calendar year, no
one event to exceed three (3) days.
(14) Model homes and temporary real estate offices until development is
completed.
(15) Solar equipment.
(16) Minor mass transit facilities including benches, which may include
advertising signs.
(17) Air conditioning machinery located on an exterior pad.
(18) Home schools.
(c) Conditional uses. The following uses of land or structures are permitted in the
R-F farm residence district if granted a conditional use permit:
(1) Churches.
(2) Libraries.
(3) A group family daycare facility under Minnesota Rules 9502.0315 to
9502.0445, to serve fourteen (14) or fewer children and operated on
non-residential premises within this zone.
(4) Other uses similar to those permitted by this section, as determined by
the City.
(d) Interim Uses. The following uses of land or structures are permitted in the R-F
Farm Residential District if granted an Interim Use Permit.
(a) Home occupations as regulated by this Chapter.
(b) Radio and television receiving antennas, including single satellite dish
TVRO’s (television receiving only) one meter or less in diameter,
short-wave radio dispatching antennas, and antennas necessary for the
operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers and
federally licensed amateur radio station if the antenna is over thirty-five
(35) feet in height.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 12 of 58
(c) Land filling and excavation/grading operations, including mining, if
more than 1000 cubic yards of material.
(d) Temporary classroom structures.
(e) Temporary real estate offices until development is completed.
(f) Major mass transit facilities, including park and ride facilities and intermodal
transfer points and bus shelters.
(g) Other uses similar to those permitted by this Subdivision or determined
to be consistent with the standards for interim uses as regulated by this
Chapter.
(e) Accessory uses. The following are permitted accessory uses in the R-F farm
residence district:
Accessory structures:
(1) Where the principal use is a single-family dwelling, garages shall
contain at least 440 square feet, but the total area of all accessory uses
shall not exceed 1,056 square feet unless the footprint of living space
within the dwelling exceeds 1,056 square feet, as determined by the
City assessor's standard procedures for calculating such footprints;
when the living space footprint exceeds 1,056 square feet, the total area
of all accessory uses may equal the living space footprint area, but in
no case shall exceed 1,200 square feet, nor shall the total area of all
structures on a lot exceed 30 percent of the lot area, nor shall any lot
contain more than three structures which enclose accessory space.
(2) An accessory building shall be attached to and made structurally part of
the principal building if it is within five (5) feet of the principal
building.
Living quarters of persons employed on the premises.
Private garage.
Private recreation facilities swimming pools, tennis courts, etc., for the use and
enjoyment of residents and guests.
Signs as regulated in this chapter.
Uses customarily incident to permitted or conditional uses allowed in the
district.
(f) Prohibited Uses.
(1) State licensed residential facilities whose primary purpose is to treat
juveniles who have violated criminal statutes related to sex offenses or
have been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of conduct in violation of
criminal statues relating to sex offenses shall not be considered a
permitted use.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 13 of 58
(2) Any use not specifically listed as permitted, conditionally permitted,
permitted with an interim use permit, or as allowed elsewhere in the
City Code, shall be considered prohibited. A prohibited use may be
changed to a permitted, conditionally permitted or interim use upon
amendment of this Chapter.
(g) Height, yard and area regulations. Height, yard and area regulations for the R-F
farm residence district shall be as follows:
(1) Height regulations. No building hereafter erected or altered in an R-F
district shall exceed 2½ stories or 30 feet in height, except as provided
in section 74-483.
(2) Front yard regulations.
a. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 50
feet, unless 30 percent or more of the frontage on the same
side of the street between two intersecting streets is improved
with buildings that have observed a greater or less depth of
front yard, in which instance no new building or portion
thereof shall project beyond the average of the setback lines of
the residences upon either side of the proposed structure, or if
there are residences on only one side, then beyond the average
of the setback lines of the two nearest residences. However,
this regulation shall not be interpreted to require a front yard
of more than 100 feet.
b. On a corner lot, there shall be a front yard on each side of such
lot. No accessory building shall project beyond the front yard
line of either street.
c. Riparian lots shall have front yards of 100 feet from the
ordinary high water level. On riparian lots, the front yard is
defined as the area which abuts the water.
(3) Side yard regulations.
a. Except as provided in the subsection (d)(3)b of this section
and in section 74-485, there shall be a side yard, on each side
of a building, a width of not less than 15 feet.
b. Churches must have a minimum side yard of 50 feet.
c. Whenever a lot of record, existing on December 7, 1967, has a
width of 70 feet or less, the side yard on each side of a
building may be reduced to a width of not less than ten percent
of the width of the lot, but in no instance shall it be less than
five feet.
(4) Rear yard regulations. Except as provided in section 74-485, there
shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 40 feet or 20 percent
of the depth of the lot, whichever amount is larger, but it need not
exceed 50 feet.
(5) Lot area regulations.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 14 of 58
a. Every lot or tract of land upon which a single-family dwelling
is erected shall have an area of not less than 2½ acres and an
average width of not less than 100 feet; except, that if a lot or
tract has less area of width than required in this section and
was legally platted and was of record at the time of the
passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived,
that lot may be used for any of the uses permitted in this
section.
b. Riparian lots shall have an area of not less than five acres, not
more than 30 percent of the total lot shall be covered with an
impervious surface, and such surface area must be set back a
minimum of 50 feet from the ordinary high water level of the
river and screened by a natural material.
1. All riparian lots shall have a minimum lot width of
200 feet.
2. All riparian lots shall have a minimum lot depth of
200 feet.
Section 74-213. R-1 Single-Family Residential District.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of the R-1 district is to provide a district for single-family
detached dwellings in those areas where such development is consistent with the
low-density residential designation of the community plan and compatible with
the surrounding land use characteristics. Development within the R-1 district
shall occur at densities not exceeding 4.3 dwelling units per acre.
(b) Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the R-1 single-family
residential district:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings, but not more than one dwelling unit
per lot.
(2) Parks and recreational areas owned or operated by public bodies.
(3) A State licensed residential facility or a housing with services
establishment registered under Minnesota Statutes Chapter 144 D,
serving six (6) or fewer persons as allowed under Minnesota Statutes
462.357 Subd. (7), as amended.
(4) A Group family daycare facility licensed under Minnesota Rules
9502.0315 to 9502.0445, to serve fourteen (14) or fewer children as
allowed under Minn. Stats. § 462.357, subd. 7. A conditional use
permit obtained pursuant to this Section or Code is required for the
operation of such schools or facilities on nonresidential premises within
this zone. Residential facilities whose primary purpose is to treat
juveniles who have violated criminal statutes related to sex offenses or
have been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of conduct in violation of
criminal statutes relating to sex offenses shall not be considered a
permitted use.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 15 of 58
(5) Essential services, including electrical, gas, water, sewer distribution
and collection lines, pumping facilities for water and sewer sytems,
rights-of way for transportation modes, and telephone switching
facilities.
(c) Accessory structures and uses.
(1) Generally. Within the R-1 District, the following accessory structures
and uses shall be permitted provided they are subordinate to, associate
with and located on the same lot as a permitted use. An accessory
structure or use shall not predate a principal structure or use, unless
granted an interim use permit as permitted by this Chapter.
a. Private recreation facilities – swimming pools, tennis courts,
etc., for the use and enjoyment of residents and guests.
b. Uses customarily incidental to the permitted, conditional or
interim uses allowed in the district.
c. Private garages and off-street parking and loading as regulated
by this Chapter.
d. Signs as regulated by this Chapter.
e. The operation of necessary facilities and equipment in
connection with schools, universities, hospitals, colleges, and
other instructions permitted or conditionally permitted in the
district.
f. Recreation, refreshment and service buildings in public parks
and playgrounds.
g. Boarding or renting of rooms to not more that two (2)
individuals per dwelling unit as regulated by this Chapter and
the Property Maintenance section of this Code. A person
providing home healthcare shall not be considered as a
boarder or renter for purposes of this ordinance.
h. Home occupations as permitted by this Chapter.
i. Tool houses, sheds and other structures for the storage of
domestic supplies and equipment.
j. Radio and television receiving antennas, including single
satellite dish TVRO’s (television receiving only) one meter or
less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, and
antennas necessary for the operation of electronic equipment
including radio receivers and federally licensed amateur radio
station if the antenna is thirty-five feet (35’) or less in height.
k. Outdoor sales and fundraising events sponsored by non-profit
uses allowed in this district and limited to six (6) events per
calendar year, no one event to exceed four (4) days.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 16 of 58
l. Garage and yard sales limited to three (3) events per calendar
year, no one event to exceed three (3) days.
m. Model homes and temporary real estate offices until
development is completed.
n. Solar equipment.
o. Minor mass transit facilities including benches, which may
include advertising signs.
p. Air conditioning machinery located on an exterior pad.
q. Home schools.
(2) Standards for accessory structures in the R-1 single-family residence
district. Standards for accessory structures in the R-1 single-family
residence district shall be as follows:
a. Where the principal use is a single-family dwelling, garages
shall contain at least four hundred forty (440) square feet and
not more than one thousand fifty-six (1,056) square feet.
b. For residential uses, the total area of all accessory building,
including attached garages, shall not exceed one thousand two
hundred (1,200) square feet.
c. A lot shall contain no more than three accessory buildings,
including attached garages.
d. An accessory building shall be attached to and made
structurally part of the principal building if it is less than five
(5) feet from the principal building.
(d) Conditional uses. The following uses of land or structures are permitted in the
R-1 single-family residential district if granted a conditional use permit:
(1) Nurseries, greenhouses for growing only, landscape gardening and tree
farms.
(2) Private recreation, including golf courses, driving ranges, clubhouse,
country club, swimming or tennis club.
(3) Public schools or private schools having a course of instruction
approved by the Minnesota Board of Education for students enrolled in
grades K-12, or any portion thereof, provided they do not including
boarding or residential facilities.
(4) Churches or other religious or philanthropic instructions.
(5) Cemeteries or memorial gardens.
(6) Public and community buildings owned or operated by public bodies.
(7) Wireless communication antennas not located on a public structure or
existing tower as regulated by this Chapter.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 17 of 58
(8) Bed and breakfast facilities.
(9) Single satellite dish and TVRO’s greater than one (1) meter in
diameter.
(10) Public or private nursing or convalescent homes.
(11) Licensed daycare facilities for more than six (6) persons, provided they
are located within a religious or educational structure that is not used
for residential purposes.
(12) Greenhouses for home use.
(13) Other uses similar to those permitted by this section, as determined by
the City.
(e) Interim uses. The following uses of land or structures are permitted in the R-1
single-family residential district if granted an interim use permit:
(1) Home occupations as regulated by this chapter.
(2) Radio and television receiving antennas, including single satellite dish
TVRO's (television receiving only) one meter or less in diameter, shortwave
radio dispatching antennas, and antennas necessary for the
operation of electronic equipment including radio receivers and
federally licensed amateur radio station if the antenna is over 35 feet
height.
(3) Land filling and excavation/grading operations, including mining, if
more than 1,000 cubic yards of material.
(4) Temporary classroom structures.
(5) Temporary real estate offices until development is completed.
(6) Major mass transit facilities, including park and ride facilities and intermodal
transfer points and bus shelters.
(7) Other uses similar to those permitted by this subsection or determined
to be consistent with the standards for interim uses as regulated by this
chapter.
(f) Prohibited uses.
(1) Residential facilities whose primary purpose is to treat juveniles who
have violated criminal statutes related to sex offenses or have been
adjudicated delinquent on the basis of conduct in violation of criminal
statutes relating to sex offenses.
(2) Any use not specifically listed as permitted, conditionally permitted,
permitted with an interim use permit, or as allowed elsewhere in this
Code, shall be considered prohibited in the R-1 single-family
residential district. A prohibited use may be changed to a permitted,
conditionally permitted or interim use upon amendment of this chapter.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 18 of 58
(g) Lot area requirements. The lot area requirements for the R-1 single-family
residential district are as follows:
(1) Every lot on which a single-family dwelling is erected shall not be less
than 10,000 square feet except riparian lots.
(2) Every lot on which a single-family dwelling is erected shall not be less
than 75 feet in width, nor less than 120 feet in depth. Lots on cul-de-sac
streets shall have a minimum frontage of 50 feet on the right-of-way
line. Corner lots shall have at least ten (10) feet extra width and
sufficient depth for established building setback on both streets.
(3) Riparian lots shall not be less than 15,000 square feet and shall not be
less than 75 feet in width, nor less than 200 feet in depth. No more than
30 percent of the lot shall be covered by impervious surface. Such
surface must be a minimum of 50 feet from the ordinary high water
level and screened by natural materials.
(4) In no case shall the impervious surface coverage of a nonriparian lot
exceed 35 percent of the area of the lot.
(h) Front, side, and rear yard requirements. Front, side, and rear yard requirements
in the R-1 single-family residential district shall be as follows:
(1) Front yard regulations. Front yard requirement shall be as follows:
a. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 25
feet. On corner lots, there shall be a front yard on each side
that abuts a street and a side yard on each side that does not. In
no case shall there be more than two front yard setbacks
applied to any lot. No accessory building shall project beyond
the front yard line of any street. If the average front yard
setback on a block is greater than the required 25 feet, all new
home construction, including residential additions, must be set
back a distance equal to the average setback.
b. The front yard setback for uses other than residential shall be
35 feet.
c. Riparian lots shall have front yards of 100 feet from the
ordinary water level. On riparian lots, the front yard is defined
as the area which abuts the water.
d. No detached accessory structure shall be closer to the front lot
line than the principal structure.
(2) Side yard regulations. Side yard regulations shall be as follows:
a. Except as provided in the subsection (h)(2)b of this section
and section 74-485, there shall be a side yard on each side of a
building having a width of not less than ten feet, except a
minimum five-foot side yard is allowable next to either an
attached or detached garage or accessory structure.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 19 of 58
b. Whenever a lot of record existing at the time of passage of the
ordinance from which this chapter is derived has a width of
less than 66 feet, the side yard on each side of the building
may be reduced to a width of not less than ten percent of the
width of the lot, but in no instance shall the side yard be less
than five feet.
c. The side yard setback for uses other than residential shall be
25 feet.
(3) Rear yard regulations. Rear yard regulations shall be as follows:
a. Each lot shall have a rear yard of not less than 25 feet with
respect to detached accessory uses and structures which may
be located five feet from the rear lot line.
b. The rear yard setback for uses other than residential shall be
40 feet.
(i) Maximum building height. The maximum building height in the R-1 singlefamily
residential district shall be as follows:
(1) No structure shall exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet in height, whichever is
less.
(2) A detached accessory building shall not exceed fifteen feet (15’) in
height for a building with a shed or flat roof, eighteen feet (18’) in
height for a gable, hip, gambrel, mansard, arch or round roof, or the
height of the principal building, whichever is less.
(3) The wall height of a detached accessory building shall not exceed
twelve feet (12’).
(4) Attached garages shall not exceed the height of the principal building.
(5) Where the average slope of a lot is greater than one foot (1’) rise or fall
in seven feet (7’) of horizontal distance from the established street
elevation at the property line, one (1) additional story than the number
permitted under this section s hall be permitted on the down hill side of
the building.
(6) Public and semi-public buildings, schools, churches, hospitals and
other institutions permitted in this district may be erected to a height
not exceeding fifty feet (50’). In such cases where the height of the
structure is increased beyond thirty-five feet (35’), the front, rear and
side yards shall be increased one foot (1’) for each foot of building
height that exceeds thirty-five feet (35’).
(j) Special regulations. Special regulations in the R-1 single-family residential
district shall be as follows:
(1) A detached accessory building, other than a garage, shall not be located
in a required front yard, or closer than five feet from any rear or side lot
line.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 20 of 58
(2) No residential structure shall have a width of less than 24 feet at its
narrowest point. Width measurements shall not take into account
overhangs or other projections beyond the principal exterior walls.
(3) All residential structures shall have permanent concrete or wood
foundations, which comply with the state building code and which is
solid for the complete circumference of the house.
(4) All residential dwellings must be built in conformance with the state
building code.
(5) Two enclosed parking spaces of not less than 440 square feet shall be
required for a single-family dwelling.
Section 74-214. R-2 one- and two-family dwellings district.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of the R-2 one- and two-family dwellings district is to
provide a district for single-family and two-family dwellings in those areas
where such development is consistent with the low density residential
designation of the community plan and compatible with surrounding land use
characteristics. Development within this district shall occur at densities not
exceeding eight (8) units per acre.
(b) Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the R-2 one- and two-family
dwelling district:
(1) Single-family dwellings detached dwelling units on lots with a
minimum area of 10,000 square feet, but not more than one dwelling
unit per lot.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Parks and recreational areas owned or operated by public schools.
(4) A State licensed residential facility or ahousing with services
establishment registered under Minnesota Statutes Chapter 144D,
serving six (6) or fewer persons as allowed under Minnesota Statutes
462.357, Subd. 7, as amended.
(5) A State licensed daycare facility serving twelve (12) or fewer persons
as allowed under Minnesota Statutes 462.357, as amended.
(6) A Group family daycare facility licensed under Minnesota Rules
9502.0315 to 9502.0445, to serve fourteen (14) or fewer children as
allowed under Minn. Stats. § 462.357, subd. 7. A conditional use
permit obtained pursuant to this Chapter is required for the operation of
such schools or facilities on non-residential premises within this zone.
Residential facilities whose primary purpose is to treat juveniles who
have violated criminal statutes related to sex offenses or have been
adjudicated delinquent on the basis of conduct in violation of criminal
statutes relating to sex offenses shall not be considered a permitted use.
(7) Essential services, including electrical, gas, water, sewer distribution
and collection lines, pumping facilities for water and sewer systems,
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 21 of 58
rights-of-way for transportation modes, and telephone switching
facilities.
(c) Accessory structures and uses.
(1) Generally. Within the R-2 District, the following accessory structures
and uses shall be permitted provided they are subordinate to, associated
with and located on the same lot as a permitted use. An accessory
structure or use shall not predate a principal structure or use, unless
granted an interim use permit as permitted by this Chapter.
a. Private recreation facilities – swimming pools, tennis courts,
etc., for the use and enjoyment of residents and guests.
b. Uses customarily incidental to the permitted, conditional or
interim uses allowed in the district.
c. Private garages and off-street parking and loading as regulated
by this Chapter.
d. Signs as regulated by this Chapter.
e. The operation of necessary facilities and equipment in
connection with schools, universities, hospitals, colleges, and
other instructions permitted or conditionally permitted in the
district.
f. Recreation, refreshment and service buildings in public parks
and playgrounds.
g. Boarding or renting of rooms to not more that two (2)
individuals per dwelling unit as regulated by this Chapter and
the Property Maintenance section of this Code. A person
providing home healthcare shall not be considered as a
boarder or renter for purposes of this ordinance.
h. Home occupations as permitted by this Chapter.
i. Recreational vehicles and equipment parking as regulated by
this Chapter.
j. Tool houses, sheds and other structures for the storage of
domestic supplies and equipment.
k. Radio and television receiving antennas, including single
satellite dish TVRO’s (television receiving only) one meter or
less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, and
antennas necessary for the operation of electronic equipment
including radio receivers and federally licensed amateur radio
station if the antenna is thirty-five feet (35’) or less in height.
l. Outdoor sales and fundraising events sponsored by non-profit
uses allowed in this district and limited to six (6) events per
calendar year, no one event to exceed four (4) days.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 22 of 58
m. Garage and yard sales limited to three (3) events per calendar
year, no one event to exceed three (3) days.
n. Model homes and temporary real estate offices until
development is completed.
o. Solar equipment.
p. Minor mass transit facilities including benches, which may
include advertising signs.
q. Air conditioning machinery located on an exterior pad.
r. Home schools.
s. Uses customarily incidental to permitted, conditional or
interim uses allowed in the district.
(2) Standards for accessory structures in the R-2 one- and two-family
dwelling district. Standards for accessory structures in the R-2 one- and
two-family dwelling district shall be as follows:
a. Where the principal use is a single-family dwelling, garages
shall contain at least four hundred forty (440) square feet and
not more than one thousand fifty-six (1,056) square feet.
b. For two-family units, garages shall contain at least four
hundred (400) square feet per unit and not more than one
thousand fifty-six (1,056) square feet per unit.
c. For residential uses, the total area of all accessory buildings on
a lot, including attached garage space, shall not exceed one
thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet.
d. A lot shall contain no more than three accessory buildings,
including attached garages.
e. An accessory building shall be attached to and made
structurally part of the principal building if it is less than five
(5) feet from the principal building.
(d) Conditional Uses. The following uses of land or structures are permitted in the
R-2 one- and two dwelling district if granted a conditional use permit:
(1) Private recreation, including golf courses, driving ranges, clubhouse,
country club, swimming or tennis club.
(2) Public schools or private schools having a course of instruction
approved by the state board of education for students enrolled in grades
K-12, or any portion thereof, provided they do not include boarding or
residential facilities.
(3) Churches or other religious or philanthropic institutions.
(4) Cemeteries or memorial gardens.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 23 of 58
(5) Wireless communication antennas not located on a public structure or
existing tower as regulated by this chapter.
(6) Bed and breakfast facilities.
(7) Single satellite dish and TVRO's greater than one meter in diameter.
(8) Public or private nursing or convalescent homes.
(9) Public and community buildings owned or operated by public bodies.
(10) Licensed day care facilities for more than six persons, provided they
are located within a religious or educational structure which is not used
for residential purposes.
(11) Greenhouses for home use.
(12) Other uses similar to those permitted by this section, as determined by
the City.
(e) Interim uses. The following uses of land or structures are permitted in the R-2
one- and two-family dwelling district if granted an interim use permit:
(1) Home occupations as regulated by this chapter.
(2) Radio and television antennas, including single satellite dish TVRO's
(television receiving only) one meter or less in diameter short-wave
radio dispatching antennas, and antennas necessary for the operation of
electronic equipment including radio receivers and federally licensed
amateur radio stations if the antenna is over 35 feet in height.
(3) Land filling and excavation/grading operations, including mining, if
more than 1,000 cubic yards of material.
(4) Temporary classroom structures for used by public or private schools.
(5) Temporary real estate offices until development is completed.
(6) Major mass transit facilities, including park and ride facilities and intermodal
transfer points and bus shelters.
(7) Other uses similar to those permitted by this subsection or determined
to be consistent with the standards for interim uses as regulated by this
chapter.
(f) Prohibited uses.
(1) Residential facilities whose primary purpose is to treat juveniles who
have violated criminal statutes related to sex offenses or have been
adjudicated delinquent on the basis of conduct in violation of criminal
statutes relating to sex offenses shall not be considered a permitted use.
(2) Any use not specifically listed as permitted, conditionally permitted,
permitted as an interim use, or as allowed elsewhere in this Code, shall
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 24 of 58
be considered prohibited. A prohibited use may be changed to a
permitted, conditionally permitted or interim use upon amendment of
this chapter.
(g) Lot area requirements. Lot area requirements in the R-2 one- and two-family
dwellings district shall be as follows:
(1) A lot on which there is erected a single-family dwelling shall contain
an area of not less than 10,000 square feet, and shall not be less than 75
feet in width at the building setback line and 50 feet at the property line
of cul-de-sac. Minimum depth shall be 120 feet.
(2) A lot on which there is erected a two-family dwelling shall have an area
of not less than 10,500 square feet, and an average width of not less
than 80 feet, and an average depth of not less than 120 feet; except, that
if a lot has less area, width or depth than required in this chapter, and
was legally platted and was of record at the time of passage of the
ordinance from which this chapter is derived, that lot may be used only
for a single-family residence.
(3) Riparian lots shall have a minimum area of 15,000 square feet and not
be less than 75 feet in width and 200 feet in depth. No more than 30
percent of the total lot area may be covered by an impervious surface.
Such surface area must be a minimum of 50 feet from the ordinary high
water level and screened by natural material.
(4) In no case shall the impervious surface coverage of a nonriparian lot
exceed 35 percent of the lot area.
(5) Corner lots shall have at least ten (10) feet extra width and sufficient
depth for established building setback on both streets.
(h) Front, side and rear yard regulations. Front, side and rear yard regulations for
the R-2 one- and two-family dwellings district shall be as follows:
(1) Front yard regulations. Front yard regulations shall be as follows:
a. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 25
feet. On corner lots, there shall be a front yard on each side
that abuts a street and a side yard on each side that does not. In
no case shall there be more than two front yard setbacks
applied to any lot. No accessory building shall project beyond
the front yard line of any street. If the average front yard
setback on a block is greater than 25 feet, all new home
construction, including residential additions, must be set back
a distance equal to the average setback.
b. The front yard setback for uses other than residential shall be
35 feet.
c. Riparian lots shall have front yards of 100 feet from the
ordinary high water level. On riparian lots the front yard is
defined as the area which abuts the water.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 25 of 58
d. No detached accessory structure shall be closer to the front lot
line than the principal structure.
(2) Side yard regulations. Side yard regulations shall be as follows:
a. Except as provided in the subsection (h)(2)b of this section
and section 74-485, there shall be a side yard on each side of a
building having a width of not less than ten feet, except a
minimum five-foot side yard is allowable next to either an
attached or detached garage or accessory structure.
b. Whenever a lot of record existing at the time of passage of this
chapter has a width of less than 66 feet, the side yard on each
side of the building may be reduced to a width of not less than
ten percent of the width of the lot, but in no instance shall it be
less than five feet.
c. The side yard setback for uses other than residential shall be
25 feet.
(3) Rear yard regulations. Rear yard regulations shall be as follows:
a. Each lot shall have a rear yard of not less than 25 feet, with
respect to detached accessory uses and structures which may
be located five feet from the rear lot line.
b. The rear yard setback for uses other than residential shall be
40 feet.
(i) Maximum building height. The maximum building height in the R-2 one- and
two-family dwellings district shall be as follows:
(1) No structure shall exceed two and one-half (2-1/2) stories, or thirty-five
(35) feet in height, whichever is less.
(2) A detached accessory building shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in
height for a building with a shed or flat roof, eighteen (18) feet in
height for a gable, hip, gambrel, mansard, arch or round roof, or the
height of the principal building, whichever is less.
(3) The wall height of a detached accessory building shall not exceed
twelve (12) feet.
(4) Attached garages shall not exceed the height of the principal building.
(5) Where the average slope of a lot is greater than one (1) foot rise or fall
in seven (7) feet of horizontal distance from the established street
elevation at the property line, one (1) additional story than the number
permitted under this section shall be permitted on the down hill side of
the building.
(6) Public and semi-public buildings, schools, churches, hospitals and
other institutions permitted in this district may be erected to a height
not exceeding fifty (50) feet. In such cases where the height of the
structure is increased beyond thirty-five (35) feet, the front, rear and
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 26 of 58
side yards shall be increased one (1) foot for each foot of building
height that exceeds thirty-five (35) feet.
(j) Special regulations. Special regulations for the R-2 one- and two-family
dwellings district shall be as follows:
(1) A detached accessory building other than a garage shall not be located
in a required front yard or closer than five feet from any rear or side lot
line.
(2) No residential structure shall have a width of less than 24 feet at its
narrowest point. Width measurements shall not take into account
overhangs or other projections beyond the principal exterior walls.
(3) All residential structures shall have permanent concrete or wood
foundations, which comply with the state building code and which is
solid for the complete circumference of the house.
(4) All residential dwellings must be built in conformance with the state
building code.
(5) Two enclosed parking spaces of not less than 440 square feet shall be
required for a single-family dwelling.
(6) Two enclosed parking spaces of not less than 400 square feet per
dwelling unit shall be required for a two-family dwelling.
Section 74-215. R-3 Medium and High Density Residential Districts.
(a) Intent. The R-3 medium and high density residential district is intended to allow
development at medium and high density in areas consistent with the
comprehensive plan and planning policies.
(b) Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the R-3 low density
multiple-family district:
(1) Single-family.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Townhouses, attached or detached, or row houses (not to exceed eight
(8) units per building or six (6) in a linear configuration).
(5) Multi-family dwellings,.
(6) Golf courses (except club houses, miniature courses and driving tees
operated for commercial purposes).
(7) A Group family daycare facility licensed under Minnesota Rules
9502.0315 to 9502.0445, to serve fourteen (14) or fewer children as
allowed under Minn. Stats. § 462.357, subd. 7. A conditional use
permit obtained pursuant to this Chapter is required for the operation of
such schools or facilities on non-residential premises within this zone.
Residential facilities whose primary purpose is to treat juveniles who
have violated criminal statutes related to sex offenses or have been
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 27 of 58
adjudicated delinquent on the basis of conduct in violation of criminal
statutes relating to sex offenses shall not be considered a permitted use.
(8) A State licensed daycare facility serving twelve (12) or fewer persons
as allowed under Minnesota Statutes 462.357, as amended.
(9) A State licensed residential facility or a housing with services
establishment registered under Minnesota Statutes Chapter 144D,
serving six (6) or fewer persons as allowed under Minnesota Statutes
462.357, Subd. 7, as amended.
(10) Essential services, including electrical, gas, water, sewer distribution
and collection lines, pumping facilities for water and sewer systems,
rights-of-way for transportation modes, and telephone switching
facilities.
State law reference--Certain state licensed facilities as permitted use, Minn. Stats. § 462.357, subd. 8.
(c) Accessory Structures and Uses.
(1) Generally. The following are permitted accessory structures uses in the
R-3 low density multiple-family district, provided they are subordinate
to, associated with and located on the same lot as a permitted use. An
accessory structure or use shall not predate a principal structure or use,
unless granted an interim use permit as permitted under this Chapter:
a. Private recreation facilities – swimming pools, tennis courts,
etc., for the use and enjoyment of residents and guests.
b. Uses customarily incidental to the permitted, conditional or
interim uses allowed in the district.
c. Private garages and off-street parking and loading as regulated
by this Chapter.
d. Signs as regulated by this Chapter.
e. The operation of necessary facilities and equipment in
connection with schools, universities, hospitals, colleges, and
other instructions permitted or conditionally permitted in the
district.
f. Recreation, refreshment and service buildings in public parks
and playgrounds.
g. In one and two-family dwellings, boarding or renting of rooms
to not more than two (2) individuals per dwelling unit as
regulated by this Chapter and the Property Maintenance
Chapter of the City Code. A person providing home
healthcare shall not be considered as a boarder or renter for the
purposes of this ordinance.
h. Home occupations as permitted by this Chapter.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 28 of 58
i. Recreational vehicles and equipment parking as regulated by
this Chapter.
j. Tool houses, sheds and other structures for the storage of
domestic supplies and equipment.
k. Radio and television receiving antennas, including single
satellite dish TVRO’s (television receiving only) one meter or
less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, and
antennas necessary for the operation of electronic equipment
including radio receivers and federally licensed amateur radio
station if the antenna is thirty-five (35) feet or less in height.
l. Outdoor sales and fundraising events sponsored by non-profit
uses allowed in this district and limited to six (6) events per
calendar year, no one event to exceed four (4) days.
m. Garage and yard sales limited to three (3) events per calendar
year, no one event to exceed three (3) days.
n. Model homes and temporary real estate offices until
development is completed.
o. Solar equipment.
p. Minor mass transit facilities including benches, which may
include advertising signs.
q. Air conditioning machinery located on an exterior pad.
r. Home schools.
s. Uses customarily incidental to permitted, conditional or
interim uses allowed in the district.
(d) Conditional uses. The following uses of land or structures are permitted in the
R-3 low density multiple-family district if granted a conditional use permit:
(1) Private recreation including golf driving ranges, clubhouse, country
club, swimming or tennis club.
(2) Public schools or equivalent private schools.
(3) Churches or other religious or philanthropic institutions.
(4) Municipal administrative or service buildings or uses including public
and semi-public institutions, libraries, museums, post offices, etc.,
except industrial type use.
(5) Railroad right-of-way.
(6) Cemetery.
(7) Convalescent and nursing homes.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 29 of 58
(8) A state licensed residential facility serving from seven (7) through
sixteen (16) persons as allowed under Minnesota Statutes 462.357
Subd. 8, as amended.
(9) A State licensed daycare facility serving from thirteen (13) through
sixteen (16) persons as allowed under Minnesota Statutes 462.357
Subd. 8, as amended.
(10) A State licensed daycare facility serving any number of persons on
non-residential premises provided State space requirements are met and
upon obtaining a conditional sue permit as provided in this Code.
Permits for non-residential daycare facilities will not be granted unless
the site meets one of the following conditions:
a. The facility will be located in an existing institutional
building, or
b. The site is suitable for commercial uses and will not be
disruptive or detrimental to an existing residential area.
State law references--State mandated conditional uses, Minn. Stats. § 462.357,
subd. 1b; authority to require conditional use permit for certain state licensed
facilities, Minn. Stats. § 462.357, subd. 8.
(e) Interim Uses. The following uses of land or structures are permitted in the R-3
Low Density Multiple Family Residential District if granted an Interim use
Permit:
(1) Home occupations as regulated by this Chapter.
(2) Radio and television antennas, including single satellite dish TVRO's
(television receiving only) one meter or less in diameter short-wave
radio dispatching antennas, and antennas necessary for the operation of
electronic equipment including radio receivers and federally licensed
amateur radio stations if the antenna is over thirty-five (35) feet in
height.
(3) Land filling and excavation/grading operations, including mining, if
more than one-thousand (1,000) cubic yards of material.
(4) Temporary classroom structures for used by public or private schools.
(5) Temporary real estate offices until development is completed.
(6) Major mass transit facilities, including park and ride facilities and intermodal
transfer points and bus shelters.
(7) Other uses similar to those permitted by this subsection or determined
to be consistent with the standards for interim uses as regulated by this
Chapter.
(f) Prohibited Uses.
(1) Residential facilities whose primary purpose is to treat juveniles who
have violated criminal statutes related to sex offenses or have been
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 30 of 58
adjudicated delinquent on the basis of conduct in violation of criminal
statutes relating to sex offenses.
(2) Any use not specifically listed as permitted, conditionally permitted,
permitted as an interim use, or as allowed elsewhere in this Code, shall
be considered prohibited. A prohibited use may be changed to a
permitted, conditionally permitted or interim use upon amendment of
this Chapter.
(g) Lot area requirements. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, every
dwelling hereafter erected, enlarged, relocated, altered or reconstructed in the R-
3 low density multiple-family district shall be located upon lots containing the
following areas:
(1) A lot on which there is erected a single-family dwelling shall contain
an area of not less than 7,500 square feet, and shall not be less than 60
feet wide at the building setback line, nor less than 130 feet in depth.
(2) A lot on which there is erected a two-family dwelling shall contain an
area of not less than 10,500 square feet and shall not be less than 75
feet wide at the building setback line nor less than 130 feet in depth.
(3) A lot on which there is erected a multiple dwelling shall contain an area
of not less than 12,000 square feet for the first two dwelling units plus
2,000 square feet for each additional dwelling unit and shall not be less
than 75 feet wide at the building setback line nor less than 130 feet in
depth.
(4) Townhouse lot area regulations: The minimum lot area per dwelling
unit shall not be less than 4,500 square feet and the minimum total lot
area shall not be less than 22,500 square feet.
(5) Riparian lots shall have a minimum area of 15,000 square feet and a lot
width of 75 feet and a lot depth of 200 feet. No more than 30 percent of
the total lot area may be covered by an impervious surface and such
surface area must be at least 50 feet from the ordinary high water level
of the river and screened by natural material.
(6) Corner lots shall have at least ten (10) feet extra width and sufficient
depth for established building setback on both streets.
(h) Front, side and rear yard requirements. Front, side and rear yard requirements
in the R-3 low density multiple-family district shall be as follows:
(1) Front yard regulations. Front yard regulations shall be as follows:
a. For two-family and multiple family structures thre shall be a
font yard having a depth of not less than 35 feet. For any
single-family structure there shall be a front yard having a
depth of not less than 25 feet. There shall be a front yard on
each street side of a corner lot. No accessory buildings shall
project beyond the front yard line of either street.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 31 of 58
b. Riparian lots shall have front yards of 100 feet from the
ordinary high water level. On riparian lots, the front yard is
defined as the area which abuts the water.
(2) Side yard regulations. Side yard regulations shall be as follows:
a. for any two-family and multiple family structures there shall
be a side yard on each side of a building, having a width of not
less than 15 feet. For any single-family structure there shall
be a side yard of not less than 10 feet. A minimum of fivefoot
side yard setback is allowable next to either an attached or
detached garage.
b. There shall be a side yard which shall have a width of not less
than 20 feet on each side of a three-story building.
(3) Rear yard regulations. One or two-family dwellings shall have a rear
yard of not less than 25 feet. Three or more family dwellings shall have
a rear yard of not less than 30 feet. All nonresidential uses shall have a
rear yard area of not less than 40 feet. Detached permitted accessory
uses and structures may be located five feet from the property line.
(i) Maximum building height:
(1) No structure shall exceed two and one-half (2-1/2) stories, or thirty-five
(35) feet in height, whichever is less.
(2) A detached accessory building shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in
height for a building with a shed or flat roof, eighteen (18) feet in
height for a gable, hip, gambrel, mansard, arch or round roof, or the
height of the principal building, whichever is less.
(3) The wall height of a detached accessory building shall not exceed
twelve (12) feet.
(4) Attached garages shall not exceed the height of the principal building.
(5) Where the average slope of a lot is greater than a one (1) foot rise or
fall in seven (7) feet of horizontal distance from the established street
elevation at the property line, one (1) additional story than the number
permitted in this article shall be permitted on the down hill side of the
building.
(6) Public and semi-public buildings, schools, churches, hospitals and
other institutions permitted in this district may be erected to a height
not exceeding fifty (50) feet. In such cases where the height of the
structure is increased beyond thirty-five (35) feet, the front, rear and
side yards shall be increased one (1) foot for each foot of building
height exceeds thirty-five (35) feet.
(j) Special regulations. Special regulations for the R-3 low density multiple-family
district shall be as follows:
(1) Lot coverage. No more than the following percentage of each lot shall
be covered by buildings, drives, and parking areas:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 32 of 58
Type of Lot Percentage Covered
Two-family 30
Townhouse 30
Quadhomes 50
Multi-family 50
a. The minimum number of required surfaced off-street parking
spaces for the following residential uses:
1. Multi-family – a minimum of 2.5 spaces per unit. At
least one (1) space per unit shall consist of an
enclosed garage.
(2) The minimum distance between principal buildings on the same lot is
30 feet.
(3) All residential dwellings must be in conformance with the State
Building Code.
(4) Parking and driving areas:
a. The minimum number of spaces for a single-family dwelling
shall be two (2) and shall be an enclosed garage of at least
found hundred forty (440) square feet.
b. The minimum number of required surfaced off-street parking
spaces for the following residential uses:
1. Two-family and quad – a minimum of two (2) spaces
per dwelling unit and shall be an enclosed garage of
at least four hundred (400) square feet.
2. Townhouse – a minimum of two (2) spaces per unit.
At least one (1) space per unit shall consist of an
enclosed garage.
3. Multiple – a minimum of 2.5 spaces per unit. At
least one (1) space per unit shall consist of an
enclosed garage.
c. No parking shall be permitted or drives constructed within five
(5) feet of any property line or within twenty (20) feet of any
right-of-way line. There shall be no parking permitted in the
sight triangle described as described in this chapter.
d. Parking is permitted in the side, front, or rear yard areas in
multi-family housing developments provided that the parking
area is effectively screened from public view by a combination
of fence, plantings and berms.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 33 of 58
(5) Garages and Accessory Buildings:
a. Where the principal use is a single-family dwelling, garages
shall contain at least four hundred forty (440) square feet and
not more than one thousand fifty-six (1,056) square feet.
b. For two-family units, garages shall not contain less than four
hundred (400) square feet and not more than one thousand
fifty-six (1,056) square feet of floor area.
c. An accessory building shall be attached to and made
structurally part of the principal building if it is less than five
(5) feet from the principal building.
d. For single-family and two-family residential uses, the total
area of all accessory building on a lot, including attached
garage space, shall not exceed one thousand two hundred
(1,200) square feet.
e. For single-family and two-family residential uses, a lot shall
contain no more than three (3) accessory buildings, including
attached
(6) No parking of any kind shall be permitted in the public right-of-way,
boulevard, or sidewalk areas.
(k) Architectural standards. The architectural control and appearance for
townhomes, attached or detached, rowhomes, and multi-family dwellings in the
R-3 district shall be regulated as follows. The following standards apply to all
newly constructed buildings, structures, or additions. New additions may use
exterior materials that are similar to the existing structure materials. New
buildings and structures must be constructed of durable materials. Projects
involving only ordinary maintenance or the replacement of existing or identical
materials of an existing building are exempt.
(1) Standards for townhomes, attached or detached, rowhomes, or multifamily
dwellings with 4 or fewer units.
a. Exterior Materials
1. Facades fronting a public or private street must be
50% brick, or natural or cementous stone. The
remaining materials may be any combination of
materials listed in section 3 below, except vinyl
siding.
2. Side facades must be 33% brick or natural or
cementous stone. The remaining materials may be
any combination of materials listed in section 3 blow.
3. Rear facades not fronting a public or private street
must be a combination of two or more of the
following materials:
aa. Brick
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 34 of 58
bb. Natural or cementous stone
cc. Fiber-cement or cement board siding
dd. Stucco or EIFS
ee. Wood shingles or lap siding
ff. Vinyl siding (minimum .44 mm thickness)
4. Prohibited Materials.
aa. Concrete block or panels
bb. Metal panels
cc. Aluminum or fiberglass siding or roofing
materials
dd. Painting previously unpainted brick
5. Any individual facades that utilize one primary
material for 75% or more of the façade must provide
at least two architectural elements listed below within
the design:
aa. Dormers
bb. Varied roof line
cc. Projecting or inset windows
dd. Balconies, porches, decks
ee. Shutters, window boxes, etc.
ff. Projecting eaves
gg. Projections or recessions in the façade
hh. Other aesthetic enhancements as approved
by City Council.
(2) Standards for multi-family dwellings with more than 4 units.
a. Exterior Materials
1. Facades fronting a public or private street must be
50% brick, or natural or cementous stone. Side
facades must be 33% brick, or natural or cementous
stone. The remaining materials may be any
combination of materials listed in section 2 below.
2. Rear facades not fronting a public or private street
must be a combination of two or more of the
following materials:
aa. Brick
bb. Natural or Cementous Stone
cc. Fiber-cement or cement board siding
dd. Stucco or EIFS
ee. Architecturally designed glass
ff. Metal accent material
gg. Cast Stone
hh. Split Face Rock
3. Prohibited Materials.
aa. Smooth concrete block
bb. Pre-cast concrete panels
cc. Metal panels
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 35 of 58
dd. Metal or fiberglass siding or roofing
materials
ee. Vinyl siding
ff. Painting previously unpainted brick
4. Any facades that utilize one primary material for 75%
or more of the façade must provide at least three
architectural elements listed below within the design:
aa. Dormers
bb. Varied roof line
cc. Projecting or inset windows
dd. Balconies, porches, decks
ee. Shutters, window boxes, etc.
ff. Projecting eaves
gg. Projections or recessions in the façade
hh. Decorative roof cornice
ii. Other aesthetic enhancements as approved
by City Council
b. In multi-story buildings, the ground floor shall be
distinguished from the floors above by the use ofa
combination of the following:
1. An intermediate cornice line
2. A difference in building materials or detailing
3. An offset in the façade
4. An awning, loggia, or arcade
5. Special windowlintels
6. Brick/stone corbels
c. Width. A building more than 45 feet in width shall be divided
into increments of no more than 45 feet through articulation of
the façade. This can be achieved through combination of the
following techniques:
1. Division of breaks inmaterials
2. Window bays
3. Special treatment at entrances
4. Subtle variations in rooflines and parapetdetailing
5. Building setbacks, façade recesses and projections
6. Awnings
7. Repetitive elements
(3) Alternative Design or Materials. To encourage creativity, imagination,
innovation, and variety in architectural design, the Planning
Commission may recommend modification of the requirements of this
Section and the City Council may approve such modifications upon
determining that the proposed architecture design or exterior façade
material(s) meets all of the following conditions:
a. The proposed design or material is consistent with the
purposes of this section
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 36 of 58
b. The proposed design or material would enhance the
architectural appearance of the building and would be equal or
superior to designs or materials permitted by this section.
c. The proposed design or material would be in harmony with
the character of adjacent buildings and the surrounding district
(4) Dumpster and refuse enclosures.
a. Dumpster and refuse enclosures must be gated and completely
screened using enclosures constructed of materials
architecturally compatible with the principal building, and
must be located in designated side or rear yards or inside the
building.
Section 74-216. R-4 high density residential district.
(a) Intent. The R-4 high density residential district is intended to create, preserve
and enhance areas for higher densities. The R-4 High Density district is typically
appropriate only in areas served by public utilities, with good accessibility to
thoroughfares, public community centers, libraries, and shopping centers and
where such development fits the comprehensive plan and planning policies.
(b) Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the R-4 high density
multiple-family district:
(1) Single-family dwellings.
(2) Two family dwellings.
(3) Townhouses, attached or detached, or rowhouses, (not to exceed eight
units per building or six in a linear configuration).
(4) Multi-family dwellings.
(5) Parks and recreational areas owned or operated by public bodies.
(6) Golf course (except club houses, miniature courses and driving tees
operated for commercial purposes).
(7) A State licensed daycare facility serving twelve or fewer persons as
allowed under Minnesota Statutes 462.357 Subd 7, as amended.
(8) A Group family daycare facility licensed under Minnesota Rules
9502.0315 to 9502.0445, to serve fourteen (14) or fewer children as
allowed under Minn. Stats. § 462.357, subd. 7. A conditional use
permit obtained pursuant to this Chapter is required for the operation of
such schools or facilities on non-residential premises within this zone.
Residential facilities whose primary purpose is to treat juveniles who
have violated criminal statutes related to sex offenses or have been
adjudicated delinquent on the basis of conduct in violation of criminal
statutes relating to sex offenses shall not be considered a permitted use.
(9) A State licensed residential facility or a housing with services
establishment registered under Minnesota Statutes Chapter 144D,
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 37 of 58
serving six (6) or fewer persons as allowed under Minnesota Statutes
462.357, Subd. 7, as amended.
(10) Essential services, including electrical, gas, water, sewer distribution
and collection lines, pumping facilities for water and sewer systems,
rights-of-way for transportation modes, and telephone switching
facilities.
(c) Accessory Structures and Uses.
(1) Generally. The following are permitted accessory structures uses in the
R-4 District, provided they are subordinate to, associated with and
located on the same lot as a permitted use. An accessory structure or
use shall not predate a principal structure or use, unless granted an
interim use permit as permitted under this Chapter:
a. Private recreation facilities – swimming pools, tennis courts,
etc., for the use and enjoyment of residents and guests.
b. Uses customarily incidental to the permitted, conditional or
interim uses allowed in the district.
c. Private garages and off-street parking and loading as regulated
by this Chapter.
d. Signs as regulated by this Chapter.
e. The operation of necessary facilities and equipment in
connection with schools, universities, hospitals, colleges, and
other instructions permitted or conditionally permitted in the
district.
f. Recreation, refreshment and service buildings in public parks
and playgrounds.
g. In one and two-family dwellings, boarding or renting of rooms
to not more than two (2) individuals per dwelling unit as
regulated by this Chapter and the Property Maintenance
Chapter of the City Code. A person providing home
healthcare shall not be considered as a boarder or renter for the
purposes of this ordinance.
h. Home occupations as permitted by this Chapter.
i. Recreational vehicles and equipment parking as regulated by
this Chapter.
j. Tool houses, sheds and other structures for the storage of
domestic supplies and equipment.
k. Radio and television receiving antennas, including single
satellite dish TVRO’s (television receiving only) one meter or
less in diameter, short-wave radio dispatching antennas, and
antennas necessary for the operation of electronic equipment
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 38 of 58
including radio receivers and federally licensed amateur radio
station if the antenna is thirty-five feet (35’) or less in height.
l. Outdoor sales and fundraising events sponsored by non-profit
uses allowed in this district and limited to six (6) events per
calendar year, no one event to exceed four (4) days.
m. Garage and yard sales limited to three (3) events per calendar
year, no one event to exceed three (3) days.
n. Solar equipment.
o. Minor mass transit facilities including benches, which may
include advertising signs.
p. Air conditioning machinery located on an exterior pad.
q. Home schools.
r. Uses customarily incidental to permitted, conditional or
interim uses allowed in the district.
(d) Conditional uses. The following uses of buildings or land are permitted in the
R-4 high density multiple-family district if granted a conditional use permit:
(1) Private recreation including golf driving ranges, clubhouse, country
club, swimming or tennis club.
(2) Public schools or equivalent private schools.
(3) Churches or other religious or philanthropic institutions.
(4) Municipal administrative or service buildings or uses including public
and semi-public institutions, libraries, museums, post offices, etc.,
except industrial type use.
(5) Essential public service and utility structures and uses.
(6) Railroad right-of-way.
(7) Cemetery.
(8) Temporary real estate offices until development is completed.
(9) Food store or delicatessen, retail, personal service uses and professional
offices as secondary use in building with any permitted principal use
and whether or not in building with permitted principal use if part of a
P.U.D.
(10) Boarding and lodging houses.
(11) A state licensed residential facility serving from thirteen (13) through
sixteen (16) persons as allowed under Minnesota Statutes 462.357
Subd. 8, as amended.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 39 of 58
(12) A convalescent and nursing home.
(13) A State licensed daycare facility serving from seven (7) through sixteen
(16) persons as allowed under Minnesota Statutes 462.357 Subd. 8, as
amended.
(14) Public and community buildings owned or operated by public bodies.
(e) Interim Uses. The following uses of land or structures are permitted in the R-4
High Density Multiple Family Residential District if granted an Interim use
Permit:
(1) Home occupations as regulated by this Chapter.
(2) Radio and television antennas, including single satellite dish TVRO's
(television receiving only) one meter or less in diameter short-wave
radio dispatching antennas, and antennas necessary for the operation of
electronic equipment including radio receivers and federally licensed
amateur radio stations if the antenna is over 35 feet in height.
(3) Land filling and excavation/grading operations, including mining, if
more than 1,000 cubic yards of material.
(4) Temporary classroom structures.
(5) Temporary real estate offices until development is completed.
(6) Major mass transit facilities, including park and ride facilities and intermodal
transfer points and bus shelters.
(7) Other uses similar to those permitted by this subsection or determined
to be consistent with the standards for interim uses as regulated by this
chapter.
(f) Prohibited Uses.
(1) A use not specifically listed as permitted, conditionally permitted,
permitted with an interim use permit, or as allowed elsewhere in the
City Code, shall be considered prohibited. A prohibited use may be
changed to a permitted, conditionally permitted or interim use upon
amendment of this Chapter.
(g) Lot area requirements. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every
dwelling hereafter erected, enlarged, relocated, altered or reconstructed in the R-
4 high density multiple-family district shall be located upon lots containing the
following areas:
(1) A lot on which there is erected a single-family dwelling shall contain
an area of not less than 7,500 square feet, and shall not be less than 60
feet wide at the building setback line, nor less than 120 feet in depth.
(2) A lot on which there is erected a two-family dwelling shall contain an
area of not less than 8,500 square feet, and shall not be less than 60 feet
wide at the building setback line nor less than 125 feet in depth.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 40 of 58
(3) A lot which there is erected a multiple dwelling shall contain an area of
not less than 9,000 square feet for the first three dwelling units plus
1,000 square feet for each additional dwelling unit.
(4) Townhouse lot area regulations: The minimum lot area per dwelling
unit shall not be less than 4,500 square feet and the minimum total lot
area shall not be less than 22,500 square feet.
(5) Riparian lots shall have a minimum area of 15,000 square feet and not
be less than 75 feet and 200 feet in depth. No more than 30 percent of
the total lot area may be covered by an impervious surface. Such
surface area must be a minimum of 50 feet from the ordinary high
water level and screened by natural material.
(6) Corner lots shall have at least ten (10) feet extra width and sufficient
depth for established building setback on both streets.
State law references--State mandated conditional uses, Minn. Stats. § 462.357, subd. 1b; authority to require
conditional use permit for certain state licensed facilities, Minn. Stats. § 462.357, subd. 8.
(h) Front, side and rear yard requirements. Front, side and rear yard requirements
in the R-4 high density multiple-family district shall be as follows:
(1) Front yard regulations. Front yard regulations shall be as follows:
a. For two-family and multiple family structures there shall be a
front yard having a depth of not less than 35 feet. For any
single-family structure there shall be a front yard having a
depth of not less than 25 feet. There shall be a front yard on
each street side of a corner lot. No accessory buildings shall
project beyond the front yard line of either street.
b. Riparian lots shall have front yards of 100 feet from the
ordinary high water level. On riparian lots the front yard is
defined as the area which abuts the water.
(2) Side yard regulations. Side yard regulations shall be as follows:
a. For two-family and multiple family structures there shall be a
side yard on each side of a building, having a width of not less
than 15 feet. For any single-family structure there shall be a
side yard of not less than 10 feet. A minimum of five-foot
side yard setback is allowable next to either an attached or
detached garage.
b. There shall be a side yard which shall have a width of not less
than 20 feet on each side of a three-story building.
(3) Rear yard regulations. One- or two-family dwellings shall have a rear
yard of not less than 25 feet. Three or more family dwellings shall have
a rear yard of not less than 30 feet. All nonresidential uses shall have a
rear yard area of not less than 40 feet. Detached permitted accessory
uses and structures may be located five feet from the property line.
(i) Maximum building height:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 41 of 58
(1) No building shall be erected in an R-4 district to exceed thirty-five (35)
feet in height or three (3) stories, except greater heights may be allowed
by conditional sue permit providing each side yard is increased by one
(1) foot for each additional foot of height above thirty-five (35) feet.
(2) A detached accessory building shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in
height for a building with a shed or flat roof, eighteen (18) feet in
height for gable, hip, gambrel, mansard, arch or round roof, or the
height of the principal building, whichever is less.
(3) The wall height of a detached accessory building shall not exceed
twelve (12) feet.
(4) Attached garages shall not exceed the height of the principal building.
(j) Special regulations. Special regulations for the R-4 high density multiple-family
district shall be as follows:
(1) Lot coverage. No more than the following percentage of each lot shall
be covered by buildings, drives, and parking areas:
Type of Lot Percentage Covered
Two-family 30
Townhouse 30
Quadhomes 50
Multi-family 50
a. The minimum number of required surfaced off-street parking
spaces for the following residential uses:
1. Multi-family – a minimum of 2.5 spaces per unit. At
least one (1) space per u nit shall consist of an
enclosed garage.
(2) The minimum distance between principal buildings on the same lot
shall be one-third the sum of the building heights but not less than 35
feet.
(3) All residential dwellings must be in conformance with the state
building code.
(4) Parking and driving areas:
a. The minimum number of spaces for a single-family dwelling
shall be two (2) and shall be an enclosed garage of at least four
hundred forty (440) square feet.
b. The minimum number of required surfaced off-street parking
spaces for the following residential uses:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 42 of 58
1. Two-family and quad - a minimum of two spaces per
dwelling unit and shall be an enclosed garage of at
least four hundred (400) square feet.
2. Townhouse - a minimum of two spaces per unit. At
least one (1) space per unit shall consist of an
enclosed garage.
3. Multiple - a minimum of 2.5 spaces per unit. At least
one (1) space per unit shall consist of an enclosed
garage.
c. No parking shall be permitted or drives constructed within five
(5) feet of any property line or within twenty (20) feet of any
right-of-way line. There shall be no parking permitted within
the sight triangle described in this Article.
d. Parking is permitted in the side, front, or rear yard areas in
multi-family housing developments provided that the parking
area is effectively screened from public view by a combination
of fence, plantings, and berms.
(5) Garages and Accessory Buildings:
a. Where the principal use is a single-family dwelling, garages
shall contain at least four hundred forty (440) square feet and
not more than one thousand fifty-six (1,056) square feet.
b. For two-family units, garages shall not contain less than four
hundred (400) square feet and not more than one thousand
fifty-six (1,056) square feet of floor area.
c. An accessory building shall be attached to and made
structurally part of the principal building if it is within five (5)
feet of the principal building.
d. For single-family and two-family residential uses, the total
area of all accessory buildings on a lot, including attached
garage space, shall not exceed one thousand two hundred
(1,200) square feet.
e. For single-family and two-family residential uses, a lot shall
contain no more than three (3) accessory buildings, including
attached garages.
(6) No parking of any kind shall be permitted in the public right-of-way,
boulevard or sidewalk areas.
(k) Architectural standards. The architectural control and appearance for
townhomes, attached or detached, rowhomes, and multi-family dwellings in the
R-3 district shall be regulated as follows. The following standards apply to all
newly constructed buildings, structures, or additions. New additions may use
exterior materials that are similar to the existing structure materials. New
buildings and structures, additions, and renovations must be constructed of
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 43 of 58
durable materials. Projects involving only ordinary maintenance or the
replacement of existing or identical materials of an existing building are exempt.
(1) Standards for townhomes, attached or detached, rowhomes, or multifamily
dwellings with 4 or fewer units.
a. Exterior Materials
1. Facades fronting a public or private street must be
50% brick, or natural or cementous stone. The
remaining materials may be any combination of
materials listed in section 3 below, except vinyl
siding.
2. Side facades must be 33% brick or natural or
cementous stone. The remaining materials may be
any combination of materials listed in section 3 blow.
3. Rear facades not fronting a public or private street
must be a combination of two or more of the
following materials:
aa. Brick
bb. Natural or cementous stone
cc. Fiber-cement or cement board siding
dd. Stucco or EIFS
ee. Wood shingles or lap siding
ff. Vinyl siding (minimum .44 mm thickness)
4. Prohibited Materials.
aa. Concrete block or panels
bb. Metal panels
cc. Aluminum or fiberglass siding or roofing
materials
dd. Painting previously unpainted brick
5. Any individual facades that utilize one primary
material for 75% or more of the façade must provide
at least two architectural elements listed below within
the design:
aa. Dormers
bb. Varied roof line
cc. Projecting or inset windows
dd. Balconies, porches, decks
ee. Shutters, window boxes, etc.
ff. Projecting eaves
gg. Projections or recessions in the façade
hh. Other aesthetic enhancements as approved
by City Council
(2) Standards for multi-family dwellings with more than 4 units.
a. Exterior Materials
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 44 of 58
1. Facades fronting a public or private street must be
50% brick, or natural or cementous stone. Side
facades must be 33% brick, or natural or cementous
stone. The remaining materials may be any
combination of materials listed in section 2 below.
2. Rear facades not fronting a public or private street
must be a combination of two or more of the
following materials:
aa. Brick
bb. Natural or Cementous Stone
cc. Fiber-cement or cement board siding
dd. Stucco or EIFS
ee. Architecturally designed glass
ff. Metal accent material
gg. Cast Stone
hh. Split Face Rock
3. Prohibited Materials.
aa. Smooth concrete block
bb. Pre-cast concrete panels
cc. Metal panels
dd. Metal or fiberglass siding or roofing
materials
ee. Vinyl siding
ff. Painting previously unpainted brick
4. Any facades that utilize one primary material for 75%
or more of the façade must provide at least three
architectural elements listed below within the design:
aa. Dormers
bb. Varied roof line
cc. Projecting or inset windows
dd. Balconies, porches, decks
ee. Shutters, window boxes, etc.
ff. Projecting eaves
gg. Projections or recessions in the façade
hh. Decorative roof cornice
ii. Other aesthetic enhancements as approved
by City Council
b. In multi-story buildings, the ground floor shall be
distinguished from the floors above by the use ofa
combination of the following:
1. An intermediate cornice line
2. A difference in building materials or detailing
3. An offset in the façade
4. An awning, loggia, or arcade
5. Special windowlintels
6. Brick/stone corbels
c. Width. A building more than 45 feet in width shall be divided
into increments of no more than 45 feet through articulation of
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 45 of 58
the façade. This can be achieved through combination of the
following techniques:
1. Division of breaks inmaterials
2. Window bays
3. Special treatment at entrances
4. Subtle variations in rooflines and parapetdetailing
5. Building setbacks, façade recesses and projections
6. Awnings
7. Repetitive elements
(3) Alternative Design or Materials. To encourage creativity, imagination,
innovation, and variety in architectural design, the Planning
Commission may recommend modification of the requirements of this
Section and the City Council may approve such modifications upon
determining that the proposed architecture design or exterior façade
material(s) meets all of the following conditions:
a. The proposed design or material is consistent with the
purposes of this section
b. The proposed design or material would enhance the
architectural appearance of the building and would be equal or
superior to designs or materials permitted by this section.
c. The proposed design or material would be in harmony with
the character of adjacent buildings and the surrounding
district.
(4) Dumpster and refuse enclosures.
a. Dumpster and refuse enclosures must be gated and completely
screened using enclosures constructed of materials
architecturally compatible with the principal building, and
must be located in designated side or rear yards or inside the
building.
Section 74-217. R-5 residential flex district.
(a) Intent. The R-5 residential flex district is intended to allow and encourage high
density residential development adjoining the downtown business district to
provide a high level of accessibility to services, retail outlets, public facilities
and public transportation to persons with less mobility and for those choosing a
more urban lifestyle. The R-5 residential flex district attempts to create a
reasonable balance between the interests of the property owner in developing the
property, and at the same time protect the interest of the surrounding properties
and the City in the following ways:
(1) By encouraging a more creative approach in housing developments that
will result in quality living environments through innovative design and
aesthetic controls.
(2) By permitting a combination of housing types and style, including
single-, two-family, townhouse, and multiple-family dwellings.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 46 of 58
(3) By allowing flexibility in design by permitting cluster developments
and a variety of architectural styles and treatments.
(4) By allowing for any type of ownership, private, condominium, or
rental.
(5) By allowing flexibility in setback and height restrictions.
(6) By allowing office, retail shops, and personal service uses which will
serve the inhabitants of such district, provided such nonresidential uses
will enhance the character, amenities, and convenience of those who
live in the proposed development.
(7) By providing an efficient use of land resulting in more cost efficient
installation of utilities, streets, and other facilities.
(8) By encouraging the preservation of common open space, recreational
facilities, and natural features such as shore lands and woodlands.
(9) By contributing to the tax base of the community without making
undue demands on the community service.
(b) Criteria. The R-5 residential flex district is an overlay zoning district and may
be allowed only in the central business district or adjoining residential districts.
Every proposal presented to the City Council for rezoning to the residential flex
district shall be accompanied by a site plan as required in section 74-37. A
conditional use permit is required at the time of final plan approval to insure
adherence to the site plan. The City Council shall consider the following criteria
and objectives in processing the application for rezoning to R-5 residential flex
district and the application for the conditional use permit.
(1) That the proposed development is compatible with the purposes and
intents of this ordinance and with the comprehensive plan.
(2) That the proposal shall exercise no substantial detrimental influence
upon the market value of surrounding properties.
(3) That the proposal shall show a favorable economic impact on the
overall community.
(4) That the proposal shall in no way be detrimental to the environment.
(5) That the proposal shall not impose any undue burden upon the public
services and facilities, such as fire and police protection, schools,
streets, water systems, sanitary sewer systems, and storm sewer
systems.
(6) That the proposed development is designed in such a manner to not be
detrimental to future land uses in the surrounding area.
(7) That the proposal be consistent with all other applicable City and state
regulations.
(c) Procedure. The following procedure shall apply to the R-5 residential flex
district:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 47 of 58
(1) Prior to the preparation and filing of a preliminary site plan and formal
application for the conditional use permit and rezoning to the R-5
residential flex district, the developers or owners shall meet with the
director of community development to review all applicable
ordinances, regulations, and plans that will affect the area to be
rezoned.
(2) The developers or property owners in the R-5 residential flex district
shall prepare a site plan in accordance with the regulations of section
74-37 and shall submit the plan to the office of community
development 30 days prior to the public hearing.
(3) The notice for public hearing shall be published in the official
newspaper at least ten days, but not more than 30 days, prior to the
public hearing, at which time the item will be heard. Notices will also
be sent during this time period to property owners of record within 350
feet of exterior boundaries of subject property.
(4) The Planning Commission shall simultaneously hold a public hearing
on the site plan and proposed rezoning and conditional use permit
requests. Following the public hearing, the planning commission shall
submit in writing to the City Council its report, its findings, and its
recommendation as to the appropriateness of the site plan, and shall
recommend approval, modification, postponement, or disapproval
based upon the criteria set forth in subsection (b) of this section.
(5) The site plan and rezoning application shall be scheduled for a City
Council meeting within 30 days after submittal of the planning
commission report.
(6) The City Council shall consider the application for rezoning pursuant to
subsection (b) of this section and shall approve, postpone, or
disapprove the application for the rezoning. If the application for the
rezoning is approved, the City Council shall approve or modify the site
plan.
(d) Major changes. If the applicant proposes major changes in the site plan for
property in a R-5 residential flex district, these changes can only be made by
resubmission of a new site plan and rezoning application to the office of
community development, and rescheduling of a new public hearing before the
planning commission and reviewal again by the City Council. The following
constitute major changes:
(1) Increase in density.
(2) Change in architectural design or style.
(3) Change in type of ownership, private, condominium, or rental.
(4) Change of more than ten percent in total floor area.
(5) Increase in height of any building.
(6) Major modification to the landscape plan.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 48 of 58
(7) Reduction in the proposed open space.
(8) Change in the development schedule.
(9) Change in the road location or standards.
(10) Any changes determined to be major by the City Council.
(e) Minor changes. The City Council may, in its discretion, permit minor deviations
from the site plan for property in a R-5 residential flex district which do not
change the concept or intent of the proposed development as previously
approved.
(f) Rezoning. The following shall apply to rezoning in the R-5 residential flex
district:
(1) If a conditional use permit is not granted within a two-year period from
the time the City Council approves the rezoning and site plan, the
Council may initiate a rezoning to remove the residential flex district
zoning.
(2) If construction does not commence within 12 months after issuance of
the conditional use permit, the Council may initiate a rezoning to
remove the residential flex district zoning and rezone the property to
the zoning that was in effect at the time of the initial rezoning.
(3) If construction is not proceeding in accordance with the approved
development schedule, the Council may initiate a rezoning of all or part
of the property to the zoning that was in effect at the time of the initial
rezoning.
(g) Development guarantee. Prior to the granting of any building permit within a R-
5 residential flex district, a deposit shall be made to the City, in cash or letter of
credit, approved by the City, equal to 125 percent of the estimated cost of all on
site improvements, except building structure, as required by the final plans.
(h) Standards. In order to provide a maximum flexibility, no fixed standards shall
apply to the R-5 residential flex district. However, the City Council shall
consider for any proposed use the regulations prescribed in other sections of this
chapter for the classification most closely resembling the proposed use. It is the
intent that the Planning Commission shall consider and recommend to the City
Council appropriate restrictions in connection with each individual application
and site development plan for rezoning.
(i) Compliance. No development shall occur nor shall any building permits be
issued for any construction that is not in accord with the approved final plans.
Section 74-218. R-6 mobile home park residence district.
(a) Intent. The R-6 mobile home park residence district is intended to allow mobile
home park development in areas generally meeting the locational requirements
of the R-4 district, however, due to the unique site development requirements
the R-6 district is established to assure compatible development.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 49 of 58
(b) Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the R-6 mobile home park
residence district:
Parks and recreational areas owned or operated by public bodies.
(c) Conditional uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-6 mobile home park
residence district if granted a conditional use permit:
Churches or other religious or philanthropic institutions.
Essential public service and utility structures or uses.
Home occupations as regulated in this ordinance.
Mobile home parks.
(d) Accessory uses. The following are permitted accessory uses in the R-6 mobile
home park residence district:
Parking and signs as regulated in this ordinance.
Private recreation facilities swimming pools, tennis courts, etc. for the use and
enjoyment of residents and guests.
Private garages.
Uses customarily incident to permitted or conditional uses allowed in the
district.
(e) Location of mobile homes outside mobile home parks. The location of mobile
homes outside mobile home parks in a R-6 mobile home park residence district
shall be regulated as follows:
(1) It shall be unlawful within the City for any person to park any mobile
home on any street, alley or highway or other public place, or on any
tract of land owned by any person, occupied or unoccupied except as
provided in this section.
(2) Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any street,
alley or highway for not longer than three hours subject to any other
and further prohibitions, regulations or limitations imposed by the
traffic and parking regulations or ordinances for that street, alley or
highway.
(3) No person shall park or occupy any mobile home on either the premises
of any occupied dwelling or on any lot which is not a part of the
premises of any occupied dwelling which is situated outside of an
approved mobile home park; except that the parking of only one mobile
home unoccupied in an accessory private garage building, side yard or
rear yard is permitted provided no living quarters shall be maintained or
any businesses practiced in the mobile home which such mobile home
is so parked or stored.
(4) Temporary special permits may be issued by the building inspector for
use of a trailer as an office by persons directly connected with new
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 50 of 58
construction in the City; provided that such person has obtained a
building permit for the construction and is proceeding with such work.
Such temporary special permits shall be limited to periods of not more
than ten days following completion of project.
(f) Mobile home park permits. Mobile home park permits in the R-6 mobile home
park residence district shall be as regulated as follows:
(1) Application for a permit to establish, construct and maintain a mobile
home park under the provisions of this section shall be made to the
City.
(2) The application for a permit shall be accompanied by four copies of the
mobile home park plan showing the following, either existing or
proposed:
a. The extent and area proposed for mobile home park purposes;
b. Roads and driveways;
c. Location of sites or lots for mobile homes;
d. Location and number of sanitary conveniences;
e. Proposed disposition of surface drainage;
f. Proposed street surfacing and lighting;
g. Utility easements;
h. Off-street parking;
i. Patios;
j. Location of community building;
k. Location of recreation facilities;
l. Location of sidewalks;
m. Location of setback lines;
n. Location of screening, planting and green areas;
o. Any other information requesting by the City.
(3) Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by a certificate of
ownership as to all of the property within 300 feet of any boundary line
of the proposed mobile home park site.
(4) Each applicant shall be required to pay a fee at the time that such
application is filed with the City. Such fee shall be as established by
resolution of the City Council and this money shall be used by the City
to defray the expenses of processing the application.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 51 of 58
(5) No permit for any mobile home park shall be issued by the City
Council until after a public hearing has been held.
(g) Building permit for mobile home park. Building permits for mobile home parks
in R-6 mobile home park residence districts shall be regulated by the following:
(1) The applicant for a building permit for the construction of a mobile
home park or any part thereof shall comply with all applicable
provisions of the City building code.
(2) Each application shall be accompanied by four copies of detailed plans
of the proposed construction and improvement of the site.
(3) Every application for a building permit to construct a mobile home park
or to expand an existing mobile home park shall be accompanied by
plans approved by the state department of health showing that the
applicant is complying with all recommendations, suggestions and laws
under the jurisdiction of that department.
(4) The building permit shall be issued by the City building inspector after
it has been approved by a majority vote of the City Council. The
building permit fee shall be based on a registered engineer's estimate of
total construction costs.
(5) Each segment of a proposed mobile home park or expansion of an
existing mobile home park shall be complete as to design standards of
this article before occupancy is permitted.
(h) Site requirements. Site requirements for the R-6 mobile home park residence
district shall be as follows:
(1) Each lot shall have a gross area of not less than 5,000 square feet.
(2) Each lot shall have a minimum width of 50 feet; corner lots shall have a
minimum width of 60 feet. The length of a lot shall be measured from
the curb face to the rear lot line.
(3) The front yard to a mobile home lot shall be no less than ten feet from
the curb and no less than five feet from the sidewalk. Such front yard
shall not be occupied by parked vehicles.
(4) Where an alley is provided adjacent to the rear lot line, there shall be a
minimum rear yard of ten feet. Where there is no alley, the rear yard
shall be not less than 20 feet.
(5) There shall be a side yard of not less than five feet between a mobile
home and any side lot line.
(6) There shall be not less than 20 feet of area between mobile homes in all
directions.
(7) A patio shall be constructed on the ground beside each mobile home
parking space; this patio shall be not less than 200 square feet in area
constructed of concrete with four-inch minimum thickness.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 52 of 58
(8) At least one suitable shade tree other than of the elm variety (minimum
diameter two inches at time of planting) shall be placed and maintained
on each lot.
(9) Except for the areas used for the mobile home, patio, sidewalk,
driveways and off-street parking space, the entire lot shall be sodded
and maintained with grass or plantings.
(10) Each lot shall abut on and have access to a public or private street. All
streets, driveways and off-street parking areas shall be constructed in
accordance with City street standards.
(11) A concrete curb or curb and gutter shall be constructed on each side of
the street and face of this curb shall be at least 17 feet from the
centerline of the street. The curb design shall be in accordance with the
City curb standards.
(12) A concrete sidewalk, not less than 36 inches wide and four inches
thick, shall be constructed parallel with and on the lot side of the curb.
This sidewalk shall be connected to the required patio by a concrete
walk not less than 24 inches in width. All sidewalks shall be
constructed in accordance with City sidewalk standards.
(13) There shall be a yard of not less than 50 feet in depth along each public
street or way adjacent to the park and this area shall be sodded or
planted.
(14) Every mobile home park shall provide for a minimum yard of at least
20 feet on all sides of the mobile home park except where abutting
upon a public street, way or residential area. This area shall be planted
to provide a screen between the mobile home park and adjacent
property.
(15) Where a mobile home park abuts any residence district there shall be a
yard of at least 50 feet and this area shall be landscaped.
(16) No more than one mobile home shall be parked on any mobile home
lot; except that an unoccupied camper or pickup truck may be parked in
the driveway of the lot.
(17) No mobile home may be inhabited by a greater number of occupants
than that for which it was designed by the manufacturer.
(18) Water facilities, sewage disposal and street lighting shall be installed
and maintained by the owner of the mobile home park and shall be
constructed in accordance with the laws of the State, the
recommendations of the State Health Department and this Code and
other ordinances and requirements of the City.
(19) Design and placement of fire hydrants throughout the area shall be such
as to satisfy the Fire Chief that adequate fire protection is achieved.
(20) An off-street parking area of at least 440 square feet shall be provided
on each lot or adjacent to each lot if joint parking facilities are
provided.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 53 of 58
(21) All utility lines and services within the mobile home park shall be
placed underground.
(22) A minimum of ten percent of the total mobile home park area shall be
devoted to usable park and recreation space and shall be furnished with
playground type equipment meeting City standards for quality,
durability and safety.
(23) All boats, trailers, snowmobiles, hauling trailers and all other
equipment not stored within the mobile home or the utility enclosure
that may have been provided shall be stored in a separate area provided
by the park and not upon the lots occupied by mobile homes nor upon
the streets within the mobile home park.
(24) All mobile homes occupied or stored in the mobile home park shall be
registered with the motor vehicle division of the state and shall display
license plates for the current year.
(25) An adequate office and community building including a storm shelter
as regulated by the State, common laundry facilities and sanitation
facilities shall be provided adjacent to an area to be used for exterior
clothes drying. No exterior clothes drying shall be permitted within any
lot or any other area of the mobile home park except in an area
specifically provided.
(26) The mobile home park operator shall remove snow from all street and
sidewalk areas within the park.
(27) No domestic animals or house pets of mobile home occupants shall be
allowed to run at large, or commit any nuisances within the limits of a
mobile home park.
(i) Administration of section; mobile home park license; variances.
(1) This section shall be administered and enforced by the building
inspector, who is hereby designated as enforcing officer. The building
inspector may institute in the name of the City any appropriate actions
or proceedings against a violator as provided by law.
(2) Before any person shall operate and maintain a mobile home park in
the City, such person shall first obtain a license to do so as provided in
this subsection. An application for a license shall be filed with the City
Clerk on forms furnished by the municipality. The fee for each license
shall be as established by the Council per annum. The Clerk shall
submit the license application to the City Council for its approval.
Licenses shall expire on January 1 following the date of issuance unless
sooner revoked or forfeited.
(3) The City Council shall have the power to revoke the mobile home park
license of any person who fails to comply to the requirements of this
section or any other municipal or state law that is applicable.
(4) The City Council shall have the right to vary or modify the strict
application of any of the regulations or provisions contained in this
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 54 of 58
section in cases in which there are practical difficulties or unnecessary
hardships in the way of strict application.
State law reference--Regulation of manufactured home parks, Minn. Stats. § 462.357, subd. 1a.
Section 74-219. Manufactured Home Park Closings.
(a) Intent/purpose. In view of the unique nature and issues presented by the closure
or conversion of manufactured home parks, the City Council finds that the
public health, safety and general welfare will be promoted by requiring
relocation assistance and/or compensation to displaced homeowners and
residents of such parks. The purpose of this Section is to require park owners to
pay displaced home owners and residents reasonable relocation costs and
purchasers of manufactured home parks to pay additional compensation,
pursuant to the authority granted under Minnesota Statutes, Section 327C.095.
(b) Definitions. The following words and terms when used in the Section shall have
the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
Closure statement means a statement prepared by the park owner clearly stating
the park is closing, addressing the availability, location and potential costs of
adequate replacement housing within a twenty-five (25) mile radius of the park
that is closing and the probable relocation costs of the manufactured homes
located in the park.
Displaced resident means a resident of an owner-occupied manufactured home
who rents a lot in a manufactured home park, including the members of the
resident’s household, as of the date the park owner submits a closure statement
to the Planning Director, acting on behalf of the Planning Commission.
Lot means an area within a manufactured home park, designed or used for the
accommodation of a manufactured home.
Manufactured home means a structure, not affixed to or part of real estate,
transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode is eight (8)
body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when
erected on the site is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing,
heating, air conditioning, and electrical system contained in it.
Manufactured home park means any site, lot, field or tract of land upon which
two or more occupied manufactured homes are located, either free of charge or
for compensation, and includes any building, structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure
used or intended for use as part of the equipment of the manufactured home
park. This definition does not include facilities that are open only during three or
fewer seasons of the year.
Park owner means the owner of a manufactured home park and any person
acting on behalf of the owner in the operation or management of the park.
Person means any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, incorporated and
unincorporated association or other legal or commercial entity.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 55 of 58
Relocations costs incurred. The reasonable cost actually incurred by a displaced
resident of relocating a manufactured home from a manufactured home park
within the City of Anoka that is being closed or converted to another use to
another manufactured home park within a twenty-five (25) mile radius of the
park, as follows.
1. Preparation for move. Reasonable costs incurred to prepare
the eligible manufactured home for transportation to another
site. This category includes crane services if needed, but not
the cost of wheel axles, tires, frame welding or trailer hitches.
2. Transportation to another site. Reasonable costs incurred to
transport the eligible manufactured home to another
manufactured home park within a twenty-five mile radius.
This category also includes the cost of insuring the
manufactured home while the home is in the process of being
relocated, and the cost of obtaining moving permits. This
category does not include the cost of moving personal
property separate and distinct from the manufactured home
and separate and distinct from the appliances and
appurtenances of the manufactured home.
3. Hook-up at new location. The reasonable cost of connecting
the eligible manufactured home to utilities at the relocation
site, including crane services if needed. The park owner shall
not be required to upgrade the electrical or plumbing systems
of the manufactured home.
Relocation costs do not include the cost of any repairs or modifications
to the manufactured home needed to bring the home into compliance
with the state and federal manufactured home building standards for the
year in which the home was constructed. Relocations costs also do not
include the cost of any repairs or modifications to the home or
appurtenances needed to bring the home into compliance with the rules
and regulations of the manufactured home park to which the
manufactured home is to be relocated, if these rules and regulations are
no more stringent than the rules and regulations of the park in which
the home is located.
(c) Notice of closing. If a manufactured home park is to be closed, converted in
whole or part to another use or terminated as a use of the property, the park
owner shall, at least nine (9) months prior to the closure, conversion to another
use, or termination of use, provide a copy of a closure statement to a resident of
each manufactured home and to the Planning Director, acting on behalf of the
Planning Commission, and to the Commissioners of Health and the Housing
Finance Agency.
(d) Notice of public hearing. The Planning Director shall submit the closure
statement to the City Council and request the City Council to schedule a public
hearing. The city shall mail a notice at least ten (10) days prior to the public
hearing to a resident of each manufactured home in the park and to the park
owner stating the time, place and purpose of the hearing. The park owner shall
provide the City with a list of names and addresses of at least one resident of
each manufactured home in the park at the time the closure statement is
submitted to the City.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 56 of 58
(e) Public hearing. A public hearing shall be held before the City Council for the
purpose of reviewing the closure statement and evaluating what impact the park
closing may have on the displaced residents and the park owner. The City
Council shall determine the adequacy of the closure statement and direct
payment of relocation costs pursuant to this Ordinance.
(f) Conditions of closing.
1. As a condition of closing of the manufactured home park, the park
owner shall pay the relocation costs to displaced residents. If the park
owner determines less than six (6) months prior to the date of closure of
the park that the park will not be closed, the park owner may rescind
the Notice of Closure and shall pay any actual relocation costs incurred
by any of the park’s manufactured home owners. If the park owner
determines at six (6) months or more prior to the date of closure of the
park that the park will not be closed, the park owner may rescind the
notice of closure, and not be liable for any relocation costs.
2. The City shall not issue a building permit in conjunction with the reuse
of the manufactured home park property unless the park owner has paid
the relocation costs and/or the park purchaser has compensated
displaced residents in accordance with the requirements of this Section.
Approval of any application for a rezoning, platting, conditional use
permit, planned unit development, interim use permit, or variance in
conjunction with a park closing or conversion shall be conditioned on
compliance with the requirement of this Section.
(g) Displaced resident statement. Within ninety (90) days of receipt of a closure
notice, the displaced resident shall provide the park owner with a written
statement of relocation costs, or, in the alternative, a written statement that the
resident cannot relocate his or her manufactured home to another manufactured
home park within a twenty-five (25) mile radius. If a resident determines not to
relocate as defined within this section, the resident must state whether he or she
elects to receive relocation costs under subsection (h) or (i) below.
(h) Election to relocate.
1. If a manufactured home can be relocated to another manufactured
home park within a twenty-five (25) mile radius, the owner of the park
shall pay displaced residents’ relocation costs as defined herein.
2. The park owner shall make relocation payments directly to contractors
providing the relocation services, or shall reimburse the displaced
resident directly after the resident submits to the park owner proof of
payment or relocation costs. The park owner shall be entitled to receive
documentation of relocation cost, including costs of proposals,
invoices, estimates and contracts for relocation services.
3. If a displaced resident cannot relocate the manufactured home within a
twenty-five (25) mile radius of the park that is being closed or some
other agreed upon distance, and the resident elected not to tender a title
to the manufactured home, the resident is entitled to relocation costs
based upon an average of relocation costs awarded to other residents of
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 57 of 58
the park, or, if no other homes have been relocated, the reasonable costs
of relocating the home within a twenty-five mile radius.
4. A displaced resident compensated under this Section shall retain title to
the manufactured home and shall be responsible for its prompt removal
from the manufactured home park. All rent due and owing to the park
owner, and all property taxes for the current and prior years shall be
paid by the displaced resident prior to removing the manufactured
home from the park.
(i) Election to receive compensation. If a resident cannot relocate his or her
manufactured home to another manufactured home park within a twenty-five
(25) mile radius or some other agreed upon distance and tenders title to the
manufactured home, the resident is entitled to compensation to be paid by the
owner of the park in order to mitigate the adverse financial impact of the park
closing. In such instance, the compensation shall be an amount equal to the
estimated market value or the tax assessed value of the manufactured home,
whichever is greater, as determined by a state licensed independent appraiser
experienced in manufactured home appraisal and approved by the City Manager.
The owner of the park shall pay the cost of the appraisal or shall reimburse the
City for any advances it makes to such appraiser for such cost. The owner of the
park shall pay such compensation into an escrow account, established by the
owner of the park, for distribution upon transfer of title to the home. The amount
otherwise due the displaced resident may be tendered on the date of transfer of
title from the escrow account for payment on liens and encumbrances. The
resident shall transfer title of the manufactured home to the owner of the park
free and clear of all liens and encumbrances. All rent due the property owner
and all property taxes for the current and prior years shall be paid by the
displaced residents prior to distribution to the displaced resident from the escrow
account.
In the event that the owner is unable to locate the title to the manufactured
home, the owner of the home shall sign an affidavit setting forth:
1. The inability to locate the title;
2. The homeowner’s desire to transfer ownership of the home to the park
owner for disposal purposes; and
3. The homeowner’s agreement to transfer ownership and releasing the
park owner from any liability for the home’s eventual disposal.
Compensation under this section shall be paid to the displaced residents no later
than ninety (90) days prior to the earlier of closing of the park or its conversion
to another use.
(j) Limitation of relocation costs and compensation. The total amount of
compensation paid to displaced residents shall not exceed the greater of twentyfive
percent (25%) of the City Assessor’s estimated market value of the
manufactured home park, as determined by the City Assessor for the year in
which the park is scheduled to close, or twenty-five percent (25%) of the
purchase price of the park, whichever is greater.
(k) Proof of residency. If any disputes arise regarding the right of an individual to
receive compensation, the individual can prove a right to compensation by
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 2
Page 58 of 58
providing evidence of legal occupancy in the park. Such evidence includes, but
is not limited to, legal title to the home, tax records indicating ownership of the
home, records from the department of transportation showing ownership of the
home, a copy of a signed lease agreement, or proof of payment of rent.
Additionally, any resident on the list provided by the park owner to the city
within the closure statement is presumed to be a legal resident.
(l) Enforcement
1. A violation of any provisions of this section shall be a misdemeanor.
2. Any provisions of this section may be enforced by injunction or other
appropriate civil remedy.
Sections 74-220--74-235. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
1 of 52
CHAPTER 74. ZONING
ARTICLE V. District Regulations.
DIVISION 3. Business Districts.
Section 74-236. B-1 Highway Business District.
(a) Purpose of district. The purpose of the B-1 highway business district is to provide
for the establishment of service and limited retail businesses primarily oriented
toward motorists and requiring high volumes of traffic and visibility from major
roads in order that highway service types of land uses can be provided in a manner
compatible with the needs for traffic movement and adjacent residential uses.
(1) Banks, savings and loan, insurance offices.
(2) Brewpubs.
(3) Daycare centers.
(4) Drying cleaning establishment provided the cleaning process does not
occur on-site.
(5) Essential services, including electrical, gas, water, sewer distribution and
collection lines, pumping facilities for water and sewer systems, right-of
ways for transportation modes, and telephone switching facilities.
(6) Grocery store.
(7) Hotel or Motel.
(8) Liquor store.
(9) Medical and dental offices or clinics.
(10) Mortuaries or funeral homes.
(11) Parks.
(12) Professional offices.
(13) Restaurant or deli, including drive-through establishments or similar uses
that provide goods and services to patrons in automobiles.
(14) Retail store, showroom or service uses, including drive-through
establishments.
(15) Veterinary clinic, animal hospital, kennel with no outdoor runs.
(16) Wellness centers, fitness and health clubs, gyms.
(c) Conditional Uses.
(1) Automobile sales, trailer sales, and/or any other establishment engaged in
the business of selling, leasing, displaying for sale, or renting motorized or
licensed vehicles, subject to the conditions as required by this Code or
reasonably imposed by the City Council.
(2) Automobile repair shops.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
2 of 52
(3) Automobile service stations, for the sale of gasoline, oil and accessories.
(4) Car wash.
(5) Churches, religious use, places of worship.
(6) Multiple family uses permitted in the R-4 Residential District.
(7) Libraries.
(8) Public schools or private schools having a course of instruction approved
by the Minnesota Board of Education for students enrolled in grades K-12,
or any portion thereof, provided they do not include boarding or
residential facilities.
(9) Sports arenas, indoor skating rinks, stadiums, dance halls, pool and
billiard rooms, bowling alleys and gymnasiums; provided that buildings
are located not less than one hundred and fifty feet from any residential
district boundary line.
(10) Trade schools, vocational schools.
(11) Universities.
(12) Service business with showroom or workshop, including office-warehouse
(contractor, painter, HVAC).
(13) Boat and marine sales and service.
(14) Other highway business uses which in the opinion of the City Planning
Commission and City Council are similar and which are established for
the convenience of the community, but only after a conditional use permit
has been secured from the lawful governing body.
(15) Indoor Self-storage Facility.
(d) Interim Uses.
(1) Overnight parking of more than three (3) mid-sized vehicles.
(2) Outdoor display of materials such as tires, lumber, building supplies,
landscape materials offered for sale at retail.
(e) Accessory Uses.
(1) Uses customarily incidental to the permitted and conditional uses in the
B-1 Highway Business District.
(2) Outdoor seating.
(3) Outdoor merchandise display (permanent) of seasonal or convenience
items (e.g. windshield washer fluid, softener salt) associated with an
allowed principal use.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
3 of 52
(4) Accessory Car Wash/Vacuums.
a. No more than one car was bay shall be allowed.
b. The car wash shall be designed to be an integral part of the
principal building and may not be a separate freestanding
structure.
c. The site shall provide stacking space for the car wash. The
amount of stacking space shall take into account the type of car
wash and the amount of time it takes to wash a vehicle. Stacking
spaces shall not interfere with parking spaces or traffic
circulation.
d. The exit from the car wash shall have a drainage system which is
subject to the approval of the City and gives special consideration
to the prevention of ice build-up during winter months.
e. Neither the car wash nor an accessory vacuum shall be located
within 300 feet of any residentially zoned or guided property or
residential land use, unless completely screened by an
intervening building or located across an arterial or major
collector roadway from residentially zoned or guided property or
residential use.
f. Both the car wash and accessory vacuum shall conform to the
noise ordinance.
(f) Prohibited Uses.
(1) Trucking or package distribution centers.
(2) Implement sales and showrooms.
(3) Yards for storage, sale and distribution of building materials.
(4) Manufacturing/warehousing facilities.
(5) Tree care service businesses.
(6) Transportation services (ambulance, limousine, package delivery, taxi cab,
etc.)
(7) Outdoor Self-storage facility.
(8) Any use not specifically listed as permitted, conditionally permitted,
permitted with an interim use permit, or as allowed elsewhere in the City
Code, shall be considered prohibited. A prohibited use may be changed to
a permitted, conditionally permitted or interim use upon amendment of
this Chapter.
(g) Height and Setback Regulations.
B-1 District Commercial B-1 District Multiple Family Residential
Setbacks Setbacks
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
4 of 52
Front: 20 feet Front: 20 feet
Rear: 20 feet Rear: 30 feet
Side: 10 feet Side: 10 feet
Adjacent to Residential Adjacent to Residential
Front: 25 feet Front: 25 feet
Rear: 2x the width of the side yard of that which is
required in the residential district it borders
Rear: 30 feet
Side: 2x the width of the side yard of that which is
required in the residential district it borders
Side: 15 feet
Parking Setbacks
Front: 10 feet; 20 feet adjacent to residential
Rear: 10 feet adjacent to single family and two family residential; 5 feet adjacent to multiple family,
commercial or industrial
Side: 10 feet adjacent to single family and two family residential; 5 feet adjacent to multiple family,
commercial or industrial
Height: 3 stories or 40 feet
(1) Lot coverage regulations. No more than 50 percent of a lot or plat area
shall be occupied by buildings and no more than 75% of the lot may be
covered by impervious surface. No impervious surface may be closer than
50 feet from the ordinary high water level of the river and must be screen
by a natural material.
(h) Specific Conditional Use Permit Standards. The standards in this sub-section
apply to the uses that are listed as conditional uses within the B-1 district and shall
apply in additional to the general criteria for granting conditional use permits.
(1) Drive-through service windows (drive-up facilities). The conditions are as
follows:
a. Curb-cut entrances for queuing driveways and exit driveways
shall be consolidated with any other driveway entrances or exits
on the site.
b. A minimum of one hundred feet (100’) leading to the drive-up
window for one lane and sixty feet (60’) per lane when more than
one lane shall be provided for queuing.
c. The queuing area shall not contain any pedestrian crosswalks or
sidewalks. Driveway lanes shall be designed to that queuing
vehicles do not interfere with other vehicle and pedestrian
circulation on the site.
d. Driveways shall not be located between a principal building and
the street, or if a corner site, all adjacent roadways.
e. All queuing lanes shall be clearly identified using striping,
landscaping, and/or signs. Drive-up windows shall be located to
the rear or side of a building.
(2) Automobile sales, trailer sales, and/or any other establishment engaged in
the business of selling, leasing, displaying for sale, or renting motorized or
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
5 of 52
licensed vehicles. In addition to the requirements of subsection 74-112(b),
the site plan shall show:
a. Setbacks as follows:
1. Complying with all requirements of the B-1 Highway
Business District unless specifically covered by
subsection (1) a. 2 of this use.
2. Setbacks shall be physically maintained to prevent
vehicle overhang through landscaping, concrete curbing,
tire bumper blocks, a fence, or some other approved
means.
b. A plan for the display of vehicles along with the required traffic
circulation and parking plan, designating all vehicle storage and
display areas with painted striping on a paved surface, providing
widths of 12 feet or one-way traffic and 18 feet for two-way
traffic, and which will permit any displayed or stored vehicle to
be moved off premises without moving any other vehicle.
c. Adequate employee parking, a minimum of three customer
parking spaces, plus one additional parking space for 25
displayed or stored vehicles for the site. All customer parking
stalls shall be adequately signed. All parking areas shall be
paved.
d. Site plan shall show a permanent building on footings, with
restroom facilities, and connections with sewer and water, all in
conformance with the building code, with a minimum of 400
square feet. The exterior building construction shall be
consistent with the architectural standards of this section.
e. A used car lot shall have a total lot area of not less than 1.5 acres.
f. Positive drainage, including storm sewer basins if necessary to
adequately handle runoff, with concrete curbing around the
perimeter of the paved display storage area on all sites which
have not previously been licensed for used car sales and those
sites which cannot otherwise adequately control drainage.
g. No more than 70 percent of the available parking stalls can be
used for displaying vehicles not owned by the licensed car dealer.
h. Operation of the business shall conform to the approved site plan.
i. Owner-to-owner sales are not allowed unless specifically
provided for in a conditional use permit or amended conditional
use permit.
(3) Automobile Repair Shops.
a. All vehicles parked or stored on site shall display a current
license plate with a current license tab.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
6 of 52
b. Outside storage of any kind is prohibited.
c. Junk vehicles may not be located outside at any time.
d. All vehicles, other than junk vehicles, waiting for repair or pickup
shall be stored on the site within an enclosed building or in
parking spaces in compliance with Section 74-266.
e. As a condition of approval, the Planning Commission and City
Council may limit the amount of vehicles that may be stored
overnight.
f. All repairs shall be performed within a completely enclosed
building.
(4) Car wash.
a. The site shall provide stacking space for the car wash. The
amount of stacking space shall take into account the type of car
wash and the amount of time it takes to wash a vehicle. Stacking
spaces shall not interfere with parking spaces or traffic
circulation.
b. The exit from the car wash shall have a drainage system which is
subject to the approval of the City and gives special consideration
to the prevention of ice build-up during winter months.
c. The car wash and accessory equipment (i.e. vacuum) shall
conform to the noise ordinance.
(5) Any multiple family use permitted in the R-4 Residential District subject
to the conditions in Section 74-216 and any others required by this Code
or reasonably imposed by the City Council.
(6) Indoor Self-storage Facility.
a. The facility must provide a fully enclosed and heated drive-in
unloading area.
b. All storage units must be accessed from the interior of the
building unless otherwise approved by the City Council.
c. No outdoor storage of tenants’ goods or wares is allowed.
d. Automobile/trailer and truck rentals is prohibited. A loaner truck
for tenant use that is owned by the facility may be permitted as
approved by the City Council.
e. Overnight parking of vehicles and trailers are prohibited. A
loaner truck for tenant use that is owned by the facility may be
permitted to be parked overnight as approved by the City
Council.
f. The facility must be located on a minimum 2 acre lot.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
7 of 52
(i) Exterior Site Requirements.
(1) Outdoor storage and display. Outdoor storage of product or merchandise
offered at wholesale, material stored for salvage or disposal, or items used
in the operation of the business, is prohibited except when specifically
permitted elsewhere in this section. Outdoor display of materials such as
tires, lumber, building supplies, landscape materials offered for sale at
retail is prohibited unless an interim use permit is first obtained and it is
demonstrated that such display is not a hazard to the public health, safety,
convenience or welfare.
(2) Refuse. Dumpsters, recycling containers, compactors, and solid waste
handling areas are permitted in any setback and shall be screened from
adjacent property and from public view with a six foot high solid and
finished masonry wall with closeable gates. In no instance shall a chain
link fence, wood, vinyl or barbed wire fence be permitted.
(3) Mechanical Screening. All mechanical equipment on the ground or roof,
such as heating and air conditional units and transformers, shall be
screened on all sides or placed so as not to be visible from public streets.
Such screening shall be compatible with the building. Camouflaging
heating and air conditional units is an acceptable method of screening and
the intent of the screening is to distract the review of these areas, not to
provide total screening.
(4) Outdoor Patio Seating.
a. The front yard setback may be used as a plaza provided it is
constructed according to the requirements in this section.
b. A barricade such as fence, landscaping hedge, decorative bollards
or similar as approved by the City shall be used to separate the
plaza from a public sidewalk to define the space.
c. The use must be separated from any adjacent residential use by a
building wall or six foot fence. This provision will not apply if
the residential use is located on an upper story above the
principal use.
d. No speakers or other electronic device which emit sounds are
permitted if the use is located within 500 feet of a residential use.
e. The hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
if the use is located within 500 feet of a residential use.
f. Additional parking will not be required if the outdoor seating
area does not exceed 500 square feet or ten percent of the gross
floor area of the principal use, whichever is less. Parking will be
required at the same rate as the principal use for that portion of
outdoor seating area in excess of 500 square feet or ten percent of
the gross floor area.
g. An outdoor seating area shall not obstruct the movement of
pedestrians along sidewalks or through areas intended for public
use.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
8 of 52
(5) Exterior Lighting.
a. Exterior lighting shall be used to provide illumination for the
security and safety of entry drives, parking, service and loading
areas, pathways, courtyards and plazas, without intruding on
adjacent properties and shall comply with the following
standards:
1. Poles and fixtures shall be architecturally compatible
with structures and lighting on-site and on adjacent
properties.
2. Security lighting shall be adequate for visibility.
3. Metal halide lighting shall be used with a concealed
light source of the “cut off” variety to prevent glare and
“light trespass” onto adjacent buildings and sites.
4. Poles within landscaped areas and plazas shall have a
maximum height of twenty feet (20’), measured from
grade.
5. Poles in parking lots shall have a maximum height of
twenty four feet (24’) measured from finished grade.
b. Light Intensity.
1. A photometric lighting plan is required for all proposed
developments to ensure that adequate and appropriate
light levels are provided for each site condition.
2. Lighting shall not exceed .1 foot candle at residential
property lines or .5 foot candle on non-residential
property lines measured on a vertical plane.
3. Site lighting should provide consistent levels of
illumination, avoiding pockets of very high or low levels
of illumination.
(6) Screening.
a. All service entrances, utility structures associated with a building,
and loading docks and/or spaces shall be screened from the
abutting property and from public view from a public street.
b. Any fences or walls used for screening or other purposes shall be
constructed in a durable fashion of brick, stone and other
masonry materials specifically designed as fencing materials.
The finished side of the fence shall face the abutting property.
Chain link, wood, vinyl or barbed wire fences are not permitted.
c. The composition of the screening material and the placement on
the lot shall be left up to the discretion of the property owners as
long as the intent of this Section is met. A wall cannot be
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
9 of 52
substituted for a planting strip along any public street unless
supplemented by landscaping.
d. Landscaping used for screening shall be evergreen and at least
four feet (4’) tall with a minimum spread of two feet (2’) when
planted and no further apart than five feet (5’). Shrubs shall be
adequately maintained so that an average height of five to six feet
can be expected as normal growth within four years of planting.
The average expected height may be reduced to four feet (4’) for
screening along public streets.
e. The maximum height for walls and fences shall be six feet (6;) or
whatever is sufficient to visually screen the use but not less than
four feet (4’).
(7) Landscaping.
a. All landscaped areas where sod is present shall be irrigated with
an underground sprinkler system. Areas considered natural may
be exempt from irrigation requirements as determined by City
staff.
b. Landscaped islands shall be provided in parking lots to break up
and soften large areas of paving. At least one tree shall be
provided in each island. If possible, portions of stormwater
created from parking lots should be collected in the landscaped
islands as a source of irrigation.
c. All areas not covered by impervious surface or landscaping or
left natural shall be planted with cultured sod.
d. All landscaping shall be maintained as to be compliant with the
approved landscape plan submitted as part of the site plan
approval.
(j) Architectural Standards.
(1) In the B-1 District the primary exterior opaque materials on each elevation
of a non-residential building must be brick, stone, decorative masonry, or
similar materials or a combination thereof.
(2) No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the building exterior opaque
materials on each elevation, except for the service side of the building,
shall be comprised of the following accent materials:
a. Cast stone.
b. Wood shingles (cedar shingles with 6-inch maximum exposure.
c. Lap siding, cedar or redwood (6 inch width, no diagonal siding)
d. Tongue and groove paneling, cedar or redwood (6 inch width, no
diagonal siding).
e. Copper (untreated).
f. Stucco and EFIS.
g. Cement board.
h. Glass (does not include windows).
i. Dark anodized aluminum or metal as accent.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
10 of 52
j. Materials that are similar in character to those listed above.
(3) The following materials are not allowed as exterior opaque materials on
new buildings.
a. Smooth surfaced concrete block.
b. Prefabricated steel panels.
c. Aluminum, vinyl or fiberglass siding or roofing materials.
d. Precast concrete panels, unless specifically approved by the City
Council for a new commercial building.
e. Painting of previously unpainted brick.
f. Wooden exteriors, except for those listed as allowed above.
(4) Gas station and convenience stores. The gas canopy shall have similar
colors and materials to the building fascia.
(5) Franchises or national chains with standardized architecture and signage
shall comply with the standards contained in this section. Aggressive or
bright signage must be altered and scaled down to meet the intentions of
these standards.
(6) Facades.
a. Visual Breaks. The exterior of new buildings shall be designed
with visual breaks through the use of decorative tile work,
masonry (but not flat concrete block), belt courses of a different
texture and color, projection cornices, medallions, opaque or
translucent glass, artwork, vertical articulation, lighting fixtures,
or architectural elements not listed herein as approved by the City
Council.
b. Width. A building more than 45 feet in width shall be divided
into increments of no more than 45 feet through articulation of
the façade. This can be achieved through combinations of the
following techniques:
1. Division or breaks in materials.
2. Window bays.
3. Special treatment at entrances.
4. Subtle variations in rooflines and parapet detailing.
5. Building setbacks.
6. Awnings.
7. Repetitive elements.
(7) LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) Standards. The
City encourages the use of sustainable building materials and construction
techniques through programs such as the U.S. Green Building’s Council’s
LEED Program.
(8) Alternative Designs or Materials. To encourage creativity, imagination,
innovation, and variety in architectural design, the Planning Commission
may recommend modifications of the requirements of this Section and the
City Council may approve such modifications upon determining that the
proposed architectural design or exterior façade material(s) meets all of
the following conditions:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
11 of 52
a. The proposed design or material is consistent with the purposes
of this section.
b. The proposed design or material would enhance the architectural
appearance of the building and would be equal or superior to
designs or materials permitted by this section.
c. The proposed design or material would be in harmony with the
character of adjacent buildings and the surrounding district.
(9) Multiple-family residential. In addition to the regulations in this
subsection, architectural control and appearance shall be regulated as
follows:
a. Facades.
1. Visual Breaks. The exterior of new building shall be
designed with visual breaks through the use of
decorative tile work, masonry (but not flat concrete
block), belt courses of a different texture and color,
projecting cornices, medallions, opaque or translucent
glass, artwork, vertical articulation, lighting fixtures, or
architectural elements not listed herein as approved by
the City Council.
2. Width. A building more than 45 feet in width shall be
divided into increments of no more than 45 feet through
articulation of the façade. This can be achieved through
combination of the following techniques:
aa. Division of breaks in materials.
bb. Window bays.
cc. Special treatment at entrances.
dd. Subtle variations in rooflines and parapet
detailing.
ee. Building setbacks, façade recesses and
projections.
ff. Awnings.
gg. Repetitive elements.
b. Exterior Materials and Detailing.
1. New buildings and structures, additions, and revocations
must be constructed of durable materials.
2. In multi-story buildings, the ground floor shall be
distinguished from the floors above by the use of a
combination of the following:
aa. An intermediate cornice line.
bb. A difference in building materials or detailing.
cc. An offset in the façade.
dd. An awning, loggia, or arcade.
ee. Special window lintels.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
12 of 52
ff. Brick/stone corbels.
3. The exterior opaque materials on each respective
elevation of a multiple family residential building must
be brick, stone, decorative masonry or similar materials
or a combination thereof according to the following:
Public Façade: 50%; Side Façade: 33%; Interior Façade:
25%. The brick, stone, or decorative masonry shall be
focused on prominent architectural features, particularly
the office components of the building, elevations that
include primary building entrance or multiple tenant
entrances, corners of buildings, and the prominent
building elevations front on public streets.
4. The remaining percentage of the building exterior
opaque materials shall be comprised of the following
materials:
aa. Cast stone.
bb. Wood shingles (cedar shingles with 6-inch
maximum exposure.
cc. Lap siding, cedar or redwood (6 inch width, no
diagonal siding)
dd. Tongue and groove paneling, cedar or redwood
(6 inch width, no diagonal siding)
ee. Copper (untreated).
ff. Stucco and EFIS.
gg. Cement board.
hh. Glass (does not include windows).
ii. Dark anodized aluminum or metal as accent.
jj. Materials that are similar in character to those
listed above.
5. The following materials are not allowed as exterior
materials:
aa. Smooth surfaced concrete block.
bb. Pre-fabricated steel panels.
cc. Aluminum, vinyl or fiberglass siding or roofing
materials.
dd. Pre-cast concrete panels, unless specifically
approved by the City Council for a new
commercial building.
ee. Painting of previously unpainted brick or
concrete block.
ff. Wooden exteriors, except for those listed as
allowed above.
(10) Accessory building and garages. Exterior wall finishes of accessory
buildings and garages shall have the same exterior finish as the main
structure or other compatible finish approved during site plan review. No
detached garages or accessory building shall be closer to the front lot line
than the principal structure. Such structure shall be set back behind the
principal building regardless of the existing front yard setback of the
principal building.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
13 of 52
(k) Parking Requirements.
(1) General regulations. Parking shall be as required under Chapter 74,
Article IX, Division 2.
a. In instances where parking areas abut the street, the parking lot
edge must be delineated with landscaping, architectural fencing
or other decorative features.
(2) Off-street parking of large vehicles. The following standards shall apply:
a. Oversized vehicles are prohibited from overnight parking if
visible from a public street.
b. No more than three (3) midsized vehicles that are visible from a
public street may be parked overnight on any one property used
for commercial purposes provided that sufficient off-street
parking is available. Such midsized vehicles must be used
primarily for business related purposes of a business located on
the same property.
c. Vehicles on residential property are regulated by Section 74-487
of this Chapter.
d. This section shall not prohibit vehicles or trailers from short-term
parking or when loading, unloading, or rendering a service.
e. This section shall not regulate the size of vehicles for sale, lease
or rent provided such vehicles are located upon a property that
has obtained a conditional use permit for such use.
(l) General standards applying to all properties adjacent to residential.
(1) Screening. Commercial uses adjacent to residential uses shall be screened
by walls of buildings, screening fence and/or landscaping compatible with
the principal building and surrounding land uses as approved by the City.
A minimum 6 foot high fence and/or landscaping shall be maintained
along the property lines adjacent to residential to provide screening of the
site.
(2) Noise. No impact noise shall be audible from any residential property,
consistent with the noise ordinance.
(3) Vehicle storage. Outside vehicle storage shall be screened any abutting
residential uses.
(4) Outdoor activities. Any outdoor activities included but not limited to patio
seating shall be limited to the hours of 7:00am – 10:00pm. This does not
include outdoor areas for smoking purposes.
(5) Access. Primary access from local residential streets shall be prohibited.
(6) Specific land uses.
a. Gas station or convenience store. The conditions are as follows:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
14 of 52
1. The fuel sales are incidental to a retail store.
2. Wherever fuel pumps are to be installed, pump islands
shall be installed.
3. Provisions are made to control and reduce noise.
4. All signing and information or visual communication
devices shall be minimized toward residential uses and
in compliance with the sign ordinance.
b. Animal handling. The conditions are as follows:
1. No animals or pens shall be kept outside the building or
cause offensive odor or noise discernible at the property
line of the lot on which the activity is being conducted.
2. Where animals are boarded, the facility shall be located
a minimum of 100 feet from any parcel that is zoned
residential and used or subdivided for residential or has
an occupied institutional building, including but not
limited to schools, religious institutions, and community
centers.
c. Drive through service windows (drive-up facilities). The
conditions are as follows:
1. If the drive-up facility is adjacent to residential, such
facility shall establish sound barriers and be screened
from vehicle lights in stacking areas.
2. The hours of operation are limited to 7:00am to
10:00pm unless extended by the City Council as part of
a conditional use permit.
(7) The City may impose further conditions for uses to protect the health,
safety, and general welfare of the public.
(m) Application of Standards. The B-1 Highway Business standards apply to the
following:
(1) All newly constructed buildings, structures or additions.
a. New additions may use exterior materials that are similar to
the existing structure materials.
(2) All exterior improvements or renovations.
(3) All new or reconstructed parking areas with five (5) or more spaces.
(n) Exemptions. The following are exempt from this Section:
(1) Projects involving only work, maintenance or repairs to the interior of a
building or structure.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
15 of 52
(2) Projects involving only ordinary maintenance or the replacement of
similar or identical materials of an existing building.
(o) Pre-existing structures. Any building, structure, parking area or sign that
lawfully exists on the effective date of this Ordinance, which is otherwise not
permitted under this Ordinance, may be continued in the same manner as existed
before the effective date of this Ordinance. Buildings that are destroyed by an
act of nature may be reconstructed with similar materials as existed prior to
being destroyed. All redevelopment of properties shall be subject to the
requirements of this Section.
(p) Compliance. No conditional use permit, interim use permit, site plan approval,
building permit, or sign permit shall be issued until the requirements of this
Section have been met. It is the applicant’s responsibility to provide the necessary
information to City staff to determine compliance with this Section.
(q) Approval Process.
(1) Site Plan Procedures. All development proposals under this section shall
be reviewed under the site plan approval process as set forth in this
chapter.
(r) Enforceability.
(1) Violation. Unless expressly provided otherwise, it shall be a misdemeanor
for any person or entity to violate any provision of the City Code,
including this Section, any rule or regulation adopted in pursuance of any
such provision, or any order lawfully enforcing the City Code or this
Section. The term “misdemeanor” is defined in Minnesota Statutes
Section 609.02, subd. 3, as amended. In addition to prosecuting a violation
as a misdemeanor, the City may separately, or in conjunction with the
misdemeanor prosecution, bring an action for specific performance to
enforce any provisions of the City Code, including this Section, any rule
or regulation adopted in pursuance of such provision, or any order
lawfully enforcing the City Code, including this Section.
Section 74-237. B-2 Shopping Center Business District.
(a) Purpose of district. The B-2 shopping center business district is intended to provide
a district which may be applied to land in single ownership or unified control for
the purpose of developing a planned business center with a unified and organized
arrangement of buildings and service facilities at locations which are suitable for
such use.
(b) Permitted uses. Within a B-2 shopping center business district, no building or land
shall be used except for one or more of the following uses:
(1) Any use permitted in the B-1 Highway Business District; except that no
dwellings shall be permitted.
(2) Antique or gift shop.
(3) Appliance store.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
16 of 52
(4) Art and school supply.
(5) Auto accessory store.
(6) Artist’s studio.
(7) Bakery or pastry shop selling retail only.
(8) Bowling Alley.
(9) Bank and savings institutions.
(10) Barber or beauty shop.
(11) Bicycle sales and repair shop.
(12) Book or stationary store.
(13) Bus station.
(14) Business, commercial or trade schools.
(15) Department store.
(16) Discount store.
(17) Candy, ice cream, soft drinks or confectionery stores, excluding drive-in
type of service.
(18) Camera or photographic supply store.
(19) Carpet and rug store.
(20) Churches.
(21) Classrooms.
(22) Clinics, for people only.
(23) Clothing stores.
(24) Community Centers.
(25) Dancing, gymnastics, or martial arts school.
(26) Delicatessen.
(27) Drug store.
(28) Dry cleaning or laundry collection stations.
(29) Electrical appliance or equipment store.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
17 of 52
(30) Essential services, including electrical, gas, water, sewer distribution and
collection lines, pumping facilities for water and sewer, rights-of way for
transportation modes, and telephone switching facilities.
(31) Fitness and health clubs, gyms.
(32) Florists or gift shops.
(33) Furniture store, including upholstery when conducted as a secondary use.
(34) Glass, china or pottery store.
(35) Grocery, fruit or vegetable store.
(36) Hardware store.
(37) Hobby store.
(38) Interior decorating studio.
(39) Jewelry store and watch repair.
(40) Leather goods and luggage shop.
(41) Library.
(42) Loan and finance companies.
(43) Meat market but not including the processing of meat products other than
those sold on the premises.
(44) Music shops.
(45) Music studios and musical instrument store.
(46) Newsstand.
(47) Offices, business or professional, including ticket sales.
(48) Paint, wallpaper stores.
(49) Pet shop.
(50) Photographers studio.
(51) Plumbing, television or radio repair when operated as an accessory use to
a retail sales establishment.
(52) Postal substation.
(53) Restaurant, tearoom, café, tavern and package liquor stores excluding
drive-in type of service.
(54) Sewing machine sales and service shop.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
18 of 52
(55) Shoe store or shoe repair shop.
(56) Sporting goods store.
(57) Tailor shop.
(58) Telephone booth (outside).
(59) Theater, excluding drive-in type of service.
(60) Tobacco shop.
(61) Toy store.
(62) Taxi stand.
(63) Service stations for gasoline and oil, excluding motor, body or fender
repair, provided, that they are designed as an integral part of the district.
(64) Video store.
(65) Brewpubs.
(66) Electronic Cigarette/Vaporizer Shop
(c) Permitted accessory uses. Within a B-2 shopping center business district, the
following uses shall be permitted accessory uses:
(1) Accessory uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in section 36-
51; provided, that any incidental repair or processing necessary to conduct
a permitted use shall not occupy more than 30 percent of the floor space.
(2) Off-street parking and loading as regulated by this Chapter.
(3) Signs as regulated by this Chapter.
(d) Interim Uses.
(1) Other uses that in the opinion of the City Council are similar to the
permitted uses in the B-2 Shopping Center Business District and that are
established for the convenience of the community.
(e) Prohibited Uses.
(1) Any use not specifically listed as permitted, conditionally permitted,
permitted with an interim use permit, or as allowed in the City Code, shall be
considered prohibited. A prohibited use may be changed to a permitted use,
conditionally permitted or interim use upon amendment of this Chapter.
(f) Height, yard, area and lot coverage regulations. Height, yard, area and lot
coverage regulations for the B-2 shopping center business district shall be as
follows:
(1) Height regulations. No building shall hereafter be erected or structurally
altered in a B-2 district to exceed three stories or 40 feet in height.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
19 of 52
(2) Front yard regulations. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not
less than 50 feet; except that on every lot in a B-2 shopping center
business district located across the street from any one of the classes of
residence districts there shall be a front yard of not less than 75 feet.
(3) Side yard regulations. There shall be a side yard on each side of a
building, having a width of not less than 30 feet; except, that no building
shall be located within 50 feet of any side lot line abutting a lot in any of
the classes of residence districts.
(4) Rear yard regulations. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not
less than 30 feet; except, that no building shall be located within 50 feet of
any rear lot line abutting a lot in any of the classes of residence districts.
(5) Lot area regulations. The minimum area of land to be included in a B-2
Shopping Center Business District shall be at least 2½ acres.
(6) Lot coverage. Not more than 40 percent of the lot or plot area shall be
occupied by buildings.
(7) Outdoor storage and display. Open storage of products or merchandise
offered at wholesale, material stored for salvage or disposal, or items used
in the operation of the business, is prohibited. Open display of materials
such as tires, lumber, building supplies, or landscape materials offered for
sale at retail is prohibited unless a conditional use permit is first obtained.
Open display of other products or merchandise offered for sale at retail is
allowed, provided that the City Council may require a conditional use
permit for any exterior display if it is demonstrated that such display is a
hazard to the public health, safety, convenience, or welfare.
(8) Refuse. All waste material, debris, refuse, or garbage shall be kept in an
enclosed building or properly contained in a closed container designed for
such purposes and housed in a refuse enclosure or within a building.
Refuse enclosures shall screen garbage containers on three sides and shall
have a concrete floor.
(g) General regulations. General regulations for the B-2 shopping center business
district shall be as follows:
(1) All business shall be conducted within an enclosed yard or building.
(2) Additional regulations in the B-2 shopping center business district are set
forth in various sections of this Chapter.
(h) Administrative procedure.
(1) The proponents of a B-2 shopping center business district shall submit a
general development plan, along with the application for rezoning, to the
City Planning Commission for their review and recommendation to the
City Council. The general development plan shall be drawn to scale and
the plan shall show:
a. The proposed site and existing developments on adjacent
properties.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
20 of 52
b. Proposed size, location and arrangement of buildings.
c. Parking areas and stall arrangement.
d. Entrance and exit drives.
e. Landscaping.
f. Dimensions.
(2) If the zoning change is approved, the general development plan is attached
to and is a part of the ordinance establishing the zoning change. Any
substantial change in the plan will require a resubmission to and approval
by the City Planning Commission and City Council.
(3) If the zoning change is approved, the first phase of construction must
begin within two years after approval of the general development plan and
zoning change by ordinance or the district may be zoned back to its
original zoning district classification or other appropriate zoning district
classification.
(4) Owner or developer must agree to comply with all the requirements of the
City regarding lighting, noise abatement, traffic control and regulation,
maintaining order and keeping the premises free from debris.
Section 74-238. B-3 General Business District.
(a) Purpose of district. The B-3 general business district is designed to accommodate
the central retail and office activities, which are of citywide and of regional
significance with a wide variety of retail shopping opportunities. The retail and
office uses, which are allowed in this district are those which are basically retail in
nature in order that a convenient, compact regional shopping area can be provided.
the B-3 District also accommodates residential uses that compliment the central
business district activities and that can benefit from existing commercial and
public services and facilities.
(b) Use regulations.
(1) Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be considered permitted uses in
the B-3 General Business District:
a. Any use permitted in the B-1 Highway Business District, unless
specifically listed as a conditional or prohibited use in this
Section.
b. Hotel or motel.
c. Retail store.
d. Restaurant or Deli.
e. Office, agency or studio.
f. Bank, savings and loan association, insurance.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
21 of 52
g. Personal Service and repair establishments such as barber and
beauty shops, shoe repair, etc.
h. Clinic medical, dental, veterinary.
i. Employment agency.
j. Personal service and craftsman shop.
k. Municipal and public buildings and utility structures.
l. Grocery store.
m. Parking-garage or lot.
n. Newspaper publishing; job printing establishment.
o. Theatre.
p. Club, lodge.
q. Confectionery shop that is primarily retail.
r. Incidental repair or processing necessary to conduct a permitted
use; provided, that such use shall not occupy more than thirty
percent of the floor space.
s. Essential services, including electrical, gas, water, sewer
distribution and collection lines, pumping facilities for water and
sewer systems, rights-of-way for transportation modes, and
telephone switching facilities.
t. Brewpubs.
u. Microbrewery with taproom, subject to the following standards:
1. The establishment must include a taproom that is open a
minimum of 2 days or 8 hours per week.
2. The malt liquor sold for consumption at the business
must be produced by the brewer on the licensed
premises.
3. The malt liquor may be sold to other bars, restaurants or
wholesalers for distribution on a limited scale according
to Federal and State regulations.
4. The bottling process shall be manual or semi automated,
not fully automated.
5. The establishment shall obtain all applicable Federal,
State, and City licenses.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
22 of 52
6. A microbrewery located at street level shall provide at
least 50% of the total floor space at the front
one-half of the building to be used for sales, tasting, or
restaurant purposes.
v. Microdistillery with tasting room/cocktail room, subject to the
following standards:
1. The establishment must include a tasting room/cocktail
room that is open a minimum of 2 days or 8 hours per
week.
2. The distilled spirits sold for consumption at the business
must be produced by the brewer on the licensed
premises.
3. The distilled spirits may be sold to other bars,
restaurants or wholesalers for distribution on a limited
scale according to Federal and State regulations.
4. The bottling process shall be manual or
semi-automated, not fully automated.
5. The establishment shall obtain all applicable Federal,
State, and City licenses.
6. A microdistillery located at street level shall provide at
least 50% of the total floor space at the front
one-half of the building to be used for sales, tasting, or
restaurant purposes.
(2) Accessory Uses. The following shall be considered Accessory Uses:
a. Uses customarily incidental to the permitted and conditional uses
in the B-3 General Business District.
(3) Conditional Uses. The following shall be considered Conditional Uses in
the B-3 General Business District:
a. Place of amusement, recreation, or assembly other than a theatre,
when conducted indoors.
b. Libraries.
c. Churches.
d. Hospitals.
e. Any multiple family use permitted in the R-3 residential district
subject to the following conditions in addition to any others
required by this Code or reasonably imposed by the Council:
1. Setbacks:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
23 of 52
aa. Front yard regulations. In the B-3 general
business district no front yard shall be required
except as follows: On every lot in the district of
which the front is directly opposite of any
classes of residential districts (across the street)
there shall be a front yard of not less than 25
feet. Off-street parking may be allowed in the
required front yard provided a 10-foot setback
is required and when across from a residential
district provided a 20-foot setback is required
from any street right-of-way.
bb. Side yard regulations. In the B-3 central
business district there shall be no side yard
required except as follows: Along the side of
every lot in the district that abuts or adjoins any
classes of residential districts there shall be a
side yard of not less than 15 feet. Such side
yard may be used for off-street parking and
loading provided a 10-foot setback is provided
when abutting a single or two family residential
district and 5 feet when abutting a multiple
family, commercial or industrial district.
cc. Rear yard regulations. In the B-3 Central
Business District no rear yards shall be
required. Rear yards may be used for off-street
parking and loading provided a 10-foot setback
is provided when abutting a single or two
family residential district and 5 feet when
abutting a multiple family, commercial or
industrial district.
2. Lot Coverage. No more than 30% of the total area of a
riparian lot shall be covered with an impervious surface
unless adequate measures are taken to control the rate
and enhance the quality of runoff.
3. Height. No building shall hereafter be erected or
structurally altered in the B-3 district to exceed 3 stories
or 40 feet.
4. Parking. Off-street parking shall be determined as
necessary by the Planning Commission and City
Council.
5. Lot area requirements. For newly constructed
buildings, lot area requirements shall follow the
requirements for multiple family structures as required
in Article V, Division 2, Section 74-215 of this chapter.
Existing buildings do not need to meet lot area
requirements.
6. Floor area requirements. Floor area requirements shall
follow the requirements for multiple family dwellings as
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
24 of 52
required in Article V, Division 2, Section 74-211 of this
chapter.
f. Schools, public and private.
g. Any use of the same general character as any of the B-3
permitted or conditional uses.
(4) Prohibited Uses. The following are Prohibited Uses:
a. Automobile service stations, gasoline and oil stations.
b. Cabinet and carpenter shops.
c. Carting or hauling stations.
d. Distribution stations for milk or other beverages.
e. Fabrication and light manufacturing.
f. Implement sales and showrooms.
g. Yard for storage, sale and distribution of building materials.
h. Any use not specifically listed as permitted, conditionally
permitted, permitted with an interim use permit, or as allowed
elsewhere in the City Code, shall be considered prohibited. A
prohibited use may be changed to a permitted, conditionally
permitted or interim use upon amendment of this Chapter.
(c) Heights, yard and design regulations. Heights, yard and design regulations for the
B-3 general business district shall be as follows:
(1) Height regulations. No building shall hereafter be erected or structurally
altered in a B-3 district to exceed a height equal to the width of the street
upon which it fronts. Towers or spires may exceed the height allowed
upon securing of a conditional use permit from the lawful governing body.
(2) Area and design regulations. Area and design regulations shall be as
follows:
a. A complete plot plan showing the building or buildings and
surrounding land areas of the entire project must be submitted for
approval.
b. A complete set of building plans and specifications certified by a
registered architect and engineer, sewerage disposal, and water
supply plans must accompany the plot plan.
c. Additional area and design requirements may be imposed so as to
establish a B-3 general business district which will best serve the
general welfare and benefit of the entire City.
d. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided as
required in Article IX, Division 2 of this Chapter.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
25 of 52
(3) Front yard regulations. In the B-3 general business district no front yard
shall be required except as follows: On every lot in the district the front of
which is directly opposite any of the classes of residential districts (across
the street) there shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet which may
not be used to provide off-street parking or loading spaces.
(4) Side yard regulations. In the B-3 general business district no side yard
shall be required except as follows:
a. Along that side of every lot in the district that abuts or adjoins
any of the classes of residential districts there shall be a side yard
of a width not less than the width of a side yard required in the
residential district.
b. As required to conform with article IX, division 2 of this Chapter.
(5) Rear yard regulations. In the B-3 general business district, no rear yards
shall be required, except provision shall be made for off-street loading and
unloading of merchandise and supplies.
(6) Amount of impervious surface. No more than 30 percent of the total lot
area of a riparian lot shall be covered with an impervious surface unless
adequate measures are taken to control the rate and enhance the quality of
runoff.
(7) Distance of impervious surface from river. No impervious surface for the
purpose of roads or parking areas may be closer than 50 feet from the
ordinary high water level of the river and must be screened by natural
material.
(8) Buildings near river. No building may be closer than 75 feet from the
ordinary high water level of the river and must be screened from the river
by mature trees. Buildings within the Rum River Overlay District may not
exceed 35 feet in height unless fully screened from the river by mature
trees. Such buildings in excess of 35 feet in height shall not exceed the
height of mature trees nor be clearly visible from the river at the ordinary
high water level on the opposite bank.
(9) Width of riparian residential lots. All riparian residential lots shall have a
width of not less than 75 feet.
(10) Outdoor storage and display. Open storage of products or merchandise
offered at wholesale, material stored for salvage or disposal, or items used
in the operation of the business, is prohibited. Open display of materials
such as tires, lumber, building supplies, or landscape materials offered for
sale at retail is prohibited unless a conditional use permit is first obtained.
Open display of other products or merchandise offered for sale at retail is
allowed, provided that the City Council may require a conditional use
permit for any exterior display if it is demonstrated that such display is a
hazard to the public health, safety, convenience, or welfare.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
26 of 52
(11) Refuse. All waste material, debris, refuse, or garbage shall be kept in an
enclosed building or properly contained in a closed container designed for
such purposes and housed in a refuse enclosure or within a building.
Refuse enclosures shall screen garbage containers on three sides and shall
have a concrete floor.
Section 74-239. B-4 Limited Business District.
(a) Purpose of district. The B-4 limited business district is intended to provide a
district for a limited range of office or professional service needs at the periphery of
residential neighborhoods or integrated with residential uses. The district is
established to provide locations for businesses that typically serve nearby
neighborhoods. Because of compatibility factors adjacent to residential uses, other
non-retail uses may be permitted only with a conditional use permit. The district is
typically located near the intersection of collectors and thoroughfares in areas that
are otherwise developed with residences.
(b) Use regulations.
(1) Permitted Uses. A building or premises in a B-4 District shall be used
only for the following purposes:
a. Clinics, medical offices.
b. Convalescent and nursing homes.
c. Financial institutions.
d. Laboratories – medical, dental.
e. Mortuaries, funeral homes, monument sales.
f. Motel, hotel, or apartment hotel.
g. Offices: administrative, executive, professional, governmental,
medical, research, without merchandising services.
h. Personal service and repair establishments such as barber and
beauty shops, shoe repair, etc.
i. Coffee shop/delicatessen.
j. Professional portrait studio and film shop.
k. Retail services such as eyeglass fitting, quick printing, tailor
shops, photo pick-up stations, etc.
l. Single Family dwellings.
m. A State licensed residential facility or a housing with services
establishment registered under Minnesota Statutes Chapter 144
D, serving six (6) or fewer persons as allowed under Minnesota
Statues 462.357 Subd. (7), as amended.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
27 of 52
n. A State licensed day care facility serving twelve or fewer persons
as allowed under Minnesota Statutes 462.357 Subd. 7, as
amended.
o. A group family day care facility licensed under Minnesota Rules
9502.0315 to 9502.0445, to serve fourteen (14) or fewer children
as allowed under Minnesota Statutes 462.357 Subd. 7, as
amended. A conditional use permit obtained pursuant to Section
74-112 of the Code is required for the operation of such schools
or facilities on non-residential premises within this zone.
Residential facilities whose primary purpose is to treat juveniles
who have violated criminal statutes related to sex offenses or
have been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of conduct in
violation of criminal statutes relating to sex offenses shall not be
considered a permitted use.
(2) Accessory Uses. Uses that are customarily incidental to permitted and
conditional uses in the B-4 Highway Business District.
(3) Conditional Uses. The following are permitted conditional uses:
a. Any permitted business use if the lot is adjacent to any
Residential District.
b. Convention hall, armory, exhibition hall.
c. Offices with merchandising services.
d. Planned Business Development which has a principal use any
permitted or conditional use allowed in this section, and may
have any other permitted or conditional use as a secondary use(s).
e. Churches.
f. Residential living units as secondary use to principal business
use.
g. Accessory structures, other than garages.
h. State licensed daycare facilities.
i. Hospitals.
j. Libraries.
k. Public schools or private schools having a course of instruction
approved by the Minnesota Board of Education for students
enrolled in grades K-12, or any portion thereof, provided they do
not include boarding or residential facilities.
l. Other commercial uses determined by the City Council to be of
the same general character of the permitted and conditional uses
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
28 of 52
above and found not to be detrimental to the general public health
and welfare.
(4) Prohibited Use. Any use not specifically listed as permitted or,
conditionally permitted, permitted with an interim use permit, or as
allowed elsewhere in the City Code, shall be considered prohibited. A
prohibited use may be changed to a permitted, conditionally permitted or
interim use upon amendment of this Chapter.)
(c) Minimum lot size. In the B-4 limited business district the lot area shall be large
enough to meet the requirements of this section and all other applicable sections
contained in this chapter.
(d) Minimum setbacks. Minimum setbacks in the B-4 limited business district shall be
as follows:
(1) Building setbacks are established as follows: from another building 25
feet; from street or street right-of-way 25 feet; adjacent residential district
20 feet; adjacent to commercial or other district, side yard ten feet, rear
yard ten feet; parking and drives ten feet.
(2) Parking and drives shall be setback from: street right-of-way--ten feet;
adjacent residential district--20 feet (the planning commission may reduce
to five feet when the use on the abutting property is a nonresidential use);
other adjacent property--five feet.
(e) Maximum lot coverage. In the B-4 limited business district no more than
40 percent of a lot shall be covered by buildings.
(f) Maximum building height. Building heights in the B-4 limited business district
shall not exceed three stories or 40 feet.
(g) Landscaping. In the B-4 limited business district at least 15 percent of the lot area
shall be landscaped. A buffer yard or green space with a minimum depth of 20 feet
shall be provided in the B-4 limited business district adjacent to an abutting
residential district. The planning commission may waive this requirement when the
use on the abutting property is a nonresidential use.
Section 74-240. B-5 Regional Business District.
(a) Purpose of district. The purpose of the B-5 Regional Business District (B-5
District) is to provide an area intended to promote commercial development,
including retail, office, entertainment, service and other complimentary uses
serving a trade area beyond the City boundaries. Development should be designed
in an integrated and unified manner according to an overall plan emphasizing
minimal impacts to adjacent land use, encouraging pedestrian activity, and have
attractive and high quality buildings, decorative lighting, landscaping, signage,
sidewalks and trails.
(b) Definitions: For purposes of this Section, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings ascribed to them by this Section or Section 74-2 of the City
Code. Words not defined shall have the plain meaning generally ascribed to them.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
29 of 52
(1) Restaurant, sit down. An establishment engaged in the preparation and
retail sale of food and beverages, which is characterized by table service to
customers and that is not a convenience or fast food restaurant.
(2) Restaurant, convenience. An establishment which sells ready-to-eat foods,
in bulk or individual servings, primarily for consumption off the premises,
and is not a fast food restaurant.
(3) Restaurant, fast food. An establishment whose design or principal
method of operation includes three (3) or more of the following
characteristics.
a. A permanent menu board is provided from which to select and
order food.
b. Customers pay for food before consuming it.
c. A self-service condiment bar is provided.
d. Trash receptacles are provided for self-service bussing.
e. Most main course food items are substantially preparedor
cooked on premises and packaged in individual, non-reusable
containers.
(c) District Boundaries. The B-5 District is as shown on the official zoning map and is
further divided into two sub districts:
(1) North – Generally located north of the road connection from 7th Avenue to
the western boundary of the district.
(2) South – Generally located south of the road connection from 7th Avenue to
the western boundary of the district.
(d) Permitted Uses.
(1) B-5 District- North.
a. Corporate office campus and retreats
b. Professional offices
c. Laboratories – Medical, dental
d. Medical/Dental/veterinary clinic/hospital
e. Personal service uses (barber, nails, tanning) but not including
tattooing, branding, body piercing or similar establishments.
f. Sit down Restaurant
g. Brewpub
h. Convenience and fast food restaurant when not located in their
own freestanding building.
i. Retail, when not in an individual space greater than 15,000 sf.
j. Hotel
k. Bank/Financial Institution
l. Drug Store/Pharmacy
m. Dance Studio
n. Coffee shops
o. Ice cream shop
p. Toy store
q. Photographer’s studio
r. Pet shop
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
30 of 52
s. Jewelry store
t. Florist or gift shop
u. Professional portrait studio and film shop
v. Essential services, including electrical, gas, water, sewer
distribution and collection lines, pumping facilities for water and
sewer systems, rights-of-way for transportation modes, telephone
switching facilities, and fiber optic.
(2) B-5 District– South
a. Personal service uses (barber, nails, tanning) but not including
tattooing, branding, body piercing or similar establishments.
b. Sit-Down Restaurant
c. Brewpub
d. Retail
e. Hotel
f. Medical/Dental/veterinary clinic/hospital
g. Bank/Financial Institution
h. Drug Store/Pharmacy
i. Dance Studio
j. Grocery store
k. Movie Theatre
l. Health, athletic or fitness clubs
m. Coffee shop
n. Convenience and fast food restaurant when not located in their
own freestanding building.
o. Ice Cream shop
p. Toy store
q. Sporting goods store
r. Photographer’s studio
s. Pet shop
t. Jewelry store
u. Florist or gift shop
v. Hardware store
w. Professional portrait studio and film shop
x. Essential services, including electrical, gas, water, sewer
distribution and collection lines, pumping facilities for water and
sewer systems, rights-of-way for transportation modes, telephone
switching facilities, and fiber optic.
(e) Conditional uses. The following are conditional uses in the B-5 District:
(1) Drive-thru/up window or teller service as accessory to the permitted use.
(2) Building heights exceeding the lesser of three stories or 40 feet in height.
(3) Other business uses which in the opinion of the City Planning
Commission and City Council are similar and which are established for
the convenience of the community, but only after a conditional use permit
has been secured from the City Council.
(f) Interim Uses.
(1) Outdoor Display and Sales associated with the business.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
31 of 52
(g) Accessory Uses.
(1) Uses customarily incidental to the permitted and conditional uses in the B-
5 District.
(h) Prohibited Uses.
(1) Auto oriented uses including but not limited to repair, gas/service station,
car wash and sales.
(2) Pawn Shops
(3) Residential uses
(4) Fast-food restaurants located in a freestanding building
(5) Any use not specifically listed as permitted, conditionally permitted,
permitted with an interim use permit, or as allowed elsewhere in the City
Code, shall be considered prohibited. A prohibited use may be changed to
a permitted, conditionally permitted or interim use upon amendment of
this Chapter.
(i) Height and setback regulations. Height and setback regulations for the B-5 District
shall be as follows:
(1) Height regulations. No building shall hereafter be erected or structurally
altered in a B-5 district to exceed three stories or 40 feet in height,
whichever is less. Greater heights may be allowed upon issuance of a
conditional use permit.
(2) Building Setbacks to Public Right-Of-Way. Setbacks from 7th Avenue and
Bunker Lake Boulevard shall be a minimum of 25 feet and a maximum of
40 feet. A minimum setback of 10 feet shall be provided from all other
right-of-way.
(3) Building Setbacks to Adjacent Property. A minimum setback of 10 feet
shall be provided to adjacent property except as noted otherwise in this
Section. This setback requirement does not apply to buildings with
common walls and a zero lot line development.
(4) Parking and Drives. A minimum setback of 25 feet shall be provided
from 7th Avenue and Bunker Lake Boulevard except that parking may not
be located in front of the building setback line. A minimum setback of 10
feet shall be provided from all other right-of-way. A minimum setback of
5 feet shall be provided from all other adjacent property except as noted
otherwise in this Section.
(5) Setbacks to City Limits and Anoka Nature Preserve. A minimum setback
of 25’ for a building and 50’ for a parking lot/drive shall be provided from
adjacent city limits and the Anoka Nature Preserve.
(6) Lot coverage regulations. Not more than 50 percent of a lot shall be
covered by buildings and no more than 75% of a lot may be covered by
impervious surface.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
32 of 52
(j) Exterior Site Requirements.
(1) Outside Storage. Outdoor storage is prohibited except for shopping cart
corrals and maintenance equipment storage as shown on an approved site
plan. The cart corrals shall be used for the temporary storage of carts.
Area for the storage of materials and equipment directly related to site
maintenance and safety shall be completely screened in an enclosure
constructed of materials similar to and compatible with the principal
structure.
(2) Service Areas. Areas for loading, truck parking, trash compaction and
collection, and other service functions shall be designed with the same
exterior materials and to complement the overall design of the buildings
being served by them. Such areas shall be screened from view of adjacent
lots, public streets, and building entries. Trash enclosures shall be
screened with a six-foot masonry wall enclosure and gate or located in the
service area.
(3) Mechanical Screening. All mechanical equipment on the ground or roof,
such as heating and air conditioning units and transformers, shall be
screened on all sides or placed so as not to be visible from public streets.
Such screening shall be compatible with the building. Camouflaging
heating and air conditioning units is an acceptable method of screening
and the intent of the screening is to distract the view of these areas, not to
provide total screening.
(4) Exterior Lighting.
a. Exterior lighting shall be used to provide illumination for the
security and safety of entry drives, parking, service and loading
areas, pathways, courtyards and plazas, without intruding on
adjacent properties and shall comply with the following
standards:
1. Poles and fixtures shall be architecturally compatible
with structures and lighting on-site and on adjacent
properties.
2. Security lighting shall be adequate for visibility.
3. Metal halide lighting shall be used with a concealed
light source of the “cut-off” variety to prevent glare and
“light trespass” onto adjacent buildings and sites.
4. Poles within landscaped areas and plazas shall have a
maximum height of twenty feet (20’), measured from
grade.
5. Poles in parking lots shall have a maximum height of 24
feet measured from finished grade.
b. Light intensity.
1. A photometric lighting plan is required for all proposed
commercial developments to ensure that adequate and
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
33 of 52
appropriate light levels are provided for each site
condition.
2. Lighting shall not exceed .1 foot candle at residential
property lines or .5 foot candle on non-residential
property lines measured on a vertical plane.
3. Site lighting should provide consistent levels of
illumination, avoiding pockets of very high or low levels
of illumination.
(5) Landscaping.
a. All landscaped areas where sod is present shall be irrigated with
an underground sprinkler system. Areas considered natural may
be exempt from irrigation requirements as determined by city
staff.
b. Landscaped islands shall be provided in parking lots to break up
and soften large areas of paving. At least one tree shall be
provided in each island. If possible, portions of stormwater
created from parking lots should be collected in the landscaped
islands as a source of irrigation.
c. All areas not covered by impervious surface or landscaping or
left natural shall be planted with cultured sod.
d. All landscaping shall be maintained as to be compliant with the
approved landscape plan submitted as part of the site plan
approval.
(6) Parking area screening from 7th Avenue, Bunker Lake Boulevard, and City
Limits. All parking lots abutting any of the above mentioned shall be
screened by one of the following:
a. Planting screen. A planting screen consisting of a row of
alternating evergreen shrubs and deciduous trees. The deciduous
trees shall be a minimum of two to 2½ inches caliper and shall be
spaced not more than 15 feet apart. Shrubs shall be a minimum
of two to three feet in height at time of planting, with a mature
height of four to six feet, and shall be spaced between the trees in
such proximity as will form a screen. Planting screens shall be
maintained in a neat and healthy condition. As an alternative, a
planting screen may consist of a continuous row of evergreen
trees, no less than four feet in height at time of planting and ten
feet apart.
b. Berm. A berm no less than six feet in height with a side slope of
no greater than 1½ to two. The berm shall be sodded or seeded,
mulched, and maintained until sod develops. Slopes greater than
1½ to two may be used if the slopes are stepped, using retaining
walls. Plant materials resistant to erosion may be substituted for
sod or seed with the prior approval of the City Council.
c. Others. Topography, existing vegetation, permanent buildings, or
other barriers may be substituted for the provisions of this
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
34 of 52
subsection, if in the determination of the Planning Commission
and City Council they provide equivalent screening.
(k) Parking Requirements.
(1) Required number of off-street parking spaces based on use shall be
determined by regulations set forth in Section 74-522 of the city zoning
code.
(l) Architectural Standards.
(1) In the B-5 District the primary exterior opaque materials on each elevation
of a building must be brick, stone, decorative masonry, rock faced
concrete block or similar materials or a combination thereof.
(2) In the B-5 District no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the building
exterior opaque materials on each elevation shall be comprised of the
following accent materials:
a. Cast stone
b. Copper
c. Stucco and EFIS.
d. Cement board
e. Glass (does not include windows)
f. Aluminum
g. Materials that are similar in character to those listed above.
(m) Signs. Signage shall be designed to be integral with the architectural character of
the building to which they belong. Specifically, the scale, proportion and color
shall be appropriate to the building to which the sign is attached. Elements to be
considered include architectural appearance, sign size, type of illumination, sign
motion, sign setback, surface colors, and items of information. The architectural
appearance of the sign shall not be so dissimilar to the existing signage on
surrounding buildings as to cause impairment in property value or constitute a
blighting influence.
The following sections shall also apply to signs within the B-5 District: Section
74.446 General Regulations; Section 74.447 Temporary Signs; and Section 74.445
Exempt Signs. If provisions of this section are in conflict with other standards in
this chapter, the most restrictive shall apply.
(1) The total surface area of business signs for a business shall not exceed
four (4) square feet per linear foot of building frontage.
(2) No single business sign surface shall exceed 200 square feet in area, nor
shall two or more smaller signs be so arranged and integrated as to create
a surface area in excess of 200 square feet.
(3) Pylon signs are prohibited.
(4) Monument signs are permitted for individual businesses on the property
the businesses are located on. No monument sign or any part thereof may
project higher than ten feet (10’) above average grade at the building line.
All portions of the sign must be set back a minimum of five feet (5’) from
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
35 of 52
the property line. Monument signs may not exceed forty (40) square feet
and shall be included in the total calculation for site signage.
(5) One entrance monument sign for the development is permitted at each of
the primary entrances from 7th Avenue and Bunker Lake Boulevard. No
monument sign or any part thereof may project higher than ten feet (10’)
above average grade. All portions of the sign must be set back a minimum
of five feet (5’) from the property line. Monument signs may not exceed
300 square feet. The intent of the entrance monument is to identify
businesses within the development.
(6) No rooftop signs shall be permitted.
(7) Integral roof signs are permitted.
(8) Consistently changing, flashing, moving, rotating, traveling, or scrolling
electronic variable signs are prohibited.
(9) LED signs shall be prohibited.
(n) Site Plan Approval Process.
(1) Procedures. All development approvals shall be required pursuant to
Section 74-38 of the Anoka City Code as amended.
(o) Enforceability.
(1) Violation. Unless expressly provided otherwise, it shall be a misdemeanor
for any person or entity to violate any provision of the City Code,
including this Article, any rule or regulation adopted in pursuance of any
such provision, or any order lawfully enforcing the City Code or this
Article. The term “misdemeanor” is defined in Minnesota Statutes Section
609.02, subd. 3, as amended. In addition to the prosecuting of a violation
as a misdemeanor, the City may separately, or in conjunction with the
misdemeanor prosecution, bring an action for specific performance or
abatement to enforce any provisions of the City Code, including this
Article, any rule or regulation adopted in pursuance of such provision, or
any order lawfully enforcing the City Code, including this Article.
Section 74-241. B-6 Neighborhood Commercial Business District
(a) Purpose and Intent of District. The purpose of the B-6 Neighborhood Business
Commercial District (B-6 District) is to provide appropriately located areas for low
intensity retail stores, offices, and personal service establishments patronized by
residents of the neighborhood area. The uses allowed in this district are to provide
goods and services on a limited community market scale and located in areas which
are well served by collector or arterial street facilities at the edge of residential
districts. It is intended that the standards will achieve the following specific
purposes:
(1) Maintain the visual environment of the City, protect the general welfare,
and ensure that the City’s property values, buildings, designs, appearance,
character, and economic well-being are preserved and respected through
minimum design and appearance standards;
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
36 of 52
(2) Reinforce and support a healthy development pattern in which new
buildings and building modifications maintain the City’s unique character
and heritage through complementary and appropriate use of building
materials, massing and architectural details;
(3) Encourage a diversity of uses and activities that promote pedestrian
activity;
(4) Promote the use of quality construction;
(5) Enhance the visual and aesthetic appeal of the corridor;
(6) Group compatible business uses that will draw trade that is naturally
compatible and promotes the business prosperity and public convenience;
(7) Protect the private investors who commit to redevelopment;
(8) Encourage creativity, imagination, innovation, and variety in architectural
design and building composition through design principles that promote
harmony in the physical relationships between residential and commercial
structures and compatible land uses.
(b) Application of Standards. The B-6 District standards apply to the following:
(1) All newly constructed buildings, structures or additions.
a. New additions may use exterior materials that are similar to the
existing structure materials.
(2) All exterior improvements or renovations.
(3) Changes in exterior color to any building within district.
(c) Exemptions. The following are exempt from this Section:
(1) Projects involving only work, maintenance or repairs to the interior of a
building or structure.
(2) Projects involving only ordinary maintenance or the replacement of
similar or identical materials of an existing building.
(d) Pre-existing structures. Any building, structure, parking area or sign that lawfully
exists on the effective date of this Ordinance, which is otherwise not permitted
under this Ordinance, may be continued in the same manner as existed before the
effective date of this Ordinance. Buildings that are destroyed by an act of nature
may be reconstructed with similar materials as existed prior to being destroyed. All
redevelopment of properties shall be subject to the requirements of this Section.
(e) Compliance. No conditional use permit, interim use permit, site plan approval,
building permit, or sign permit shall be issued until the requirements of this Section
have been met. It is the applicant’s responsibility to provide the necessary
information to City staff to determine compliance with this Section.
(f) Permitted, Conditional, Interim, Accessory and Prohibited Uses.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
37 of 52
(1) Permitted Uses.
a. Retail stores
b. Retail services such as eyeglass fitting, quick printing, tailor
shops, photo pick-up stations, etc.
c. Dine in restaurants
d. Fast-food restaurants without drive-through
e. Offices, such as administrative, executive, professional,
governmental, medical, research, without merchandising services
f. Medical and dental clinics and offices
g. Bakeries
h. Dry-cleaning pick-up
i. Assisted living facilities
j. Police and fire stations
k. Banks, savings and loan, insurance offices
l. Personal service and repair establishments such as barber, beauty
shops, shoe repair, etc.
m. Hardware and craftsman shops
n. Grocery stores/Specialty food markets
o. Coffee shops
p. Brew pubs
q. Liquor stores
r. Tobacco shops
s. Professional portrait studios and film shops
t. Pet grooming
u. Sign making
v. Dance and music studios, martial arts, judo, boxing
w. Laundromats
x. Clubs, lodges
y. Health/Wellness centers or clubs
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
38 of 52
z. Parks
aa. Mortuaries, funeral homes and chapels
bb. Veterinary clinics, animal hospital; no outdoor runs
cc. Photocopying, printing, publishing
dd. Flower shop
ee. Mail order business
ff. Essential facilities and services, including electrical, gas, water,
sewer distribution and collection lines, pumping facilities for
water and sewer systems, rights-of-way for transportation modes,
and telephone switching lines.
gg. Electronic Cigarette/Vaporizer Shop
(2) Conditional Uses.
a. Fast food restaurants with drive through
b. Drive-up windows or teller service as accessory use to permitted
use
c. Churches, religious use, place of worship
d. Libraries
e. Public or private schools provided they do not include boarding
or residential facilities
f. Trade schools, vocational schools, colleges, universities,
institutions of higher learning
g. Outdoor activities other than patio seating when property is
located adjacent to residential
h. State licensed facilities serving from 7 through 16 persons
i. State licensed day care facilities serving from 13 through 16
persons
j. Two family dwellings
k. Two to Six family dwellings
l. Townhouses, rowhouses (not to exceed eight units per building
or six in a linear configuration) and each dwelling unit shall have
separate and individual front and rear entrances and solid walls of
at least five feet in height and 12 feet in length extending to the
rear of each dwelling unit so as to substantially enclose on at
least three sides a semiprivate outdoor space
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
39 of 52
m. Multiple dwellings, apartments
n. Automobile service stations, gasoline and oil stations.
1. Pump, pump islands, and canopies may be located in the
front yard, except where located directly across from a
residential, and provided they are not less than fifteen
(15’) from the property line.
2. Temporary promotional signs affixed to freestanding
signs, pumps, pump islands, canopies, or any structure
other than the main structure shall be prohibited.
o. Automobile repair shops.
1. All vehicles waiting for repair or pick-up shall be stored
on the site within an enclosed building or in parking
spaces in compliance with off-street parking
regulations.
2. All repairs shall be performed within a completely
enclosed building.
3. All vehicles parked or stored on-site shall display a
current license plate with a current license tab. Outside
storage of automotive parts or storage of junk vehicles
shall be prohibited except within an approved enclosed
storage area.
4. The sales of vehicles shall be prohibited.
5. The use shall employ best management practices
regarding the venting of odors, gas and fumes. Such
vents shall be located a minimum of ten feet (10’)
above grade and shall be directed away from residential
uses. All storage tanks shall be equipped with vapor
tight fittings to preclude the escape of gas vapors from
the fill pipes.
p. Car wash.
1. The site shall provide stacking space for the car wash.
The amount of stacking space shall take into account the
type of car wash and the amount of time it takes to wash
a vehicle. Stacking spaces shall not interfere with
parking spaces or traffic circulation.
2. The exit from the car wash shall have a drainage system
which is subject to the approval of the City and gives
special consideration to the prevention of ice build-up
during winter months.
3. The car wash and accessory equipment (ie. vacuum)
shall conform to the noise ordinance.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
40 of 52
q. Indoor shooting ranges.
1. All local, State, and Federal laws related to the operation
of an indoor shooting range shall be met.
2. Specialized inspections and documentation by qualified
professional shall be required as part of the building
permit process to verify the indoor gun range system is
constructed and installed to the manufacturer’s
specifications.
3. All indoor shooting ranges shall be designed and
expected to meet the noise regulations of the City of
Anoka.
4. Firearms used in indoor shooting ranges shall be limited
to the capabilities of the range’s system and building
construction.
5. Indoor range hours of operation shall be approved by the
City Council.
r. Any other uses found to be of the same general character of the
permitted uses.
(3) Interim Uses.
a. Overnight parking of more than three (3) mid-sized vehicles
(4) Accessory Uses.
a. Transit facilities
b. Information kiosks
c. Farmer’s markets
d. Outdoor patio seating
e. Outdoor merchandise display (permanent) of seasonal or
convenience items (e.g. windshield washer fluid, softener salt) as
an accessory use in association with an allowed principal use
provided that:
1. The area so occupied shall not exceed 10 percent of the
gross floor area of the principal building or 100 square
feet, whichever is less.
2. No display of merchandise shall occur within the
required front, rear, or side yards.
3. Such outdoor display of merchandise shall be limited to
the area of customer entrance areas or within pump
islands. No outdoor business display shall be located
where it obstructs the line of sight of passing motorists.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
41 of 52
4. Such outdoor display of merchandise shall not exceed
five feet in height.
5. Such outdoor display area shall be included in the
calculations for parking spaces required for the use and
shall not occupy space required for parking as regulated
by the City Code, except as may be exempted for cause
by the Zoning Administrator.
f. Accessory Car Wash/Vacuums.
1. No more than one car wash bay shall be allowed.
2. The car wash shall be designed to be an integral part of
the principal building, and may not be a separate
freestanding structure.
3. The site shall provide stacking space for the car wash.
The amount of stacking space shall take into account the
type of car wash and the amount of time it takes to wash
a vehicle. Stacking spaces shall not interfere with
parking spaces or traffic circulation.
4. The exit from the car wash shall have a drainage system
which is subject to the approval of the City and gives
special consideration to the prevention of ice build-up
during winter months.
5. The car wash and accessory equipment (ie. vacuum)
shall conform to the noise ordinance.
(5) Prohibited Uses.
a. Transportation services (ambulance, limousine, package delivery,
taxi cab, etc.)
b. Self-storage facility
c. Manufacturing/warehousing facilities
d. Yards for storage, sale and distribution of building materials
e. Multi-screen movie theatres with more than five screens
f. Hospitals
g. Tree care services
h. Any uses not specifically listed as permitted, conditionally
permitted, permitted with an interim use permit, or as allowed
elsewhere in the City Code, shall be considered prohibited. A
prohibited use may be changed to a permitted, conditionally
permitted or interim use upon amendment of this Chapter.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
42 of 52
(g) Bulk and Dimensional Standards.
(1) The following table establishes bulk and dimensional standards:
Properties not adjacent or abutting residential
Minimum Maximum
Building Height --- 40 feet
Building Coverage --- 50%
Impervious surface --- 85%
Multiple Family Residential Setbacks
Front 20 feet
45 feet
Side 10 feet ---
Rear 30 feet ---
Commercial/Mixed Use
Front 10 feet 20 feet
Side 10 feet ---
Rear 20 feet ---
Parking setback
Front 10 feet ---
Side 5 feet ---
Rear 5 feet ---
(2) For particular property lines adjacent to residential, the following table
shall be used. For the purpose of this subsection, properties with
residential across right of way shall not be considered as adjacent to or
abutting residential.
Properties adjacent or abutting residential
Minimum Maximum
Building Height --- 40 feet
Building Coverage --- 50%
Impervious surface --- 85%
Multiple Family Residential Setbacks
Front
20 feet
45 feet
Side 15 feet; 20 feet for 3 stories ---
Rear 30 feet ---
Commercial/Mixed Use
Front 10 feet 20 feet
Side Twice the width of the side
yard of that which is
required in the residential
district it borders
---
Rear Twice the width of the side
yard of that
which is required in the
residential
---
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
43 of 52
district it borders
Parking Setbacks 5 feet adjacent to multiple
family; 10 feet adjacent to
single family and two
family residential
---
(3) Density standards for residential uses. The density for residential uses
shall be no less than 4 units, but not more than 20 units per acre.
(4) Garages and Accessory Buildings:
a. Where the principal use is a single-family dwelling, garages shall
contain at least four hundred forty (440) square feet and not more
than one thousand fifty-six (1,056) square feet.
b. For two-family units, garages shall not contain less than four
hundred (400) square feet and not more than one thousand fiftysix
(1,056) square feet of floor area.
c. An accessory building shall be attached to and made structurally
part of the principal building if it is less than five (5) feet from
the principal building.
d. For single-family and two-family residential uses, the total area
of all accessory building on a lot, including attached garage
space, shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square
feet.
e. For single-family and two-family residential uses, a lot shall
contain no more than three (3) accessory buildings, including
attached.
f. Exterior wall finishes of accessory building shall have the same
exterior finish as the main structure or other compatible finish
approved during site plan review. No detached garages or
accessory building shall be closer to the front lot line than the
principal structure. Such structure shall be set back behind the
principal building, regardless of the existing front yard setback of
the principal building.
(h) Architectural Standards.
(1) Facades.
a. Visual breaks. The exterior of new buildings shall be designed
with visual breaks through the use of decorative tile work,
masonry (but not flat concrete block), belt courses of a different
texture and color, projecting cornices, medallions, opaque or
translucent glass, artwork, vertical articulation, lighting fixtures,
or architectural elements not listed above as approved by the City
Council.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
44 of 52
b. Width. A building more than 45 feet in width will be divided into
increments of no more than 45 feet through articulation of the
facade. This can be achieved through combinations of the
following techniques:
1. Division or breaks in materials
2. Window bays
3. Special treatment at entrances
4. Subtle variation in roof lines and parapet detailing
5. Building setbacks
6. Awnings
7. Repetitive increments
c. Color Schemes. All exterior finish colors shall be consistent with
the acceptable color palettes currently on file with the city
planning department charged with such oversight.
(2) Exterior Materials and Detailing.
a. New buildings and structures, additions and renovations must be
constructed of durable materials.
b. Where the original façade has been removed and replaced with
an unsympathetic alteration, the reinstatement of earlier styles in
keeping with the character of the building is encouraged.
c. In multi-story buildings, the ground floor shall be distinguished
from the floors above by the use of a combination of the
following:
1. An intermediate cornice line
2. A difference in building materials or detailing
3. An offset in the façade
4. An awning, trellis, loggia or arcade
5. Special window lintels
6. Brick/stone corbels
d. The primary exterior opaque materials on each elevation of a
building, except for the service side, must be brick, stone,
decorative masonry, or similar materials or a combination
thereof.
e. No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the building exterior
opaque materials on each elevation, except for the service side of
the building, shall be comprised of the following accent
materials:
1. Cast stone
2. Wood shingles (cedar shingles with 6-inch maximum
exposure
3. Lap siding, cedar or redwood (6 inch width, no diagonal
siding)
4. Tongue and groove paneling, cedar or redwood (6 inch
width, no diagonal siding)
5. Copper (untreated)
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
45 of 52
6. Stucco and EFIS
7. Cement board
8. Glass (does not include windows)
9. Dark anodized aluminum or metal as accent
10. Materials that are similar in character to those listed
above.
f. The following materials are not allowed as exterior opaque
materials on new buildings:
1. Smooth concrete block
2. Pre-fabricated steel panels
3. Aluminum, vinyl or fiberglass siding or roofing
materials
4. Pre-cast concrete panels, unless specifically approved by
the City Council for a new commercial building
5. Painting of previously unpainted brick
6. Wooden exteriors, except for those listed as allowed
above.
g. LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design)
Standards. The City encourages the use of sustainable building
materials and construction techniques in through programs such
as the US Green Building’s Council’s LEED program.
h. Alternative Designs or Materials. To encourage creativity,
imagination, innovation, and variety in architectural design, the
Planning Commission may recommend modifications of the
requirements of this Section and the City Council may approve
such modifications upon determining that the proposed
architectural design or exterior facade material(s) meets all of the
following conditions:
1. The proposed design or material is consistent with the
purposes of this section.
2. The proposed design or material would enhance the
architectural appearance of the building, and would be
equal or superior to designs or materials permitted by
this section.
3. The proposed design or material would be in harmony
with the character of adjacent buildings and the
surrounding district.
i. The use of bars, chains or similar security devices that are visible
from a public street or sidewalk shall be prohibited.
(3) Franchise or National Chain Architecture.
a. Franchises or national chains with standardized architecture and
signage shall comply with the standards contained in this Section.
Aggressive and bright signage must be altered and scaled down
to meet the intentions of these standards.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
46 of 52
(4) Exterior Lighting.
a. Exterior lighting shall be used to provide illumination for the
security and safety of entry drives, parking, service and loading
areas, pathways, courtyards and plazas, without intruding on
nonadjacent properties and shall comply with the following
standards:
1. Poles and fixtures shall be architecturally compatible
with structures and lighting on-site and on adjacent
properties.
2. Security lighting shall be adequate for visibility, but not
overly bright.
3. Metal halide lighting shall be used with a concealed
light source of the “cut-off” variety to prevent glare and
“light trespass” onto adjacent buildings and sites.
4. Poles within landscaped areas and plazas shall have a
maximum height of twenty feet (20’), measured from
grade, and shall be coordinated with city standards.
5. Poles in parking lots shall have a maximum height of 24
feet (24’) measured from finished grade.
6. Lighting fixtures mounted directly on structures shall be
permitted when utilized to enhance specific architectural
elements or to help establish scale or provide visual
interest.
7. “Wall paks” shall be permitted only in loading and
service areas and shall be down-lit and shielded from
view.
8. Shielded illumination or fixtures shall be permitted to
light building mounted signage, building facades, or
pedestrian arcades if they are integrated into a building’s
architectural design.
9. Lighting should highlight entrances, art, terraces, and
special landscape features.
10. Separate pedestrian scale lighting or other low level
fixtures, such as bollards, shall be incorporated for all
pedestrian ways through parking lots and drop-off areas
at entrances to buildings.
11. All primary walkways, steps or ramps along pedestrian
routes shall be illuminated.
b. Light intensity.
1. A photometric lighting plan is required for all proposed
commercial developments to ensure that adequate and
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
47 of 52
appropriate light levels are provided for each site
condition.
2. Lighting shall not exceed 0.1 foot candle at residential
property lines or 0.5 foot candle on non-residential
property lines measured on a vertical plane.
3. The following minimum levels of illuminations must be
maintained for each of the specific locations.*
Building entrances 5.0 foot candles
Sidewalks 2.0 foot candles
Bikeways 1.0 foot candles
Courts/Plazas/Terraces 1.5 foot candles
Ramps 5.0 foot candles
Stairways 5.0 foot candles
Underpasses 5.0 foot candles
Waiting Areas 1.0 foot candles
Parking lots 1.0 foot candles
Roadways 1.5 foot candles
* Values given are in minimum average maintained
horizontal foot candles which are measured at the
average point of illumination between brightest and
darkest areas, 4’ – 5’ above the ground surface. (Source:
IES Lighting Handbook – 4th Edition)
4. Site lighting should provide consistent levels of
illumination, avoiding pockets of very high or low levels
of illumination.
(5) Outdoor Seating, Plazas and Patios.
a. The front yard setback abutting a street may be used as a plaza
provided it is constructed according to the requirements listed in
this subsection.
b. A barricade such as fence, landscaping hedge, decorative bollards
or similar as approved by the City shall be used to separate the
plaza from a public sidewalk to define the space.
c. The use must be separated from any adjacent residential use by a
building wall or six foot fence. This provision will not apply if
the residential use is located on an upper story above the
principal use.
d. No speakers or other electronic devise which emit sound are
permitted if the use is located within 500 feet of a residential use.
e. The hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00am to 10:00pm if
the use is located within 500 feet of a residential use.
f. Additional parking will not be required if the outdoor seating
area does not exceed 500 square feet or ten percent of the gross
floor area of the principal use, whichever is less. Parking will be
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
48 of 52
required at the same rate as the principal use for that portion of
outdoor seating area in excess of 500 square feet or ten percent of
the gross building area, whichever is less.
g. An outdoor seating area shall not obstruct the movement of
pedestrians along sidewalks or through areas intended for public
use.
(i) Utility Areas, Mechanical Equipment and Screening.
(1) Mechanical Screening. All mechanical equipment on the ground or roof,
such as heating and air conditioning units and transformers, shall be
screened on all sides or placed so as not to be visible from public streets.
Such screening shall be compatible with the building. Camouflaging
heating and air conditioning units is an acceptable method of screening
and the intent of the screening is to distract the view of these areas, not to
provide total screening.
(2) Service Areas and Refuse. Areas for loading, truck parking, trash
compaction and collection, and other service functions shall be designed
with the same exterior materials and to complement the overall design of
the buildings being served by them. Such areas shall be screened from
view of adjacent lots, public streets, and building entries. Trash enclosures
shall be screened with a six-foot masonry wall enclosure and gate or
located in the service area.
(3) Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage shall be prohibited except when
specifically permitted elsewhere in this section.
(j) General standards applying to all properties adjacent to residential.
(1) Screening. Commercial uses adjacent to residential uses shall be screened
by walls of buildings, screening fence and/or landscaping compatible with
the principal building and surrounding land uses as approved by the City.
A minimum 6 foot high fence and/or landscaping shall be maintained
along the property lines adjacent to residential to provide screening of the
site.
(2) Noise. No impact noise shall be audible from any residential property,
consistent with the noise ordinance.
(3) Vehicle storage. Outside vehicle storage shall be screened from any
abutting residential uses.
(4) Outdoor activities. Any outdoor activities included but not limited to patio
seating shall be limited to the hours of 7:00am – 10:00pm. This does not
include outdoor areas for smoking purposes.
(5) Access. Primary access from local residential streets shall be prohibited.
(6) Specific land uses.
a. Gas station or convenience store.
1. The fuel sales are incidental to a retail store.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
49 of 52
2. Wherever fuel pumps are to be installed, pump islands
shall be installed.
3. Provisions are made to control and reduce noise.
4. All signing and information or visual communication
devices shall be minimized toward residential uses and
in compliance with the sign ordinance.
b. Animal handling. The conditions are as follows:
1. No animals or pens shall be kept outside the building or
cause offensive odor or noise discernible at the property
line of the lot on which the activity is being conducted.
2. Where animals are boarded, the facility shall be located
a minimum of 100 feet from any parcel that is zoned
residential and used or subdivided for residential or has
an occupied institutional building, including but not
limited to schools, religious institutions, and community
centers.
c. Drive through service windows (drive-up facilities). The
conditions are as follows:
1. If the drive-up facility is adjacent to residential, such
facility shall establish sound barriers and be screened
from vehicle lights in stacking areas.
2. The hours of operation are limited to 7:00am to
10:00pm unless extended by the City Council as part of
a conditional use permit.
(7) The City may impose further conditions for uses to protect the health,
safety, and general welfare of the public.
(k) Landscaping. The use of window boxes, hanging flower baskets, vines and/or other
seasonal landscaping is encouraged. Window boxes, hanging baskets and planters
should be used around entries. Vines may be used to cover blank walls.
(l) Parking Requirements.
(1) General regulations. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be
provided as required in Article IX, Division 2 of this chapter.
(2) Off-street parking of large vehicles. The following standards shall apply:
a. Oversized vehicles are prohibited from overnight parking if
visible from a public street.
b. Storage of mid-size vehicles associated with the company are
permitted only in screened areas approved by the City.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
50 of 52
c. No more than three (3) midsized vehicles that are visible from a
public street may be parked overnight on any one property used
for commercial purposes provided that sufficient off-street
parking is available. Such midsized vehicles must be used
primarily for business related purposes of a business located on
the same property.
d. Vehicles on residential property are regulated by Section 74-487
of this Chapter.
e. Overnight parking of semi tractors and/or trailers, dump trucks,
fire trucks, buses, recreational vehicles, boats, farm trucks or
tractors, tank trucks, stored vehicles and special mobile
equipment are prohibited regardless of length, height, or gross
vehicle weight.
f. This section shall not prohibit vehicles or trailers from short-term
parking or when loading, unloading, or rendering a service.
g. This section shall not regulate the size of vehicles for sale, lease
or rent provided such vehicles are located upon a property that
has obtained a conditional use permit for such use.
(3) Parking lots. In instances where parking areas abut the street, the sidewalk
edge must be delineated with landscaping, architectural fencing or other
decorative features.
(4) Vehicular circulation and parking. Parking and vehicular circulation shall
comply with the following standards:
a. Parking drives and drive through service windows (drive-up
facilities) should be located away from building entrances, be
designed to minimize pedestrian conflicts, and shall not be
located between the main building entrance and the street.
b. Access for all commercial uses shall be from a roadway
identified in the comprehensive plan as a collector or arterial or
otherwise located so that access can be provided without
generating significant traffic on local residential streets.
(m) Signs. Signage shall be designed to be integral with the architectural character of
the building to which they belong. Specifically, the scale, proportion and color
shall be appropriate to the building to which the sign is attached. Elements to be
considered include architectural appearance, sign size, type of illumination, sign
motion, sign setback, surface colors, and message. The architectural appearance of
the sign shall not be so dissimilar to the existing signage on surrounding buildings
as to cause impairment in property value or constitute a blighting influence.
Signage shall be consistent with Section 74-449. The following sections shall also
apply to signs within the B-6 district: Section 74-446 General Regulations; Section
74-447 Temporary Signs; and Section 74-445 Exempt Signs. Residential signs
shall be regulated by the provisions in Chapter 74, Article VIII related to
residential signs.
(1) Business signs, and nameplate signs are permitted, subject to the
following regulations:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
51 of 52
a. One identification sign, not to exceed 32 square feet in area, for
private educational institutions, community centers, rest homes,
nursing homes, and dental offices. It may be illuminated, but
non-flashing. A second sign may be permitted if located at a
primary entrance on a major thoroughfare.
b. For business and professional office buildings, a business sign
not exceeding 40 square feet in surface area or four percent of
wall area upon which it is placed, whichever is greater, and
indicating only the name and address of the building, occupant or
management, may be displayed. For corner lots, two such signs,
one facing each street, shall be permitted but may be combined to
have one sign not to exceed 60 square feet.
c. Notwithstanding the provisions in subsection (1) b of this section,
business signs for multi-tenant centers shall be regulated as
follows:
1. A multi-tenant center will be allowed a freestanding
nameplate sign not exceeding 60 square feet in surface
area.
2. The City may recognize separate sign plans for multitenant
buildings which will supersede the ordinance.
The sign plans which have been approved by the City
Council will have the effect of a sign ordinance for
specific property. The procedure for approval of sign
plans that exceeds the limits of this Code shall be that of
a variance described in this chapter.
d. Notwithstanding the provisions in subsection (1) (a) of this
section, business signs for single-tenant conditional or permitted
uses shall be limited to 200 square feet in area, including all
signs, with not more than 150 square feet of signage attached to
the building and not more than 60 square feet of ground sign.
Businesses which have frontage on two (2) arterial streets may
have two (2) pylon signs, but may not exceed 200 square feet of
total signage.
(2) In the B-6 highway business district, no sign shall project higher than 25
feet above average grade at the building line or the height of the building,
whichever is greater. Integral roof signs are permitted in the B-6 district.
(3) All signs and signposts must be placed at a minimum of five feet setback
from the property line in the B-6 neighborhood commercial business
district.
(n) Approval Process.
(1) Site Plan Procedures. All development proposals under this section shall
be reviewed under the site plan approval process as set forth in this
chapter.
(o) Enforceability.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 3
52 of 52
(1) Violation. Unless expressly provided otherwise, it shall be a misdemeanor
for any person or entity to violate any provision of the City Code,
including this Section, any rule or regulation adopted in pursuance of any
such provision, or any order lawfully enforcing the City Code or this
Section. The term “misdemeanor” is defined in Minnesota Statutes
Section 609.02, subd. 3, as amended. In addition to prosecuting a violation
as a misdemeanor, the City may separately, or in conjunction with the
misdemeanor prosecution, bring an action for specific performance to
enforce any provisions of the City Code, including this Section, any rule
or regulation adopted in pursuance of such provision, or any order
lawfully enforcing the City Code, including this Section.
Sections 74-242--74-255. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
1 of 35
CHAPTER 74. ZONING
ARTICLE V. District Regulations.
DIVISION 4. Industrial Districts.
Section 74-256. M-1 Light Industrial District.
(a) Purpose of district. The M-1 Light Industrial District is established to provide
exemplary standards of development for certain industrial uses that prefer to be
located in choice of strategic sites. The M-1 Light Industrial District is intended
for administrative, wholesaling, manufacturing and related uses which can
maintain high standards of appears, including open spaces and landscaping;
limit external effects such as noise, odors, smoke and vibration; and not require
a high level of public services. With proper control, these areas should become
compatible with commercial or residential areas.
(b) Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the M-1 Light Industrial
District:
(1) Art equipment supplier – manufacturers.
(2) Bags, boxes and paper containers, manufacturing and storage.
(3) Baker products.
(4) Bottling establishments.
(5) Books, loose-leaf binders – fabrication and assembly.
(6) Cabinet and woodworking establishments.
(7) Books and Bookbinding.
(8) Camera and photographic manufacturing.
(9) Cold Storage Plants.
(10) Commercial printing, publishing, engraving and reproduction firms.
(11) Confectionary and related products, manufacture and packaging.
(12) Dental Instruments and supplies.
(13) Dry cleaning and drying establishments.
(14) Electric lighting and wiring equipment – manufacture.
(15) Electric measuring and testing equipment – manufacture.
(16) Electric tubes and other components – manufacture.
(17) Electrical products and appliances – manufacture and assembly.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
2 of 35
(18) Fabricated metal products – warehousing and administration.
(19) Food and kindred products – warehousing and administration only.
(20) Footwear – manufacture and fabrication.
(21) Furniture and fixtures – warehousing and administration only.
(22) Hand and edge tools (except machine tools) – manufacturing and
assembly.
(23) Hardware warehousing and distribution operations.
(24) Ice plants and ice cream plants.
(25) Jewelry manufacture.
(26) Laboratory instruments and associated equipment, scientific and
testing.
(27) Luggage, handbags, similar items – manufacture and assembly.
(28) Lumber and wood products.
(29) Mail order houses.
(30) Medical and surgical instruments and supplies.
(31) Machine tool – manufacture.
(32) Newspaper plants and offices.
(33) Optical instruments and lenses – manufacture and assembly.
(34) Paper and allied products – warehousing and administration.
(35) Patterns – design and manufacture.
(36) Pottery shops.
(37) Precision instruments.
(38) Plastic extrusion and molding and fixture.
(39) Plumbing fixture and equipment – wholesale.
(40) Radio and television – assembly and parts fabrication.
(41) Sport equipment – manufacture and assembly.
(42) Scientific and research instruments and equipment – manufacture and
assembly.
(43) Signs and advertising display materials.
(44) Stone, Clay and glass products – warehousing and administration.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
3 of 35
(45) Telephone and telegraph technical apparatus – manufacture and
assembly.
(46) Temperature controls – fabrication and assembly.
(47) Textile products – warehousing and administration only.
(48) Trade Schools.
(49) Welding supply.
(50) Wholesale business facilities.
(51) Manufacturing of building materials.
(52) Office uses directly related to the above uses.
(53) Brewery, Micro.
(54) Brewery, National.
(55) Brewery, Regional.
(c) Conditional Uses. The following uses may be allowed only upon the City’s
issuance of a Conditional Use Permit:
(1) Any manufacturing, production, processing, cleaning, storage,
servicing, repair and testing of materials, goods or products similar to
those permitted uses which conform with the performance standards set
forth in this district.
(2) Other manufacture, processing, storage or commercial uses as
determined by the Planning Commission to be of the same general
character as the permitted uses above and found not to be obnoxious,
unhealthful, or offensive by reason of the potential emission or
transmission of noise, oxidation, smoke, dust, odors, toxic or noxious
matters or glare or heat.
(3) Retail and service establishments providing goods and services that are
complimentary to the principal uses in the district.
(4) Broadcast antenna, radio and television.
(5) Daycare facility.
(d) Accessory Uses. The following are considered accessory uses:
(1) Uses customary with and incidental to the principal use are permitted,
but shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the gross floor area of the
principal use.
(2) Signs, off-street parking and loading areas as regulated by this chapter.
(3) Taprooms.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
4 of 35
(e) Prohibited Uses.
(1) Public schools or private schools for students enrolled in grades K-12,
or any portion thereof.
(2) Any use not specifically listed as permitted, conditionally permitted,
permitted with an interim use permit, or as allowed elsewhere in the
City Code, shall be considered prohibited. A prohibited use may be
changed to a permitted, conditionally permitted or interim use upon
amendment of this Chapter.
(f) Site design standards. Site design standards in the M-1 light industrial district
shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum lot size.
a. A lot area of not less than one-half acre is required.
b. A lot width of not less than 75 feet abutting a public right-ofway
is required.
c. A lot depth of not less than 150 feet is required.
d. A minimum of ten percent of the total lot area shall be
reserved for landscaping use. Such landscaping shall conform
in design and appearance to other sections of this chapter as
approved by the planning commission.
(2) Front, side and rear yard requirements. Front, side and rear yard
requirements shall be as follows:
a. Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not
less than 25 feet between buildings and the street right-of-way
line devoted exclusively to landscaping except for necessary
points of access.
b. Distance from highways or thoroughfares. No building shall
be erected closer than 30 feet to the right-of-way line of any
state highway, major, or secondary thoroughfare.
c. Side yard. There shall be two side yards, one on each side of
any building, each of a width of not less than 20 feet, except
that where the district abuts or adjoins a residence district, the
side yard width shall not be less than 50 feet.
d. Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not
less than 30 feet, except that where the district abuts or adjoins
a residential district, there shall be a rear yard of not less than
50 feet.
e. Distance from adjacent residential district. No building shall
be erected closer than 50 feet to any lot line adjacent to a
residential district. The areas between buildings and streets or
lot lines shall be landscaped as buffer strips planted with grass,
shrubs, and trees and shall be continuously maintained by the
property owner in a sightly manner. Additionally, or in the
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
5 of 35
alternative, the City may require a fence, with a finished side
out, to screen the property from view from the residential
district.
(3) Maximum ground coverage. No more than 50 percent of a lot
shall be covered by buildings.
(4) Zero lot line development. Industrial lots may be platted or
subdivided in such a manner that common property lines will
have a zero lot line setback, provided however, that each lot
meets all performance, safety and other standards required by
the zoning administrator.
(5) Common areas. The developer may provide open storage,
parking, driveways, and loading areas in an area common to
all units of the building. Common areas shall be deeded to and
held in the name of an owner's association created by the
developer and including all owners of property in the project.
Declarations, in form and substance acceptable to the City
attorney, governing the usage and maintenance of such
common areas shall be adopted and filed by the developer.
(6) Party wall agreements. Agreements to ensure maintenance of
party walls shall be approved by the City attorney.
(7) Off-street parking and loading area requirements.
Establishments within an M-1 light industrial district must be
designed to provide vehicle parking space for employees and
visitors and space for truck loading and unloading on their
own property, as no parking shall be permitted on streets
within or bordering an M-1 district.
a. Drainage and surface. The surfaces of parking stalls
and aisles, truck standing spaces and access
driveways shall be blacktop, concrete, or other hard
surface and designed and maintained for adequate
drainage and free from dust, dirt, and mud. Such
maintenance includes keeping the blacktop, concrete,
or other hard surface in good condition and free from
chuckholes and other types of surface cracks and
breakage.
b. Curbing. The entire perimeter of the parking stalls
and aisles, truck standing spaces and access
driveways shall be curbed with a six-inch high
curbing of poured or precast concrete.
c. Parking. All required parking stalls shall be located
on the premises to which such requirements apply or
on an off-street space distant not more than 500 feet
from such premises, provided that stalls required for
employees and proprietors of any premises may be
located on an off-street space distant not more than
1,000 feet from such premises.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
6 of 35
d. Parking stalls. For the purpose of this Chapter, each
parking stall shall be not less than 300 square feet in
area, including a minimum width of nine feet and a
minimum depth of 20 feet and whatever area is
required for satisfactory movement into and out of
such stall.
e. Prohibited off-street parking. Off-street parking is
prohibited in the following areas:
1. Any portion of required 25-foot front yard.
2. Any more than two-thirds of required rear
yard.
3. Any closer to a lot line than five feet.
4. Any closer to a main building than five feet.
f. Driveway requirements.
1. A maximum driveway width of 32 feet at
the curb opening, excluding the entrance
radii may be constructed without the
approval of the zoning administrator.
2. The parking aisle shall be at least 25 feet in
width, unless otherwise approved by the
zoning administrator.
3. The edge of the curb opening shall not be
closer to the nearest portion of a street rightof-
way intersection than 75 feet or twothirds
of the lot width (whichever is
smaller); except that where a "T"
intersection exists, a drive may be located
opposite the end of the intercepted street.
4. A minimum driveway angle to the street
shall be 60 degrees.
5. The driveway pavement must:
i. Be at least five feet from any lot
line.
ii. Be at least five feet from the main
building.
iii. Have a minimum driveway radii of
ten feet.
g. Truck berths.
1. Each business, commercial, manufacturing
or industrial use having deliveries made by
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
7 of 35
truck more than once a day between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., or where
the time of loading and unloading materials
or goods exceeds ten minutes between those
hours, shall provide off-street truck loading
space on the lot, such space to be not less
than 35 feet in length, 12 feet in width and
15 feet in height.
2. Loading and unloading facilities are to be
located in the rear yard; or side yard if
properly screened by a solid six-foot fence
or other acceptable means.
3. The space needed for the loading and
unloading facilities must be adequate to
handle the loading and unloading needs,
without obstructing right-of-way.
h. Parking ratio requirements. The parking areas shall
include the following ratio of parking stalls plus
adequate aisles, walks and open spaces:
1. Manufacturing: One parking stall per 500
square feet of building or one stall per 1.5
employees on major shift plus one for each
company vehicle, whichever is greater.
2. Office: One parking stall each per 250
square feet of floor area.
3. Warehousing: One each per 1.5 employees
plus one for each company vehicle, or one
per 2,000 square feet of floor area whichever
is greater.
4. Other uses: For other uses, parking stall
requirements shall be at least comparable to
similar uses in other districts, but also
subject to additional provisions as provided
by the City.
5. Joint use of parking: Provisions of parking
stalls jointly by several uses in the same
block or in the same vicinity is permissible;
in which case, the number of stalls required
shall be the sum total of the individual
requirements, provided that where it is
found by the Planning Commission upon
application thereto that the need for parking
stalls required in this section is substantially
less, the Planning Commission may
recommend to the City Council and the
Council may reduce the total number of
parking stalls to be jointly provided.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
8 of 35
6. No reduction of parking space: All required
parking spaces provided on a lot or in a
building shall be unobstructed and useable
for the purpose and shall not be reduced.
i. Berming of parking lots and adjacent streets.
Berming of parking lots and adjacent to streets will
be required where it is deemed appropriate by the
Planning Commission.
(8) Open storage areas. Open storage areas are permitted in the
following areas:
a. Side yards not adjacent to or across the street from
any residential district.
b. Rear yards: Except within 50 feet of a property line
adjacent to any residential district.
c. Building setbacks: No open storage shall be
permitted in building setbacks from rights-of-way.
d. Screening: Open storage areas shall be screened by
walls of buildings or a screening fence compatible
with the principal building and surrounding land
uses. The screening requirements shall be satisfied by
the use of one of the following as required by the
Planning Commission:
1. Screening fence. A screening fence at least
six feet in height with a minimum
opaqueness of 80 percent. The fence shall be
compatible with the principal building and
surrounding properties. Screening fences
shall be painted or stained, whenever
necessary, to prevent fading, chipping or
discoloration. Damaged or destroyed fences
shall be repaired or restored in a reasonable
period of time.
2. Planting screen. A planting screen
consisting of a row of alternating evergreen
shrubs and deciduous trees. Only honey
locust, hard maples, green ash, ginko, or
other long-lived shade trees approved by the
City forester shall be planted. The trees shall
be a minimum of two to 2½ inches caliper
and shall be spaced not more than 15 feet
apart. The shrubs shall be a minimum of two
to three feet in height at time of planting,
with a mature height of four to six feet, and
shall be spaced between the trees in such
proximity as will form a screen. Planting
screens shall be maintained in a neat and
healthy condition. Dead materials shall be
replaced in a reasonable period of time. As
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
9 of 35
an alternative, a planting screen may consist
of a continuous row of evergreen trees, no
less than four feet in height at time of
planting and ten feet apart.
3. Berm. A berm no less than six feet in height
with a side slope of no greater than 1½ to
two. The berm shall be sodded or seeded,
mulched, and maintained until sod develops.
Slopes greater than 1½ to two may be used
if the slopes are stepped, using retaining
walls. Plant materials resistant to erosion
may be substituted for sod or seed with the
prior approval of the planning commission.
4. Others. Topography, existing vegetation,
permanent buildings, or other barriers may
be substituted for the provisions of this
subsection, if in the determination of the
Planning Commission they provide
equivalent screening.
e. Garbage receptacles or refuse areas must be located
in rear or side yards, be constructed of masonry with
a gate and must be screened from public view.
f. Storage of company vehicles over 9,000 pounds
gross vehicle weight is permitted only in screened
areas approved by the planning commission.
g. Business which require outside storage that are
adjacent to properties, which through private
covenants have prohibited all outside storage, shall
not be erected closer than 50 feet to any lot line. The
area between buildings storage areas and the lot line
shall be landscaped and buffer strips planted with
grass, shrubs, and trees and shall be continuously
maintained by the property owner. Additionally, or in
the alternative, the City may require a fence, with the
finished side out, to screen the outside storage from
view.
(9) Landscaping.
a. All open areas of any site, lot, tract, or parcel shall be
graded to provide proper drainage and except for
areas used for parking driveways or storage, shall be
landscaped with trees, shrubs, and planted ground
cover. Location, size, and species of trees and shrubs
shall be indicated on the site plan and subject to the
landscaping ordinance and approval by the Planning
Commission.
b. It shall be the owner's responsibility to see that this
landscaping is maintained in an attractive and wellkept
condition. If any trees or shrubs die, the owners
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
10 of 35
shall replace them with a like species. Any dead or
damaged sod also shall be replaced.
c. All vacant lots, tracts, or parcels shall be properly
maintained in an orderly manner, free of litter and
junk.
d. All landscaped areas and sodded areas which abut a
public street shall include an underground sprinkling
system.
(g) Performance standards. It is the intent of this subsection to provide that industry
and related activities in the M-1 light industrial district shall be established and
maintained with proper appearance from streets and adjoining properties and to
provide that each such permitted use shall be a good neighbor to adjoining
properties by the control of emission of noise, odor, glare, vibration, smoke,
dust, liquid wastes, radiation, radioactivity, etc.
(1) Noise. Noise shall be measured on any property line of the tract on
which the operation is located. Noise shall be muffled, so as not to
become objectionable due to intermittence, beat frequency, shrillness or
intensity.
(2) Odor. No activity or operation shall cause at any time the discharge of
odorous matter in such concentrations as to be readily detectable at any
point along the property boundary line or in such concentration as to
create a public nuisance or hazard beyond such boundary line. Detailed
plans for the prevention of odors crossing property lines may be
required before the issuance of a building permit.
(3) Glare. Glare, whether direct or reflected, such as from floodlights or
high temperature process, and as differentiated from general
illumination, shall not be visible at any property line.
(4) Exterior lighting. Any lights used for exterior illumination shall direct
light away from adjoining properties.
(5) Smoke, dust, fumes, or gases. every operation shall conform to state
pollution control standards.
(6) Storage of materials. Open storage of materials in any required front,
side or rear yard shall be prohibited. Any other outside storage shall be
located or screened, so as not to be visible from any of the classes of
residence districts.
(7) Hazard. Every operation shall be carried on with reasonable
precautions against fire and explosion hazards.
(8) Water supply. The design and construction of water supply facilities
and water supply source shall be in accord with city health standards
and requirements.
(9) Waste. All sanitary sewage and industrial wastes shall be treated and
disposed of in such manner as to comply with health standards and
requirements of the City and the State Department of Health and the
State Water Pollution Control Commission.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
11 of 35
(h) Architectural control and appearance. Architectural control and appearance in
the M-1 light industrial district shall be regulated as follows:
(1) All buildings erected shall conform to the State building code.
(2) Building specifications must contain sufficient data to indicate
elevations, all materials, textures, colors, and finishes for all
foundations, exterior walls and roofs of buildings and for all storage
fencing and walls.
(3) The Planning Commission and City Council will review the overall
appearance of the proposed buildings in terms of the structure's relation
ship and impact on adjacent land uses and development. The building
should conform with the existing design and character of the industrial
park, and any adjacent businesses. The standards for architectural
treatment will be higher for sides of buildings facing a street or a
residential area.
(4) All exterior wall finishes on any building shall be one or a combination
of the following:
a. Face brick.
b. Natural stone.
c. Decorative block, if used with brick, stone, or glass.
d. Specially designed precast concrete units, if the surfaces have
been integrally treated with an applied decorative material or
texture.
e. Factory fabricated or pre-engineered steel and finished metal
framed panel construction, if the panel materials are any of
those named above, glass, prefinished (other than galvanized
iron), or a plastic, and if there is a color retention guarantee of
a minimum of 20 years, and if 42-inch full perimeter frost
footings are included. If any metal materials are utilized, there
must not be any exposed fasteners used and guardrails or
posts, curbs, or buffer strips must be installed to prevent
impact to the building.
(5) The building design should exhibit architectural uniqueness in building
lines, shades, and angles to enhance energy conversation and when
practical use active or passive solar design.
(6) All buildings shall be constructed so as to screen all electrical and
mechanical equipment on the roof or to secure such equipment
mounted at ground level by appropriate screening.
(7) Every exterior wall, foundation and roof of any building or structure
shall be reasonably watertight, weather tight and rodent proof and shall
be kept in a workmanlike state of maintenance and repair. Exterior
walls shall be maintained and kept free from dilapidation by cracks,
tears or breaks or from deteriorated plaster, stucco, brick, wood or other
material that is extensive and suggests neglect. The protective surface
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
12 of 35
on exterior walls of a building above ground level shall be maintained
in good repair so as to provide a sufficient covering and protection of
the structural surface underneath against its deterioration. Without
limiting the generality of this section, a protective surface of a building
shall be deemed to be out of repair if (i) more than 25 percent of the
area of any plane or wall on which the protective surface is paint is
blistered, cracked, flaked, scaled or chalked away, or (ii) more than 25
percent of the pointing of any brick or stone wall is loose or has fallen
out.
(i) Plat and plan approval. Plat and plan approval of property in the M-1 light
industrial district shall be as follows:
(1) A site plan and security agreement shall be required pursuant to section
74-37.
(2) A complete set of building plans and specifications certified by a
registered architect and engineer, sewage disposal and water supply
plans must accompany the site plan.
(3) No development shall be allowed until the Planning Commission has
reviewed and made a recommendation and the City Council has
approved the deed restrictions for such a district and evidence of filing
such restrictions is given to the City Council.
Section 74-257. M-2 General Industrial District.
(a) Purpose of district. The M-2 General Industrial District is established to provide
industrial uses that are more intensive than uses permitted in other industrial
districts based on performance, site requirements, and site use. Uses in the
district are permitted based on the geography of Anoka being a fully developed
community with limited area and smaller parcels which may limit industrial uses
that require larger areas to operate. Additionally, the M-2 General Industrial
District, when located near residential or commercial zoning districts or other
land uses, will require additional performance standards and limitations of use to
ensure compatibility with such districts and land uses.
(b) Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the M-2 General Industrial
District:
(1) Dry cleaning, laundry and drying establishments
(2) Government maintenance facility
(3) Laboratories for medical science research
(4) Laboratories for physical science research
(5) Manufacturing of:
Flour and other grain mill products
Fats and Oils
Cereal breakfast foods
Sugar
Confectionary
Frozen and canned food
Dried and dehydrated food and pasta
Dairy products
Bakery products
Flour, cookie, and cracker mixes
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
13 of 35
Tortillas
Coffee and tea
Soft drinks and bottled water
Ice
Malt beverage, wine, distilled and blended liquors
Tobacco
Yarn, thread, broad woven, narrow and nonwoven fabrics
Schiffli machine embroideries
Textile finishing, household textile products
Coated Fabrics
Carpets and rugs
Canvas and related products
Rope, cordage, and twine
Hosiery, socks, hats, caps, neckware and other clothing/apparel
Footwear
Luggage and Leather goods
Sawmills and cut stock, resawing
Wood preservation
Hardwood and softwood veneer and plywood
Engineered wood member, truss and prefab wood buildings
Wood container and pallet
Paperbox and container
Plastics, foil, and paper packaging
Coated and laminated paper and foil
Paper office supply
Sanitary paper product
Commercial printing
Manifold business forms and checkbooks
Book printing, binding, post press and service industries for the
printing trade
Inorganic, organic and synthetic fabric, dye and pigment
Plastics material resin and synthetic rubber
Drugs and Medicinal Chemical Manufacturing
Paint and Coating
Adhesives
Soaps, detergents, polishes and related products
Toilet preparation
Printing Ink
Custom compounding of purchased resin
Photographic film, paper and plate
Unlaminated plastics film and sheet (except packaging)
Plastic bottles and plastic profile shapes
Plastic Pipe and Fittings
Laminated plastics plate, sheet, and shapes
Plastic foam products
Plastic plumbing fixtures
Tire manufacturing
Rubber and Plastic hoses and belting
Rubber products
Vitreous china, fine earthenware and porcelain
Brick and other structural clay products except refractories
Flat, pressed, blown and fabricated glass
Abrasive products
Cut stone and stone products
Aluminum Sheet, Plate, Foil and extruded products
Copper rolling, drawing and extruding
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
14 of 35
Copper wire drawing
Forging
Custom roll forming
Crown and closures
Powder Metallurgy Parts
Cutlery, flatware, kitchen utensil, pot and pans
Hand and edge tools, hardware
Saw blade and handsaw
Metal window and doors
Sheet metal
Ornamental and architectural metal work
Metal can and containers
Spring (heavy and light gauge)
Machine shops
Precision turned product
Bolt, nut, screw, river, and washers
Metal coating, engraving and allied activities
Industrial valves
Fluid power valve and hose fitting
Plumbing fixture fitting
Ball and roller bearing
Fabricated pipe and pipe fitting
Enameled Iron and Metal Sanitary Ware
Fabricated Structural Metal
Farm, turf, lawn and garden machinery
Construction and mining equipment
Woodworking machinery
Textile machinery
Printing trades machinery and equipment
Food products machinery
Vending machines
Commercial laundry equipment
Optical instrument and lens
Photographic Equipment
Blowers, exhaust and ventilation fans
Heating equipment
Refrigeration, air conditioning and warm air equipment
Machine tool accessories
Metalworking machinery
Turbines
Mechanical power transmission
Pumps and compressors
Conveying and elevating equipment and industrial trucks
Hoists, cranes and monorails
Power-drive hand tools
Welding apparatus
Packaging machinery and equipment
Industrial furnaces and ovens
Fluid power equipment
Scales and balances
Special dies, tools, jigs, fixtures
Cutting tool and Machine tool accessories
Computing and office machines
Communications equipment
Radio receivers and television sets
Electronic components
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
15 of 35
Electric Enclosures
Musical Instruments
Clocks, watches and watchcases
Discs and recording devices
Household appliances, cabinets, countertops, mattresses, furniture
Motors, generators
Switchgear, switchboard
Storage batteries, primary batteries
Fiber optic cable, wire and other communication cable
Carbon and Graphite products
Motor vehicles, boats, trains, airplanes and parts associated with
Aerospace industries
Blinds and shades
Medical and dental equipment
Jewelry
Hollowware and Flatware
Sporting and Athletic goods
Toys, games, dolls, and children’s vehicles
Pens, pencils, marking devices
Signs and displays
Burial caskets
Brooms, brushes, and mops
Buttons, needles, pins, fasteners
(6) Offices
(7) Public utilities and services
(8) Retail sales and showrooms when done in association with a permitted
or conditionally permitted use
(9) Warehousing or distribution centers
(10) The manufacture of ammunition and all processes related to the
manufacture of ammunition, the development of the materials and
components used in the manufacture of ammunition and the storage of
the materials and components used in the manufacture of ammunition.
(11) Brewery, Micro.
(12) Brewery, National.
(13) Brewery, Regional.
(14) Manufacturing of wine, distilled and blended liquors.
(c) Conditional Uses. The following uses may be allowed only upon the City’s
issuance of a Conditional Use Permit:
(1) Automotive repair
(2) Concrete product manufacturing
(3) Daycare
(4) Electroplating, coating, engraving and allied activities
(5) Metal heat treating
(6) Prefabricated metal building and component manufacturing
(7) Resilient floor covering manufacturing
(8) Power boilers, heat exchangers, and heavy gauge metal tank
manufacturing
(9) Mixed municipal recycling facility
(10) Tire retreading facility
(11) Compost facility
(12) Any junkyard that is entirely within an enclosed building(s) and do not
require any open storage
(13) Other manufacturing, process, storage or commercial uses as
determined by the Planning Commission to be of the same general
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
16 of 35
character as the permitted uses and found not to be obnoxious,
unhealthful, or offensive by reason of the potential emission or
transmission of noise, oxidation, smoke, dust, odors, and/or toxic or
noxious matters.
(14) Any permitted use located directly adjacent to a residential zoning
district.
(d) Prohibited Uses.
(1) Alkalis and chlorine manufacturing
(2) Alumina refining
(3) Animal slaughtering
(4) Animal food manufacturing
(5) Asphalt and tar roofing, siding, and paving products
(6) Carbon black manufacturing
(7) Cement, lime, and gypsum products manufacturing
(8) Cyclic crude and intermediate manufacturing
(9) Demolition debris land disposal facility
(10) Energy recovery facility
(11) Ethyl alcohol manufacturing
(12) Feedlots
(13) Fertilizer, pesticides and other agricultural chemicals facility
(14) Fish and other seafood processing
(15) Foundries
(16) Ground or treated mineral and earth manufacturing
(17) Industrial gas manufacturing
(18) Industrial solid waste land disposal facility
(19) Iron, steel mill, and electrometallurgical products manufacturing
(20) Landfills
(21) Junkyards not meeting the requirements under 74-2579 (c)(13)
(22) Leather tanning facility
(23) Metal Recycling Facility
(24) Mixed municipal solid waste land disposal facility
(25) Paper and paperboard mills
(26) Petrochemical manufacturing
(27) Poultry processing
(28) Pulp mills
(29) Ready-mix concrete manufacturing
(30) Rendering and meat by-product processing
(31) Rolling, drawing and extruding of nonferrous metals
(32) Public or private schools
(33) Single or multiple family residential
(34) Slaughtering of animals
(35) Smelting
(36) Solid waste land disposal facility
(37) Solid waste management facility
(38) Transfer station
(39) Any use not specifically listed as permitted, conditionally permitted, or
as allowed elsewhere in the City Code, shall be considered prohibited.
Any prohibited use may be changed to permitted or conditionally
permitted upon an amendment to this Chapter.
(e) Accessory Uses. The following are considered accessory uses:
(1) Taprooms.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
17 of 35
(f) Site design Standards. Site design standards in the M-2 general industrial district
shall be as follows:
(1) Height regulations. No building or structure shall hereafter be erected
or structurally altered to exceed a height of 50 feet. Greater heights may
be allowed upon issuance of a conditional use permit. Accessory
structures used exclusively for the storage of materials processed, used,
or manufactured on site shall be exempt from height regulations.
(2) Front, side and rear yard requirements: Front, side and rear yard
requirements shall be as follows:
a. Front yard regulations. In the M-2 general industrial district,
there shall be a front yard of not less than 20 feet; except, that
on every lot in the M-2 general industrial district that is
located across the street from any of the classes of residential
districts, there shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet.
b. Side yard regulations. In the M-2 general industrial district,
there shall be a side yard of not less than 10 feet, except, that
when the property abuts or adjoins any of the classes of
residential districts, there shall be a side yard of a width of not
less than 20 feet. When the property abuts or adjoins a railroad
no side yard is required.
c. Rear yard regulations. In the M-2 general industrial district
there shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 feet except, that
when the property abuts or adjoins any of the classes of
residential districts, there shall be a rear yard of a depth equal
to, but not less than, twice the depth of a rear yard required in
the abutting district. When the property abuts or adjoins a
railroad no rear yard is required.
(3) Impervious surface and Riparian Lots.
a. Maximum ground coverage. No more than 50 percent of a lot
shall be covered by buildings. No more than 85% of a lot
shall be covered by impervious surface.
b. No more than 30 percent of the total lot area of a riparian lot
shall be covered with an impervious surface unless adequate
measures are taken to control the rate and enhance the quality
of runoff as determined by the City Engineer.
c. Distance of impervious parking surface from the Rum River.
No impervious surface for the purpose of driveways or
parking areas may be closer than 50 feet from the ordinary
high water level of the river and must be screened by natural
material.
d. Distance from high water level of the Rum River. No building
may be closer than 100 feet from the ordinary high water level
of the river and may not exceed 35 feet in height.
(4) Off street parking and loading areas. Establishments within an M-2
general industrial district must be designed to provide vehicle parking
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
18 of 35
space for employees and visitors and space for truck loading and
unloading on their own property.
a. Drainage and surface. The surfaces of parking stalls and
aisles, truck standing spaces and access driveways shall be
bituminous, concrete, or similar surface not including Class V
gravel and designed and maintained for adequate drainage and
free from dust, dirt, and mud.
b. Curbing. If the parking lot is bordered by a right of way that
contains drainage gutter and storm sewer, the perimeter of
parking lots, truck standing places and access driveways shall
be curbed with poured or precast concrete.
c. Prohibited off-street parking. Off-street parking is prohibited
in the following areas:
1. Within any required front yard when directly across
from a residential zoning district.
2. Within five feet of any property line.
d. Nonconforming parking and loading areas. Nonconforming
parking, driving, and loading areas shall be allowed to
continue, but shall comply with Section 74-257(e)(4)(a and b)
upon the need for a site plan approval by the City Council
and/or issuance or amendment of a conditional or interim use
permit.
(5) Parking ratio requirements. The parking areas shall include the
following ratio of parking stalls plus adequate aisles and walks.
a. Manufacturing: One parking stall per 500 square feet of
building or one stall per 1.5 employees on major shift plus one
for each company vehicle, whichever is greater.
b. Office: One parking stall per 250 square feet of floor area.
c. Warehousing: One per 1.5 employees plus one for each
company vehicle, or one per 2,000 square feet of floor area,
which is greater.
d. Other uses: Other uses shall be subject to other off-street
parking requirements in the City Code.
(6) Open Storage areas.
a. Open storage is permitted in side or rear yards except within
25 feet of a property line adjacent to a residential district.
b. All open storage shall be screened from any classes of
residential or commercial district, or from any public right-ofway
that has a grade difference of less than 12 feet. Storage
shall be screened by buildings or the use of one or a
combination of the following:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
19 of 35
1. Screening fence. A screening fence at least six feet
in height with a minimum opaqueness of 80 percent.
The fence shall be compatible with the principal
building and surrounding properties. Screening
fences shall be gate style, painted or stained
whenever necessary, to prevent fading, chipping or
discoloration. Damaged or destroyed fences shall be
repaired or restored in a reasonable period of time as
determined by the Planning Department.
2. Planting screen. A planting screen consisting of a
row of evergreen shrubs or deciduous trees, as
recommended by the City Forester. Only honey
locust, hard maples, green ash, ginko, or other longlived
shade trees approved by the City Forester shall
be planted. The trees shall be a minimum of two (2)
to two and one-half (2-1/2) inches caliper and shall
be spaced not more than 15 feet apart. The shrubs
shall be a minimum of two (2) to three (3) feet in
height at time of planting, with a mature height of
four (4) to six (6) feet, and shall be spaced between
the trees in such proximity as will form a screen.
Planting screens shall be maintained in a neat and
healthy condition. Dead materials shall be replaced in
a reasonable period of time as determined by the
Planning Department. As an alternative, a planting
screen may consist of a continuous row of evergreen
trees, no less than four (4) feet in height at time of
planting and ten (10) feet apart.
3. Berm. A berm no less six feet in height with a side
slope of no greater than 1 ½ to two. The berm shall
be sodded or seeded and maintained until sod
develops. Slopes greater than 1 ½ to two may be
used if the slopes are stepped, using retaining walls.
4. Others. Topography, existing vegetation, permanent
buildings or other barriers may be substituted for the
provisions of this subsection, if in the determination
of the Planning Commission, provide adequate
screening.
c. The parking, keeping, storage or accumulation of junk motor
vehicles upon any private land or premises owned, occupied
or controlled by any person or legal entity unless authorized
by this code or other ordinance shall be prohibited. For
purposes of this section, a junk vehicle means any motor
vehicle as defined in Minn. Stats 169.01, subd. 3, part of a
motor vehicle, or former motor vehicle stored which is (1)
unusable or inoperable because of a lack of or defects in
component parts; (2) damage from collision, deterioration, or
otherwise; (3) beyond repair, and, therefore, not intended for
future use as a motor vehicle; (4) being retained on the
property for possible use of salvageable parts; or (5) is not
properly and currently licensed for operation.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
20 of 35
d. Hazardous chemicals and materials as defined by Minnesota
State Statutes are prohibited from being stored outside.
e. Open storage shall not affect the required amount of parking
stalls needed on a site.
f. Open storage may not be stacked higher than 12 feet unless it
is fully screened from any property line.
g. All waste material, garbage or refuse shall be kept in an
enclosed container and screened from any public right-of-way.
h. For the purposes of this section, the storage of trailers
associated with the use shall not be considered open storage
provided the trailers are licensed, operable, and are used for
the transportation of materials associated with the business
and not storage of materials.
(7) Landscaping.
a. All yards not occupied by parking, permitted open storage, or
loading space, shall either be landscaped and green areas or be
left in a natural state. If any yards are to be landscaped, they
shall be landscaped attractively with lawn, trees, shrubs, etc.
Any areas left in a natural state shall be properly maintained in
a sightly and well-kept condition. Yards adjoining residential
districts which are otherwise not screened shall be landscaped
with buffer planting screens.
b. It shall be the owner’s responsibility to see that landscaping is
maintained in an attractive and well-kept condition. Any dead
vegetation shall be required to be replaced upon notice from
the Planning Department.
c. All vacant lots, tracts, or parcels shall be properly maintained
in an orderly manner, free of litter and junk.
(g) Performance standards. It is the intent of this subsection to provide that
industry and related activities in the M-2 general industrial district shall be
established and maintained with proper appearance from streets and adjoining
properties and to provide that each such permitted use shall be a good neighbor
to adjoining properties by the control of emission of noise, odor, glare, vibration,
smoke, dust, liquid wastes, radiation radioactivity, etc. Performance standards
in the M-2 general industrial district shall be as follows:
(1) Noise. Any noise emitted must meet requirements set forth in the City
Code pertaining to noise as a public nuisance.
(2) Odor. Every operation shall conform to Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency standards. Detailed plans for the prevention of odors crossing
property lines may be required before the issuance of a building permit.
(3) Glare. Glare, whether direct or reflected, such as from floodlights or
high temperature processes, and as differentiated from general
illumination, shall not be visible at any property line.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
21 of 35
(4) Exterior lighting. Any lights used for exterior illumination shall direct
light away from adjoining properties. Lighting shall not exceed 0.1
foot candle at residential property lines and 0.5 foot candle at
nonresidential property lines measured on a vertical plane.
(5) Vibration. No person or device shall cause any unreasonable or
annoying vibration which constitutes a public nuisance as defined at
Art. II Section 38-30 of this Code.
(6) Smoke, dust, fumes or gases. Every operation shall conform to
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency standards.
(7) Hazard. Every operation shall be carried on with reasonable
precautions against fire and explosion hazards. Reasonable shall mean
if the operation is in compliance with local, county, state and federal
regulations.
(8) Water supply. The design and construction of water supply facilities
and water supply source shall be in accord with City health regulations
and requirements.
(9) Wastes. All sewage and industrial wastes shall be treated and disposed
of in such manner as to comply with City health regulations and
requirements.
(h) Architectural control and appearance. Architectural control and appearance in
the M-2 general industrial district shall be regulated as follows:
(1) All buildings erected shall conform to the State building code.
(2) Building specifications must contain sufficient data to indicate
elevations, all materials, textures, colors, and finishes for all
foundations, exterior walls and roofs of buildings and for all storage
fencing and walls.
(3) Any exterior wall finishes of new principal buildings and exterior sides
of accessory buildings that can be viewed from a public street shall be
required to be one or a combination of the following:
a. Face brick.
b. Natural stone.
c. Decorative concrete block, if used with brick, stone, or glass.
d. Specially designed precast concrete units, if the surfaces have
been integrally treated with an applied decorative material or
texture not including raked texture.
e. Architectural metal accent panels, generally with a value
greater than precast concrete units.
f. Alternative Designs or Materials. To encourage creativity,
imagination, innovation, and variety in architectural design,
the Planning Commission may recommend modifications of
the requirements of this Section and the City Council may
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
22 of 35
approve such modifications upon determining that the
proposed architectural design or exterior wall material(s)
meets all of the following conditions:
1. The proposed design or material is consistent with
the purposes of this section.
2. The proposed design or material would enhance the
architectural appearance of the building, and would
be equal or superior to designs or materials permitted
by this section.
3. The proposed design or material would be in
harmony with the character of adjacent buildings and
the surrounding district.
(4) The following exterior wall materials shall be prohibited:
a. Factory fabricated or pre-engineered steel and finished metal
framed panel construction.
(5) Any pre-existing structures or buildings that lawfully exist on the
effective date of this ordinance may be expanded using similar
material(s) of the existing building provided all other requirements of
the city code are met.
Section 74-258. M-3 Light Industrial/Commercial Overlay District
(a) Purpose of district. The purpose of this section is to establish an overlay district
to address the unique characteristics of properties adjacent to Bunker Lake
Boulevard, west of St. Francis Boulevard. The M-3 Light Industrial/Commercial
Overlay District is established to provide exemplary standards of development
for certain industrial and commercial uses as well as multiple family residential
uses in this district. These uses shall maintain high standards of appearance,
including open spaces and landscaping; limit external effects such as noise,
odors, smoke and vibration; and not require a high level of public services. With
proper control, these areas should become compatible with surrounding
commercial or residential areas. The City has determined that future growth
within the overlay district must be responsibly managed under a planned
framework of development parameters. A crucial element of planned
development management involves the maintenance of acceptable levels of
traffic operation on regional and local road systems. In order to maintain the
functional capacity of area road systems, consideration was made for large
vehicle traffic generation and types of land use to facilitate compatibility
between these uses and neighboring residential developments. The light
industrial/commercial overlay district attempts to create a reasonable balance
between the interests of the property owner in development of the property, and
at the same time protect the interest of the surrounding properties and the City.
(b) Intent. Bunker Lake Boulevard has unique traffic management needs,
development pressures, and aesthetic characteristics that require the
establishment of additional development standards to meet the City’s goals and
fulfill the purpose of this Ordinance. The intent of the M-3 Light
Industrial/Commercial Overlay District is to require development along the
corridor that maintains the visual environment of the City, protects the general
welfare, responsive to development pressures, and proportional to the area’s
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
23 of 35
traffic management issues. The overlay district regulations are intended to
supplement the regulations of the underlying M-1 Light Industrial zoning district
and to provide for compatibility of development along the identified corridor.
(c) Applicability. In the event other City ordinances or State Statutes address the
same topics covered in this Section, the more restrictive language shall apply.
(d) Establishment of District Boundaries. Boundaries for the M-3 Light
Industrial/Commercial Overlay District areas are shown on the Official Zoning
Map. The district shall include the following properties:
Address PID Number
500 Bunker Lake Blvd. NW 36-32-25-21-0009
650 Bunker Lake Blvd. 36-32-25-21-0214
652 Bunker Lake Blvd. 36-32-25-21-0008
700 Bunker Lake Blvd. 36-32-25-22-0070
730 Bunker Lake Blvd. 36-32-25-22-0001
36-32-25-22-0006
740 Bunker Lake Blvd. 36-32-25-22-0004
800 Bunker Lake Blvd. 36-32-25-22-0002
1140 Bunker Lake Blvd.
3821 Tower Pond Dr.
Vacant Lot
Vacant Lot
35-32-25-12-0010
36-32-25-24-0022
35-32-25-12-0013
35-32-25-11-0021
(e) Permitted uses. The following are permitted uses in the M-3 Light
Industrial/Commercial Overlay District:
(1) Art equipment supplier – manufacturers.
(2) Bags, boxes and paper containers, manufacturing and storage.
(3) Baker products.
(4) Books, loose-leaf binders – fabrication and assembly.
(5) Cabinet and woodworking establishments.
(7) Books and Bookbinding.
(8) Camera and photographic manufacturing.
(9) Cold Storage Plants- refrigeration and warehouse.
(10) Commercial printing, publishing, engraving and reproduction firms.
(11) Confectionary and related products, manufacture and packaging.
(12) Dental Instruments and supplies.
(13) Electric lighting and wiring equipment – manufacture.
(14) Electric measuring and testing equipment – manufacture.
(15) Electric tubes and other components – manufacture.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
24 of 35
(16) Electrical products and appliances – manufacture and assembly.
(17) Fabricated metal products – warehousing and administration.
(18) Food and kindred products – warehousing and administration only.
(19) Footwear – manufacture and fabrication.
(20) Furniture and fixtures – warehousing and administration only.
(21) Hand and edge tools (except machine tools) – manufacturing and
assembly.
(22) Hardware warehousing and distribution operations.
(23) Ice plants and ice cream plants.
(24) Jewelry manufacture.
(25) Laboratory instruments and associated equipment, scientific and
testing.
(26) Luggage, handbags, similar items – manufacture and assembly.
(27) Mail order business.
(28) Medical and surgical instruments and supplies – manufacture and
assembly.
(29) Machine tool – manufacture.
(30) Newspaper plants and offices.
(31) Optical instruments and lenses – manufacture and assembly.
(32) Paper and allied products – warehousing and administration.
(33) Patterns – design and manufacture.
(34) Pottery – wholesale and making pottery.
(35) Precision instruments.
(36) Plumbing fixture and equipment – wholesale.
(37) Radio and television – assembly and parts fabrication.
(38) Sport equipment – manufacture and assembly.
(39) Scientific and research instruments and equipment – manufacture and
assembly.
(40) Signs and advertising display materials.
(41) Stone, Clay and glass products – warehousing and administration.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
25 of 35
(42) Telephone and telegraph technical apparatus – manufacture and
assembly.
(43) Temperature controls – fabrication and assembly.
(44) Textile products – warehousing and administration only.
(45) Welding supply.
(46) Wholesale business facilities.
(47) Contractor and construction supply shops, conducted wholly within an
enclosed building, including but not limited to plumbing, HVAC,
drywall, roofing and electrical.
(48) Medical and dental clinics.
(48) Offices such as administrative, executive, professional, governmental,
medical, and research.
(49) Employment agencies.
(50) Dance and music studios, martial arts, judo, boxing, gymnastics.
(51) Wellness centers, fitness and health clubs, gyms.
(52) Mortuaries, funeral homes.
(53) Craft and artisan shops such as model making, rug weaving, wood
products, and similar activities.
(54) Artist, author, composer, sculptor.
(55) Music and art teachers or other tutoring services.
(56) Professional art or photo gallery.
(57) Professional portrait studio and film shop.
(58) Catering.
(59) Paint, wallpaper stores, interior decorating studio.
(f) Conditional Uses. The following uses may be allowed only upon the City’s
issuance of a Conditional Use Permit:
(1) Multiple family residential dwellings.
(2) Mini-storage facilities.
(3) Daycare facility.
(4) Retail and service establishments providing goods and services that are
complimentary to the principal uses in the district and qualify as an
accessory use under this Section.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
26 of 35
(5) Other manufacturing, production, processing, cleaning, storage,
servicing, repair and testing of materials, goods or products or other
commercial uses, not identified as, but similar to those permitted uses
as determined by the City and shall be of the same general character as
the permitted uses above with similar traffic volume generation and
found not to be obnoxious, unhealthful, or offensive by reason of the
potential emission or transmission of noise, oxidation, smoke, dust,
odors, toxic or noxious matters or glare or heat.
(g) Accessory Uses. The following are considered accessory uses:
(1) Uses customary with and incidental to the principal use are permitted,
but shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the gross floor area of the
principal use.
(2) Signs, off-street parking and loading areas as regulated by this chapter.
(h) Prohibited Uses.
(1) Public schools or private schools for students enrolled in grades K-12,
or any portion thereof, trade schools, vocational schools, colleges,
universities, institutions of higher learning.
(2) Yards for storage, sale and distribution of building materials or
landscaping products and materials.
(3) Motor vehicle repair businesses.
(4) Gas, service stations or convenience stores.
(5) Hospital.
(6) New or used car sales.
(7) Residential facilities whose purpose is to treat juveniles who have
violated criminal statutes related to sex offenses or who have been
adjudicated delinquent on the basis of conduct in violation of criminal
statues relating to sex offenses shall not be a permitted use.
(8) Any use not specifically listed as permitted, conditionally permitted, or
as allowed elsewhere in the City Code, shall be considered prohibited.
A prohibited use may be changed to a permitted, conditionally
permitted or interim use upon amendment of this Chapter.
(i) Site design standards. Site design standards in the M-3 Light
Industrial/Commercial Overlay District shall be consistent with the requirements
set forth in the M-1 Light Industrial standards, with the following additional
regulations:
(1) Height regulations. No building shall hereafter be erected or
structurally altered to exceed three stories or 40 feet in height.
(2) Lot area requirements. Every dwelling hereafter erected, enlarged,
relocated, altered or reconstructed shall be located upon lots containing
the following areas:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
27 of 35
a. Multiple dwelling: The minimum lot area shall be not less
than 12,000 square feet for the first two dwelling units plus
2,000 square feet for each additional dwelling unit and shall
not be less than 75 feet wide at the building setback line nor
less than 130 feet in depth.
(3) Density standards for residential uses. The density for residential uses
shall be no less than 4 units nor more than 10 units per acre.
(4) Floor Area Requirements. Residential floor area requirements required
in Chapter 74, Article V, Division 2, Section 74-211 (b) shall apply to
this Section.
(5) Impervious surface. The impervious surface coverage for multiple
dwellings shall not be more than 50%. Impervious surface coverage for
other uses shall be consistent with requirements set forth in the M-1
Light Industrial standards.
(6) Off-street parking and loading requirements. Off-street parking and
loading shall be consistent with the standards in the M-1 Light
Industrial District. The parking ratios for manufacturing, office and
warehousing uses in M-1 district shall apply. For other uses allowed in
the M-3 Light Industrial/Commercial Overlay District, parking stall
requirements shall be at least comparable to similar uses in other
districts, but also subject to additional provisions as provided by the
City and consistent with Chapter 74, Article IX, Division 2 Off-Street
Parking and Loading.
a. No more than six company vehicles (vans, semis, etc.) may be
parked overnight on any one property, provided sufficient offstreet
parking is available to accommodate said vehicles. Such
vehicles must be used primarily for business related purposes
of a business located on the same property. Vehicles defined
as being a midsize vehicle or larger are permitted only in
screened areas approved by the City as required by this
Section.
(7) Outdoor storage areas.
a. With the exception of loading and unloading of commodities,
and parking and storage of vehicles and trailers, all business
activities shall be within an enclosed building.
b. Outdoor storage of products or merchandise offered at
wholesale, material stored for salvage or disposal, or items
used in the operation of the business is prohibited.
c. Inoperative vehicles or equipment, or other items typically
stored in a junkyard or salvage yard, shall not be stored
outside on the property and shall be considered public
nuisances affecting peace and safety, pursuant to Section 38-
32 of the City Code.
(8) Screening
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
28 of 35
a. Stored vehicles and outdoor storage areas shall be screened by
walls of buildings or a screening fence compatible with the
principal building and surrounding land uses. The screening
requirements shall be satisfied by the use of one of the
following as recommended by the Planning Commission and
approved by the City Council:
i. Screening fence. A screening fence at least six feet in
height with a minimum opaqueness of 80 percent.
The fence shall be compatible with the principal
building and surrounding properties. Screening
fences shall be painted or stained, whenever
necessary, to prevent fading, chipping or
discoloration. Damaged or destroyed fences shall be
repaired or restored in a reasonable period of time.
ii. Planting screen. A planting screen consisting of a
row of alternating evergreen shrubs and deciduous
trees. Only honey locust, hard maples, green ash,
ginko, or other long-lived shade trees approved by
the City forester shall be planted. The trees shall be a
minimum of two to 2½ inches caliper and shall be
spaced not more than 15 feet apart. The shrubs shall
be a minimum of two to three feet in height at time of
planting, with a mature height of four to six feet, and
shall be spaced between the trees in such proximity
as will form a screen. Planting screens shall be
maintained in a neat and healthy condition. Dead
materials shall be replaced in a reasonable period of
time. As an alternative, a planting screen may consist
of a continuous row of evergreen trees, no less than
four feet in height at time of planting and ten feet
apart.
iii. Berm. A berm no less than six feet in height with a
side slope of no greater than 1½ to two. The berm
shall be sodded or seeded, mulched, and maintained
until sod develops. Slopes greater than 1½ to two
may be used if the slopes are stepped, using retaining
walls. Plant materials resistant to erosion may be
substituted for sod or seed with the prior approval of
the Planning Commission and City Council.
iv. Others. Topography, existing vegetation, permanent
buildings, or other barriers may be substituted for the
provisions of this subsection, if in the determination
of the Planning Commission and City Council they
provide equivalent screening.
b. Garbage receptacles or refuse areas must be located in rear or
side yards, be constructed of masonry with a gate and must be
screened from public view.
(9) Landscaping.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
29 of 35
a. All open areas of any site, lot, tract, or parcel shall be graded
to provide proper drainage and, except for areas used for
parking, driveways, or storage, shall be landscaped with trees,
shrubs, and planted ground cover. Location, size, and species
of trees and shrubs shall be indicated on the site plan and
subject to the landscaping ordinance and approval by the
Planning Commission and City Council.
b. It shall be the owner's responsibility to see that this
landscaping is maintained in an attractive and well-kept
condition. If any trees or shrubs die, the owner shall replace
them with a like species. Any dead or damaged sod also shall
be replaced.
c. All vacant lots, tracts, or parcels shall be properly maintained
in an orderly manner, free of litter and junk.
d. All landscaped areas and sodded areas which abut a public
street shall include an underground sprinkling system.
(j) Performance standards. It is the intent of this subsection to provide that industry
and related activities in the M-3 Light Industrial/Commercial Overlay District
shall be established and maintained with proper appearance from streets and
adjoining properties and to provide that each such permitted use shall be a good
neighbor to adjoining properties by the control of emission of noise, odor, glare,
vibration, smoke, dust, liquid wastes, radiation, radioactivity, etc.
(1) Noise. Noise shall be measured on any property line of the tract on
which the operation is located. Noise shall be muffled, so as not to
become objectionable due to intermittence, beat frequency, shrillness or
intensity.
(2) Odor. No activity or operation shall cause at any time the discharge of
odorous matter in such concentrations as to be readily detectable at any
point along the property boundary line or in such concentration as to
create a public nuisance or hazard beyond such boundary line. Detailed
plans for the prevention of odors crossing property lines may be
required before the issuance of a building permit.
(3) Glare. Glare, whether direct or reflected, such as from floodlights or
high temperature process, and as differentiated from general
illumination, shall not be visible at any property line.
(4) Exterior lighting. Any lights used for exterior illumination shall direct
light away from adjoining properties.
(5) Smoke, dust, fumes, or gases. Every operation shall conform to state
pollution control standards.
(6) Hazard. Every operation shall be carried on with reasonable
precautions against fire and explosion hazards.
(7) Water supply. The design and construction of water supply facilities
and water supply source shall be in accord with city health standards
and requirements.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
30 of 35
(8) Waste. All sanitary sewage and industrial wastes shall be treated and
disposed of in such manner as to comply with health standards and
requirements of the City and the State Department of Health and the
State Water Pollution Control Commission.
(k) General regulations.
(1) All commercial use outdoor activities such as loading and unloading
shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any parcel that is zoned
residential and used or subdivided for residential, or has an occupied
institutional building, including but not limited to schools, religious
institutions and community centers.
(2) Where uses are located on sites which abut residential zoning districts
or residential uses, all outdoor activities including trucking are limited
to normal hours of operation except for those specifically excluded.
Normal hours of operation are defined as being between the hours of
7:00am and 10:00pm Monday through Saturday inclusive, and includes
all outdoor activities, loading and unloading, truck maneuvering and
movement of equipment and other materials. It does not include
administrative or office functions, or maintenance, manufacturing, or
cleanup work conducted entirely within a structure. Operations may be
conducted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., subject to the
following conditions:
a. The person conducting operations outside of normal business
hours shall apply for a temporary permit for hours of operation
between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. The application for such
permit shall specify the name and address of the applicant, the
location of the temporary operation, the nature of the activity,
the anticipated duration of such activity and the name and
telephone number of the responsible person available on the
premises while temporary operations are being conducted.
b. A temporary permit may be granted for a period not to exceed
15 days. A person receiving a temporary permit may apply for
extensions, provided that the number of days in which
temporary permits are granted shall not exceed 90 days in any
calendar year.
c. A permit may be denied to any applicant who has had two
violations of a temporary permit and/or has violated any other
provision of this Chapter within a period of one year
preceding the date of application.
d. A permit issued pursuant to this section shall be revoked upon
a violation of this chapter or the terms of the permit by the
permit holder or any person or entity acting on behalf of, or at
the request of, the permit holder.
e. No permit shall be issued for the time from 10:00 p.m.
Saturday to 7:00 a.m. Monday.
f. When a permit is issued for a period of time exceeding five
days, the City shall send notice to owners of residential
property abutting the property for which a permit is granted,
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
31 of 35
informing them of the terms of the permit. The holder of the
temporary permit shall reimburse the City for the cost of such
notice.
g. Employee parking during temporary operations shall be
located on the site as far as possible from any parcel that is
zoned residential and used or subdivided for residential use, or
has an occupied institutional building, including but not
limited to schools, religious institutions, and community
centers.
(3) Uses shall not generate significant traffic on local residential streets.
Where possible, truck activity routes shall be accessed from a roadway
identified in the Comprehensive Plan as a collector or arterial road.
(l) Architectural control and appearance. The architectural control and appearance
standards in the M-1 district shall apply to non-residential buildings and
structures in the M-3 Light Industrial/Commercial Overlay District with the
exception as stated in subsection (l) (5) of this section. The architectural control
and appearance for multiple family residential uses shall be as follows:
(1) Multiple family residential. Architectural control and appearance shall
be regulated as follows:
a. Facades.
1. Visual Breaks. The exterior of new buildings shall be
designed with visual breaks through the use of
decorative tile work, masonry (but not flat concrete
block), belt courses of a different texture and color,
projecting cornices, medallions, opaque or
translucent glass, artwork, vertical articulation,
lighting fixtures, or architectural elements not listed
herein as approved by the City Council.
2. Width. A building more than 45 feet in width shall be
divided into increments of no more than 45 feet
through articulation of the façade. This can be
achieved through combination of the following
techniques:
aa. Division of breaks in materials
bb. Window bays
cc. Special treatment at entrances
dd. Subtle variations in rooflines and parapet
detailing
ee. Building setbacks
ff. Awnings
gg. Repetitive elements
b. Exterior Materials and Detailing.
1. New buildings and structures, additions, and
renovations must be constructed of durable materials.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
32 of 35
2. In multi-story buildings, the ground floor shall be
distinguished from the floors above by the use of a
combination of the following:
aa. An intermediate cornice line
bb. A difference in building materials or
detailing
cc. An offset in the façade
dd. An awning, loggia, or arcade
ee. Special window lintels
ff. Brick/stone corbels
3. The exterior opaque materials on each respective
elevation of a multiple family residential building
must be brick, stone, decorative masonry or similar
materials or a combination thereof. Public Façade:
50%; Side Façade: 33%; Interior Façade: 25%. The
brick, stone, or decorative masonry shall be focused
on prominent architectural features, particularly the
office components of the building, elevations that
include primary building entrance or multiple tenant
entrances, corners of buildings, and the prominent
building elevations fronting on public streets.
4. The remaining percentage of the building exterior
opaque materials shall be comprised of the following
materials:
aa. Cast stone
bb. Wood shingles (cedar shingles with 6-inch
maximum exposure
cc. Lap siding, cedar or redwood (6 inch width,
no diagonal siding)
dd. Tongue and groove paneling, cedar or
redwood (6 inch width, no diagonal siding)
ee. Copper (untreated)
ff. Stucco and EFIS
gg. Cement board
hh. Glass (does not include windows)
ii. Dark anodized aluminum
jj. Materials that are similar in character to
those listed above and approved by the City.
5. The following materials are not allowed as exterior
materials:
aa. Painted or unpainted concrete block
bb. Aluminum, vinyl or fiberglass siding or
roofingmaterials.
cc. Precast concrete materials, unless
specifically approved by the City Council for
a new commercial building.
dd. Painting of previously unpainted brick
ee. Wooden exteriors
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
33 of 35
6. LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental
Design) Standards. The City encourages the use of
sustainable building materials and construction
techniques through programs such as US Green
Building Council’s LEED program.
7. Alternative Designs or Materials. To encourage
creativity, imagination, innovation and variety in
architectural design, the Planning Commission may
recommend modifications of the requirements of this
Section and the City Council may approve such
modifications upon determining that the proposed
architectural design or exterior facade(s) materials
meet all of the following conditions:
aa. The proposed design or material is
consistent with the purposes of this section.
bb. The proposed design or material would
enhance the architectural appearance of the
building and would be equal or superior to
designs or materials permitted by this
section.
cc. The proposed design or material would be
in harmony with the character of adjacent
buildings and the surrounding district.
c. Accessory building. The City Council may require common
walls for accessory buildings where common walls will
eliminate unsightly and hazardous areas. Exteriors of
accessory buildings shall have the same exterior finish as the
main structure or some other compatible finish approved
during site plan review.
(2) All buildings erected shall conform to the State building code.
(3) Building specifications must contain sufficient data to indicate
elevations, all materials, textures, colors, and finishes for all
foundations, exterior walls and roofs of buildings and for all storage
fencing and walls.
(4) The Planning Commission and City Council will review the overall
appearance of the proposed buildings in terms of the structure's
relationship and impact on adjacent land uses and development. The
building should conform with the existing design and character of the
industrial park, and any adjacent businesses. The standards for
architectural treatment will be higher for sides of buildings facing a
street or a residential area.
(5) A building that has an exterior wall finish of factory fabricated or preengineered
steel and finished metal framed panel construction may
have exposed metal fasteners on walls that are adjacent to a minimum
six foot berm and six foot fence, on a wall facing the interior of the site,
or adjacent to a tree line or landscaping with six foot evergreen trees
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
34 of 35
ten feet on center, limiting the visibility of the public. All other
exterior walls must not have exposed fasteners.
(m) Exterior lighting.
(1) Exterior lighting shall be used to provide illumination for the security
and safety of entry drives, parking, service and loading areas, and
pathways, without intruding on adjacent properties, and shall comply
with the following standards:
(a) Poles and fixtures shall be architecturally compatible with
structures and lighting on-site and on adjacent properties.
(b) Metal halide lighting shall be used with a concealed light
source of the “cut-off” variety to prevent glare and “light
trespass” onto adjacent buildings and sites.
(c) Poles in parking lots shall have a maximum height of 24 feet,
measured from finished grade.
(d) “Wall paks” shall be down-lit and shielded from view.
(e) Security lighting shall be adequate for visibility, but not overly
bright.
(f) City Code Section 74-519 shall also apply as applicable.
(2) Lighting intensity.
a. A photometric lighting plan is required to ensure adequate and
appropriate light levels are provided for each site condition.
b. Lighting shall not exceed 0.1 foot candle at residential
property lines or 0.5 foot candle on non-residential property
lines measured on a vertical plane.
(n) Plat and plan approval. Plat and plan approval of property in the M-3 Light
Industrial/Commercial Overlay District shall be as follows:
(1) A site plan and security agreement shall be required pursuant to section
74-38.
(2) No development shall be allowed until the Planning Commission has
reviewed and made a recommendation and the City Council has
approved the development.
(3) In cases where there is uncertainty or disagreement about compliance
with the standards in this Section, the Planning Director or designee
may refer development approvals to the Planning Commission and City
Council to determine whether the proposal meets the standards of this
Section.
(o) Enforceability.
(1) Violation. Unless expressly provided otherwise, it shall be a
misdemeanor for any person or entity to violate any provision of the
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 4
35 of 35
City Code, including this Section, any rule or regulation adopted in
pursuance of any such provision, or any order lawfully enforcing the
City Code or this Section. This term “misdemeanor” is defined in
Minnesota Statutes Section 609.02, subd. 3, as amended. In addition to
prosecuting a violation as a misdemeanor, the City may separately, or
in conjunction with the misdemeanor prosecution, bring a civil action
to enforce any provisions of the City Code, including this Section, or
any rule or regulation adopted in pursuance of such provision.
Section 74-259--74-264. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
1 of 68
CHAPTER 74. ZONING
ARTICLE V. District Regulations.
DIVISION 5. Mixed Use Districts.
Section 74-265. Main Street Mixed Use District. (MS).
(a) Purpose and Intent of District. The purpose of the standards for the Main Street
Mixed Use District (MS) is to promote harmonious development, redevelopment and
rehabilitation of structures along Main Street. It is intended that the standards will:
(1) Maintain the visual environment of the City, protect the general welfare, and
ensure that the City’s property values, buildings, designs, appearance, character,
and economic well-being are preserved and respected through minimum design
and appearance standards;
(2) Encourage creativity, imagination, innovation, and variety in architectural
design and building composition through design principles that promote
harmony in the physical relationships between structures in the City and are
reflective of the river city heritage;
(3) Preserve the unique river city heritage, history, and architectural character of
existing buildings as these buildings are renovated and re-used and as
improvements are made;
(4) Reinforce and support a healthy development pattern in which new buildings
and building modifications maintain the City’s unique character through
complementary and appropriate use of building materials, massing and
architectural details;
(5) Encourage a diversity of uses and activities that promote pedestrian activity;
(6) Reinforce the unique character of existing Main Street facade/streetscape
sightlines;
(7) Promote the use of quality construction;
(8) Enhance the visual and aesthetic appeal of Main Street;
(9) Protect private investors who commit to redevelopment along the Main Street
corridor; and
(10) Inhibit criminal activity and provide a pleasant, rich and diverse experience for
pedestrians through minimum façade transparency requirements.
(b) Definitions. For purposes of this Section, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings ascribed to them by this section or Section 74- 2 of the City
Code. Words not defined shall have the plain meaning generally ascribed to
them.
Arcade is defined as a frontage wherein the façade is above a colonnade that
overlaps the sidewalk to one side of the sidewalk.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
2 of 68
Articulation is defined as architectural composition in which elements and parts
of the building are expressed logically, distinctly, and consistently, with clear
joints.
Awning is defined as a roof-like covering place over a door or window to
provide shelter from the elements. An awning usually consists of a metal frame
covered with fabric.
Bollard is defined as a short vertical post, often used to control traffic.
Character is defined as those attributes, qualities, and features that make up and
distinguish a neighborhood, street, or an individual development project and
give such place or project a sense of purpose, function, definition, and
uniqueness.
Colonnade is defined as a series of columns set at regular intervals and usually
supporting the base of a roof structure.
Convenience store is any retail establishment offering for sale a relatively
limited selection of prepackaged food products, household items, and other
related goods, not necessarily including gasoline or fuel sales, and characterized
by a rapid turnover of customers and high traffic generation.
Corbel is defined as a bracket of stone, wood, brick, or other building material,
projecting from the face of a wall and generally used to support a cornice or
arch.
Cornice is defined as any projecting ornamental molding along the top of a
building or wall.
Exterior Insulation Finish System (EIFS) is a type of building product that
provides exterior walls with a finished surface, insulation and waterproofing in
an integrated composite system. EIFS is also known as "synthetic stucco" and
"Dryvit" - a popular EIFS brand.
Facade is defined as the face or front of a building.
Foot candle is defined as the amount of light from one candle at one foot from
the source of light.
Lintel is defined as a horizontal structural member, such as a beam or stone that
spans an opening, as between the uprights of a door or window or between two
columns or piers.
Live-work dwelling is defined as dwelling units used for both dwelling purposes
and any nonresidential use permitted in that zoning district.
LEED -The Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design. The LEED Green
Building Rating System™ is the nationally accepted benchmark for the design,
construction, and operation of high performance green buildings.
Loggia is defined as a space within the body of a building but open to the air on
one side, serving as an open-air room or as an entrance porch.
Monolithic street facade defined as a street façade that is imposing in size or
bulk or is characterized by massiveness and total uniformity.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
3 of 68
New car sales shall have the meaning as defined in Minn. Stat. § 168.27, as
amended.
Photometric is defined as the measurement of the properties of light, especially
luminous intensity.
Pitched roof is defined as any of the following:
Gable roof -- a roof with a central ridge line and vertical wall ends.
Gambrel roof -- a roof with a double pitch terminating in a small gable
at the ridge.
Hip roof -- a roof with sloped instead of vertical ends.
Mansard roof is a roof having a double slope, the lower pitch being
longer and steeper than the upper.
Plaza is defined as an area used for public purposes, such as outdoor seating,
outdoor gathering areas or landscaped courtyard but cannot be used for outdoor
sales or storage or for a parking space or drive lane.
School is defined as a public or private school having a course of instruction
approved by the Minnesota Board of Education for students enrolled in grades
K-12, or any portion thereof.
Signs
Freestanding sign is a sign that is supported by one or more uprights,
poles or braces in or upon the ground.
Monument or ground sign is a sign not supported by exposed posts or
poles that is architecturally designed and located directly at grade, and
where the base width dimension is fifty percent (50%) or more of the
greatest width of the sign.
Pylon sign is a sign supported by a column-type structure that is firmly
set in or below ground surface and finished in a material consistent
with the sign.
Sandwich board sign is a sign not supported in the ground, nor attached
to or erected against a permanent structure and is capable of being
moved.
State licensed residential facility or housing with services establishment is
defined as a residential facility registered under Minnesota Statutes Chapter 144
D.
State licensed day care facilities is defined as a day care facility licensed by the
State of Minnesota.
Group family day care facilities are day care facilities licensed under Minnesota
Rules 9502.0315 to 9502.0445.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
4 of 68
Used car sales shall have the meaning as defined in Minn. Stat. § 168.27, as
amended.
Vehicle.
1. The definitions in Minn. Stat. § 168.011, as amended, are hereby
adopted by reference.
2. Midsize vehicle means any motorized vehicle or trailer more than
twenty-two (22) feet and up to twenty-five (25) feet in length, or
more than 12,000 pounds and up to 15,000 pounds gross vehicle
weight.
3. Oversized vehicle means any motorized vehicle or trailer more
than twenty-five (25) feet in length or more than 15,000 pounds
gross vehicle weight.
4. Stored vehicle means a parked vehicle that has remained in the
same location for seven (7) consecutive days or more. Any vehicle
moved less than 300 feet shall be deemed to have remained in the
same location.
Wall pak is defined as a wall mounted light fixture, often used for outdoor
security lighting and small general area lighting.
(c) District and Sub-District Boundaries. The Main Street Mixed Use District (MS)
shall include the Main Street Corridor from TH 10 to the eastern boundary of the
City as shown on the official zoning map. The Main Street Mixed Use District
(MS) shall be further divided into the following sub-districts:
(1) West Main Street (WM) – from TH 10 to the Main Street Rum River
Bridge.
(2) East Main Street Sub-District 1 (EM-1) – Historic Downtown Core –
from immediately east of the Main Street Rum River Bridge to 5th
Avenue.
(3) East Main Street Sub-District 2 (EM-2) – East of 5th Avenue to and
including all properties that abut the intersection of 7th Avenue and
Main Street.
(4) East Main Street Sub-District 3 (EM-3) – East of the East Main Street
Sub-District 2 (EM-2) boundary as shown on the official zoning map.
(d) Application of Standards. The Main Street Mixed Use District (MS) standards
apply to the following within the Main Street Mixed Use District (MS):
(1) All newly constructed buildings, structures or additions.
a. New additions may use exterior materials that are similar to
the existing structure materials.
(2) All exterior improvements or renovations.
(3) Changes in exterior color to any building within East Main Street Sub-
District 1 and 2 (EM-1 and EM-2).
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
5 of 68
(4) Sign changes that require a building and/or sign permit.
(5) All new or reconstructed parking areas with five (5) or more spaces.
(6) Temporary signage.
(e) Exemptions. The following are exempt from this Section:
(1) Projects involving only work, maintenance or repairs to the interior of a
building or structure.
(2) Projects involving only ordinary maintenance or the replacement of
similar or identical materials of an existing building.
(f) Pre-existing structures. Any building, structure, parking area or sign that
lawfully exists on the effective date of this Ordinance, which is otherwise not
permitted under this Ordinance, may be continued in the same manner as existed
before the effective date of this Ordinance. Buildings that are destroyed by an
act of nature may be reconstructed with similar materials as existed prior to
being destroyed. All redevelopment of properties shall be subject to the
requirements of this Section.
(g) Compliance. No conditional use permit, interim use permit, site plan approval,
building permit, or sign permit shall be issued until the requirements of this
Section have been met. It is the applicant’s responsibility to provide the
necessary information to City staff to determine compliance with this Section.
(h) Permitted, Conditional, Interim, Accessory and Prohibited Uses.
(1) West Main Street Sub-District (WM).
a. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted uses in the West
Main Street Sub-District (WM):
1. Any permitted uses in the East Main Street Sub-District 1
(EM-1)
2. Mortuaries, funeral homes and chapels
3. Health, athletic or fitness clubs
4. Veterinary clinics
5. Pawn shops
6. Tattoo parlors
7. Group family daycare facilities serving fourteen (14) or fewer
children
8. Taxi, mini-bus service and facilities
b. Conditional Uses. The following uses are permitted in the West
Main Street Sub-District (WM) upon obtaining a conditional use
permit
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
6 of 68
1. New car sales or leasing, subject to the general standards for
conditional uses and the following standards:
aa. A plan for the display of vehicles along with the
required traffic circulation and parking plan,
designating all vehicle storage and display areas with
painted striping on a paved surface, providing widths of
twelve feet (12’) for one-way traffic and eighteen feet
(18’) for two-way traffic, and which will permit any
displayed or stored vehicle to be moved off the
premises without moving any other vehicle.
bb. Adequate employee parking, a minimum of three (3)
customer parking spaces, plus one (1) additional space
per 25 displayed or stored vehicles. All customer
parking stalls shall be adequately signed. All parking
areas shall be paved.
cc. Any lot used for the sale of vehicles shall have a total
area of no less than one (1) acre.
dd. Operation of the business shall conform to the approved
site plan.
ee. All vehicles parked or stored on-site shall be properly
licensed. Open storage of automobile parts or storage of
junk vehicles shall be prohibited. Vehicles shall be
stored within an approved enclosed (fenced) storage
area.
ff. The site shall have positive drainage.
gg. All site plans for newly-established car lots shall
include a permanent building on footings, with
restroom facilities, and connection with sewer and
water, all in conformance with the building code, of a
minimum size of four hundred (400) square feet. The
exterior building walls shall consist of one or a
combination of either face brick or “rock face” or “split
face” concrete block.
2. Renting of vehicles, subject to the general standards for
conditional use permits and the following:
aa. A plan for the display of vehicles along with the
required traffic circulation and parking plan,
designating all vehicle storage and display areas with
painted striping on a paved surface, providing widths of
twelve feet (12’) for one-way traffic and eighteen feet
(18’) for two-way traffic, and which will permit any
displayed or stored vehicle to be moved off premises
without moving any other vehicles.
bb. The sale of vehicles shall be prohibited.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
7 of 68
cc. Any lot used for the renting of vehicles shall have a
total area of no less than one-half acre.
3. Automobile service stations, gasoline and oil stations, subject to
the general standards for conditional use permits and the
following:
aa. Temporary outside display of merchandise at service
and gasoline stations is allowed as an accessory use.
Such display shall be maintained in a neat and orderly
fashion appurtenant to a permanent structure and shall
not exceed 150 square feet or 5% of the gross building
floor area, whichever is less.
bb. Pumps, pump islands, and canopies may be located in
the front yard, except where located directly across
from a residential zoning district, and provided they are
not less than fifteen feet (15’) from the property line.
cc. Temporary promotional signs affixed to freestanding
signs, pumps, pump islands, canopies, or any structure
other than the main structure shall be prohibited.
4. Automobile repair, subject to the general standards for conditional
uses and the following:
aa. All vehicles waiting for repair or pick-up shall be stored
on the site within an enclosed building or in parking
spaces in compliance with off-street parking
regulations.
bb. All repairs shall be performed within a completely
enclosed building.
cc. All vehicles parked or stored on-site shall display a
current license plate with a current license tab. Outside
storage of automotive parts or storage of junk vehicles
shall be prohibited except within an approved enclosed
storage area.
dd. The sales of vehicles shall be prohibited.
ee. The use shall employ best management practices
regarding the venting of odors, gas and fumes. Such
vents shall be located a minimum of ten feet (10’)
above grade and shall be directed away from residential
uses. All storage tanks shall be equipped with
vaportight fittings to preclude the escape of gas vapors
from the fill pipes.
5. Drive-up window or teller service as accessory to permitted
use
6. State licensed residential facilities serving from 7 through 16
persons
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
8 of 68
7. State licensed day care facilities serving from 13 through 16
persons
8. Group family daycare on non-residential properties
9. Any other uses found to be of the same general character as
any of the West Main permitted uses
10. Churches, religious institutions
11. Public or private schools, provided they do not include
boarding or residential facilities
12. Libraries
13. Trade schools
14. Vocational Schools
15. Colleges, Universities, Institutions of Higher Learning
c. Interim Uses. The following uses are permitted in the West Main
Street Sub-District (WM) upon obtaining an interim use permit:
1. Rental of vehicles if accessory to a use other than new or used
car sales
2. Outside storage of more than three (3) mid-sized vehicles to
allow overnight parking
d. Accessory Uses. The following accessory uses are permitted in the
West Main Street Sub-District (WM):
1. Used car sales as an accessory use to new car sales
2. Renting or leasing vehicles as an accessory use to new car
sales
3. Transit facilities
4. Information kiosks
e. Prohibited Uses. The following uses are prohibited in the West
Main Street Sub-District (WM):
1. Residential facilities whose purpose is to treat juveniles who
have violated criminal statutes related to sex offenses or who
have been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of conduct in
violation of criminal statutes relating to sex offenses
2. Amusement arcades
3. Distribution buildings or beverages
4. Yards for storage, sale and distribution of building materials
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
9 of 68
5. Multi-screen movie theatres with more than five screens
6. Hospitals
7. Manufacturing/warehousing facilities
8. Any use not specifically listed as permitted, conditionally
permitted, permitted with an interim use permit, or as allowed
elsewhere in the City Code, shall be considered prohibited. A
prohibited use may be changed to a permitted, conditionally
permitted or interim use upon amendment of this Chapter.
(2) East Main Street Sub-District 1 (EM-1) – Historic Downtown Core.
a. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the East Main
Street Sub-District 1 (EM-1):
1. Retail stores
2. Retail services such as eyeglass fitting, quick printing, tailor
shops, etc.
3. Dine in restaurants
4. Fast-food restaurants without drive-through
5. Convenience stores
6. Offices, such as administrative, executive, professional,
governmental, medical, research, without merchandising
services
7. Medical and dental clinics
8. Hotels/motels
9. Bakeries
10. Dry-cleaning pick-up
11. Live theatre
12. Multi-family residential buildings
13. Live/work dwellings
14. Assisted living facilities
15. Essential facilities and services, including electrical, gas,
water, sewer distribution and collection lines, pumping
facilities for water and sewer systems, rights-of-way for
transportation modes, and telephone switching lines
16. Police and fire stations
17. Banks, savings and loan, insurance offices
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
10 of 68
18. Personal service and repair establishments such as barber,
beauty shops, shoe repair, etc.
19. Hardware and craftsman shops
20. Grocery stores
21. Parking ramps or lots
22. Coffee shops
23. Brew pubs
24. Liquor stores
25. Attorneys
26. Professional portrait studios and film shops
27. Specialty food markets
28. Employment agencies
29. Dance and music studios, martial arts, judo, boxing
30. Laundromats
31. Clubs, lodges
32. Wellness centers
33. Parks
34. Microbrewery with taproom, subject to the following
standards:
aa. The establishment must include a taproom that is
open a minimum of 2 days or 8 hours per week.
bb. The malt liquor sold for consumption at the business
must be produced by the brewer on the licensed
premises.
cc. The malt liquor may be sold to other bars, restaurants
or wholesalers for distribution on a limited scale
according to Federal and State regulations.
dd. The bottling process shall be manual or semiautomated,
not fully automated.
ee. The establishment shall obtain all applicable Federal,
State, and City licenses.
ff. A microbrewery located at street level shall provide
at least 50% of the total floor space at the front onehalf
of the building to be used for sales, tasting, or
restaurant purposes.
35. Microdistillery with tasting room/cocktail room, subject to the
following standards:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
11 of 68
aa. The establishment must include a tasting
room/cocktail room that is open a minimum of 2 days
or 8 hours per week.
bb. The distilled spirits sold for consumption at the
business must be produced by the brewer on the
licensed premises.
cc. The distilled spirits may be sold to other bars,
restaurants or wholesalers for distribution on a
limited scale according to Federal and State
regulations.
dd. The bottling process shall be manual or semiautomated,
not fully automated.
ee. The establishment shall obtain all applicable Federal,
State, and City licenses.
ff. A microdistillery located at street level shall provide
at least 50% of the total floor space at the front onehalf
of the building to be used for sales, tasting, or
restaurant purposes.
b. Conditional Uses. The following uses are permitted in the East
Main Street Sub-District 1 (EM-1) upon obtaining a conditional
use permit:
1. Fast food restaurants with drive though
2. Drive-up windows or teller service as accessory use to
permitted use
3. Churches, religious institutions
4. Libraries
5. Public or private schools provided they do not include
boarding or residential facilities
6. Trade schools
7. Vocational schools
8. Colleges, Universities, Institutions of Higher Learning
9. Event Centers
10. A State licensed residential facility serving from seven (7)
through sixteen (16 persons as allowed under Minnesota
Statutes 462.357 Subd. 8, as amended.
11. A State licensed daycare facility serving from thirteen (13)
through sixteen (16) persons allowed under Minnesota
Statutes 462.357 Subd. 8, as amended.
12. Any other uses found to be of the same general character of
the East Main 1 permitted uses
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
12 of 68
c. Accessory Uses. The following are permitted accessory uses in the
East Main Street Sub-District 1 (EM-1) sub-district:
1. Transit facilities
2. Information kiosks
3. Farmer’s markets
d. Prohibited Uses. The following uses are prohibited in the East
Main Street Sub-District 1 (EM-1):
1. Amusement arcades
2. Distribution station for beverages
3. Manufacturing/warehousing facilities
4. Yards for storage, sale and distribution of building materials
5. Multi-screen movie theatres with more than five screens
6. Hospitals
7. Gas or service stations
8. Tobacco Shops.
9. Any Commercial Use Selling Drug Paraphernalia.
10. Medical or Recreational Marijuana Dispensaries.
11. Tattoo shops.
12. Body Piercing Shops.
13. Pawn Shops.
14. Electronic Cigarette/Vaporizer Shops.
15. Any uses not specifically listed as permitted, conditionally
permitted, permitted with an interim use permit, or as allowed
elsewhere in the City Code, shall be considered prohibited. A
prohibited use may be changed to a permitted, conditionally
permitted or interim use upon amendment of this Chapter.
(3) East Main Street Sub-District 2 (EM-2)
a. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the East Main
Street Sub-District 2 (EM-2):
1. All permitted uses listed in the East Main Street Sub-District 1
(EM-1)
2. Medical or dental laboratories
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
13 of 68
3. Mortuaries, funeral homes and chapels
b. Conditional Uses. The following uses are permitted in the East
Main Street Sub-District 2 (EM-2) upon obtaining a conditional
use permit:
1. All conditional uses listed in the East Main Street Sub-District
1 (EM-1).
2. Group family daycare on non-residential properties
3. Any other use found to be of the same general character of the
East Main Street Sub-District 2 permitted uses
c. Interim Uses. The following uses are permitted in the East Main
Street Sub-District 2 (EM-2) upon obtaining an interim use permit:
1. Overnight parking of more than three (3) mid-sized vehicles
d. Accessory Uses. The following accessory uses are permitted in the
East Main Street Sub-District 2 (EM-2):
1. Transit facilities
2. Information kiosks
e. Prohibited Uses. The following uses are prohibited in the East
Main Street Sub-District 2 (EM-2):
1. Residential facilities whose purpose is to treat juveniles who
have violated criminal statutes related to sex offenses or who
have been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of conduct in
violation of criminal statutes relating to sex offenses shall not
be considered a permitted use under subsection (1) above.
2. Amusement arcades
3. Distribution buildings for beverages
4. Manufacturing facilities
5. Motor vehicle repair businesses
6. Gas or service stations
7. Yards for storage, sale and distribution of building materials
8. Multi-screen movie theatres with more than five screens
9. Hospitals
10. Any use not specifically listed as permitted, conditionally
permitted, permitted with an interim use permit, or as allowed
elsewhere in the City Code, shall be considered prohibited. A
prohibited use may be changed to a permitted, conditionally
permitted or interim use upon amendment of this Chapter.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
14 of 68
(4) East Main Street Sub-District 3 (EM-3).
a. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the East
Main Street Sub-District 3 (EM-3):
1. Medical and dental clinics.
2. Live/work dwellings.
3. Mortuaries, funeral homes.
4. Offices: administrative, executive, professional, governmental,
medical, research, without merchandising services.
5. Personal service and repair establishments such as barber and
beauty shops, shoe repair, etc.
6. Professional portrait studio and film shop.
7. Retail services such as eyeglass fitting, quick printing, tailor
shops, photo pick-up stations, etc.
8. Single family residential dwellings.
9. Multiple family residential dwellings.
10. Libraries.
11. Professional art or photo gallery.
12. Parks.
13. Essential facilities and services, including electrical, gas,
water, sewer distribution and collection lines, pumping
facilities for water and sewer systems, rights-of-way for
transportation modes, and telephone switching lines.
14. Assisted living facilities.
15. Craft and artisan shops such as model making, rug weaving,
woodworking, and similar activities.
16. Mail order business.
17. Antique shops
18. Artist, author, composer, sculptor.
19. Music and art teachers or other tutoring services.
20. Coffee shops.
21. Ice Cream Parlor.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
15 of 68
22. Sign making.
23. Bed and breakfast facilities.
24. Book Store.
25. Specialty Bakery.
26. Flower Shop.
27. Catering.
28. Wellness Center.
29. Boutiques, dress, and designer clothing shops.
30. Candy store.
31. Gift shop.
32. Kitchen supply store.
33. Cheese store.
34. Specialty cigar shop.
35. A State licensed residential facility or a housing with services
establishment registered under Minnesota State Statutes
Chapter 144 D, serving six (6) or fewer persons under
Minnesota Statutes 462.357 Subd. 7, as amended.
36. A State licensed day care facility serving twelve or fewer
persons as allowed under Minnesota Statutes 462.357 Subd. 7,
as amended.
b. Conditional Uses. The following uses are permitted in the East
Main Street Sub-District 3 (EM-3) upon obtaining a conditional
use permit:
1. A state licensed residential facility serving from seven (7)
through sixteen (16) persons as allowed under Minnesota
Statutes 462.357 Subd. 8, as amended
2. A State licensed daycare facility serving from thirteen (13)
through sixteen (16) persons allowed under Minnesota
Statutes 462.357 Subd. 8, as amended.
3. Any other use found to be of the same general character of the
East Main Street Sub-District 3 permitted uses.
c. Prohibited Uses. The following uses are prohibited in the East
Main Street Sub-District 3 (EM-3):
1. Residential facilities whose purpose is to treat juveniles who
have violated criminal statutes related to sex offenses or who
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
16 of 68
have been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of conduct in
violation of criminal statutes relating to sex offenses shall not
be considered a permitted use under subsection (1) above.
2. Amusement arcades
3. Distribution buildings for beverages
4. Manufacturing facilities
5. Motor vehicle repair businesses
6. Gas or service stations
7. Yards for storage, sale and distribution of building materials
8. Multi-screen movie theatres
9. Hospitals
10. New or used car sales
11. Any use not specifically listed as permitted, conditionally
permitted, permitted with an interim use permit, or as allowed
elsewhere in the City Code, shall be considered prohibited. A
prohibited use may be changed to a permitted, conditionally
permitted or interim use upon amendment of this Chapter
(i) Bulk and Dimensional Standards.
(1) The following tables establish bulk and dimensional standards for the
Main Street Mixed-Use District:
West Main Street Sub-District (WM)
Minimum Maximum
Building height ---- 40 feet
Building coverage ---- 50%
Impervious surface ---- 85%
Residential Setbacks
Front 30 feet 45 feet
Side 15 feet ----
Rear 20 feet ----
Commercial/Mixed Use
Front 10 feet 25 feet
Side 10 feet ----
Rear 20 feet ----
Parking setback and
Landscape area
Front 10 feet ----
Side 5 feet ----
Rear 5 feet ----
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
17 of 68
East Main Street Sub-Districts 1 and 2 (EM-1 and EM-2)
Minimum Maximum
EM - 1
Commercial and Mixed Use Structures
Front 0 feet 15 feet
Side 0 feet 15 feet
Rear --- ---
EM - 2
Impervious Surface ---- 75%
Multiple Family Residential Setbacks
Front 15 feet 35 feet
North Side
of Main Street 28 feet 48 feet
Side 0 feet ----
Rear 0 feet ----
Commercial/Mixed Use
Front 15 feet 35 feet *
North Side of
Main Street 28 feet 48 feet
Side 0 feet ----
Rear 0 feet ----
* The front yard setback abutting Main Street may be used as a plaza
but no parking or drive lanes are allowed between a building and
Main Street.
East Main Sub-District 3 (EM-3).
Minimum Maximum
Building height ---- 40 feet
Building coverage ---- 40%
Impervious surface ---- 85%
Single Family
Residential 35%
Residential Setbacks
Multiple Family:
Front 15 feet 35 feet
Side 10 feet ----
Rear 20 feet ----
Single Family:
Front 25 feet ----
Side 10 feet ----
Rear 25 feet ----
Commercial/Mixed Use
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
18 of 68
Front 15 feet 35 feet
Side 10 feet ----
Rear 20 feet ----
Parking setback and
Landscape area
Front 15 feet ----
Side 5 feet ----
Rear 5 feet ----
(2) Density standards. Multiple family residential developments in the
Main Street Mixed Use District (MS) shall be consistent with the
density standards set forth in the R-4 High Density Residential
standards. Density bonuses may be granted, in the sole discretion of the
City Council, for developments that are consistent with this Section of
the Ordinance.
(3) Floor Area Ratios. Residential floor area ratios required in Chapter 74,
Article V, Division 2, Section 74-211(b) shall apply to this Section.
(4) Lot Area Requirements. Any single family residential lot in the Main
Street Mixed Use District (MS) shall be consistent with the lot area
requirements set forth in the R-4 High Density Residential standards.
(5) Garages and Accessory Buildings. Any garage or accessory building
located in the EM-3 sub-district shall be consistent with the garage and
accessory building dimensional standards set forth in the R-4 High
Density Residential district.
(j) Architectural Standards
(1) Facades.
a. Visual breaks. The exterior of new buildings shall be designed
with visual breaks through the use of decorative tile work,
masonry (but not flat concrete block), belt courses of a
different texture and color, projecting cornices, medallions,
opaque or translucent glass, artwork, vertical articulation,
lighting fixtures, or architectural elements not listed above as
approved by the City Council.
b. Width. A building more than 45 feet in width will be divided
into increments of no more than 45 feet through articulation of
the facade. This can be achieved through combinations of the
following techniques:
1. Division or breaks in materials
2. Window bays
3. Special treatment at entrances
4. Subtle variation in rooflines and parapet detailing
5. Building setbacks
6. Awnings
7. Repetitive increments
c. Color Schemes. In the East Main Street Sub-District 1 (EM-1) subdistrict,
all exterior finish colors shall be consistent with the
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
19 of 68
acceptable color palettes then currently on file with the city
department charged with such oversight.
(2) Materials and Detailing.
a. New buildings and structures, additions and renovations must be
constructed of durable materials.
b. Where the original façade has been removed and replaced with an
unsympathetic alteration, the reinstatement of earlier styles in
keeping with the character of the building is encouraged.
c. In multi-story buildings, the ground floor shall be distinguished
from the floors above by the use of a combination of the following:
1. An intermediate cornice line
2. A difference in building materials or detailing
3. An offset in the facade
4. An awning, trellis, loggia or arcade
5. Special window lintels
6. Brick/stone corbels
d. In the East Main Street Sub-Districts 1 and 2 and West Main Street
Sub-district (EM-1, EM-2 and WM), the primary exterior opaque
materials on each elevation of a building, except for the service
side, must be brick, stone, decorative masonry or similar materials
or a combination thereof.
e. In the East Main Street Sub-Districts 1 and 2, and West Main
Street Sub-district (EM-1, EM-2 and WM), no more than twentyfive
percent (25%) of the building exterior opaque materials on
each elevation, except for the service side of the building, shall be
comprised of the following accent materials:
1. Cast stone
2. Wood shingles (cedar shingles 6 inch maximum exposure) for
trim
3. Lap siding, cedar or redwood (6 inch maximum width)
4. Tongue and groove paneling cedar or redwood (6 inch width,
no diagonal siding)
5. Copper (untreated)
6. Stucco and EFIS is not permitted in the underlying Historic
Downtown Core District in East Main Street Sub-District 1
(EM-1).
7. Cement board
8. Glass (does not include windows)
9. Dark anodized aluminum
10. Materials that are similar in character to those listed above.
f. In the East Main Street Sub-District 3 (EM-3) the primary exterior
opaque materials on each elevation of a building, except for the
service side, must be brick, stone, decorative masonry, lap siding
(cedar or redwood), aluminum, vinyl or fiberglass siding, or
similar materials or a combination thereof.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
20 of 68
g. In the East Main Street Sub-District 3 no more than twenty-five
percent (25%) of the building exterior opaque materials on each
elevation, except for the service side of the building, shall be
comprised of the following accent materials:
1. Cast stone
2. Wood shingles (cedar shingles 6 inch maximum exposure) for
trim
3. Tongue and groove paneling (cedar or redwood 6 inch width,
no diagonal siding),
4. Copper (untreated)
5. Stucco
6. Cement board
7. Glass (does not include windows)
8. Dark anodized aluminum
9. Materials that are similar in character to those listed above.
h. The following materials are not allowed as exterior opaque
materials on new buildings in the East Main Street Sub-Districts 1
and 2, and West Main Street Sub-district:
1. Painted or unpainted concrete block
2. Aluminum, vinyl or fiberglass siding or roofing materials
3. Precast concrete panels
4. Painting of previously unpainted brick
5. Wooden exteriors
i. The following materials are not allowed as exterior opaque materials
on new buildings in the East Main Street Sub District -3:
1. Painted or unpainted concrete block
2. Painting of previously unpainted brick
3. Precast concrete panels
j. For buildings in the downtown Historic Core as defined in Chapter
20, Heritage Preservation Regulations, exterior building material
regulations set forth in said Chapter shall apply to this section.
k. LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design)
Standards. The City encourages the use of sustainable building
materials and construction techniques in Main Street projects
through programs such as the US Green Building’s Council’s
LEED program.
l. Alternative Designs or Materials. To encourage creativity,
imagination, innovation, and variety in architectural design, the
Planning Commission may recommend modifications of the
requirements of this Section and the City Council may approve
such modifications upon determining that the proposed
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
21 of 68
architectural design or exterior facade material(s) meets all of the
following conditions:
1. The proposed design or material is consistent with the
purposes of this section.
2. The proposed design or material would enhance the
architectural appearance of the building, and would be equal
or superior to designs or materials permitted by this section.
3. The proposed design or material would be in harmony with
the character of adjacent buildings and the surrounding
district.
m. The use of bars, chains or similar security devices that are visible
from a public street or sidewalk shall be prohibited.
(3) Franchise or National Chain Architecture.
a. Franchises or national chains with standardized architecture and
signage shall comply with the standards contained in this Section.
Aggressive and bright signage must be altered and scaled down to
meet the intentions of these standards.
(4) Exterior Lighting.
a. Exterior lighting shall be used to provide illumination for the
security and safety of entry drives, parking, service and loading
areas, pathways, courtyards and plazas, without intruding on
nonadjacent properties and shall comply with the following
standards:
1. Poles and fixtures shall be architecturally compatible with
structures and lighting on-site and on adjacent properties.
2. Security lighting shall be adequate for visibility, but not overly
bright.
3. Metal halide lighting shall be used with a concealed light
source of the “cut-off” variety to prevent glare and “light
trespass” onto adjacent buildings and sites.
4. Poles within landscaped areas and plazas shall have a
maximum height of twenty feet (20’), measured from grade,
and shall be coordinated with city standards.
5. Poles in parking lots shall have a maximum height of 24 feet
(24’) measured from finished grade.
6. Lighting fixtures mounted directly on structures shall be
permitted when utilized to enhance specific architectural
elements or to help establish scale or provide visual interest.
7. “Wall paks” shall be permitted only in loading and service
areas and shall be down-lit and shielded from view.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
22 of 68
8. Shielded illumination or fixtures shall be permitted to light
building mounted signage, building facades, or pedestrian
arcades if they are integrated into a building’s architectural
design.
9. Lighting should highlight entrances, art, terraces, and special
landscape features.
10. Separate pedestrian scale lighting or other low level fixtures,
such as bollards, shall be incorporated for all pedestrian ways
through parking lots and drop-off areas at entrances to
buildings.
11. All primary walkways, steps or ramps along pedestrian routes
shall be illuminated.
b. Light intensity.
1. A photometric lighting plan is required for all proposed
commercial developments to ensure that adequate and
appropriate light levels are provided for each site condition.
2. Lighting shall not exceed 0.1 foot candle at residential
property lines or 0.5 foot candle on non-residential property
lines measured on a vertical plane.
3. The following minimum levels of illuminations must be
maintained for each of the specific locations.*
Building entrances 5.0 foot candles
Sidewalks 2.0 foot candles
Bikeways 1.0 foot candles
Courts/Plazas/Terraces 1.5 foot candles
Ramps 5.0 foot candles
Stairways 5.0 foot candles
Underpasses 5.0 foot candles
Waiting Areas 1.0 foot candles
Parking lots 1.0 foot candles
Roadways 1.5 foot candles
* Values given are in minimum average maintained
horizontal foot candles which are measured at the
average point of illumination between brightest and
darkest areas, 4’ – 5’ above the ground surface.
(Source: IES Lighting Handbook – 4th Edition)
4. Site lighting should provide consistent levels of illumination,
avoiding pockets of very high or low levels of illumination.
(5) Awnings.
a. Use. Awnings may be allowed to enhance the historic character of
Main Street. Awnings shall be primarily designed to protect
pedestrians, display windows, and public entrances from the
weather and to add color and visual interest to the street level
façade. Awnings shall not be used for advertising but may contain
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
23 of 68
the name, phone number and logo. Such graphics shall be included
in the overall square footage for allowed signage.
b. Maintenance. Awnings shall be kept in good repair to maintain the
original appearance and ensure public safety.
c. Dimensions.
1. Awnings cannot extend across multiple storefronts and/or
multiple buildings or exceed a width of forty feet (40’) unless
otherwise approved by the City Council.
2. No portion of any awing shall extend nearer than four feet (4’)
to the face of the nearest curb measured horizontally. The
pitch of the awning shall be from 10 to 40 degrees.
3. All portions of any awning on the first floor of a building shall
have a minimum clearance of eight feet (8’) in height above
the finished grade.
4. No bubble type awnings are permitted unless they are used
over a curved door entrance or a curved window.
d. Materials. Awnings must be constructed of durable, protective,
water-repellent and fire-resistant fabric. The use of vinyl, plastic,
rigid fiberglass, or metal panels shall be prohibited.
e. Color. Dark solid colors are suggested (i.e. dark brown, navy, blue,
black, dark green, dark red).
f. Lighting. Backlit or illuminated awnings are not allowed.
g. Secured to Building. All awnings shall be securely attached to the
building.
(6) Signs. Signage shall be designed to be integral with the architectural
character of the building to which they belong. Specifically, the scale,
proportion and color shall be appropriate to the building to which the
sign is attached. Elements to be considered include architectural
appearance, sign size, type of illumination, sign motion, sign setback,
surface colors, and message. The architectural appearance of the sign
shall not be so dissimilar to the existing signage on surrounding
buildings as to cause impairment in property value or constitute a
blighting influence.
The following sections shall also apply to signs within the Main Street
Mixed Use District (MS): Section 74.446 General Regulations; Section
74.447 Temporary Signs; and Section 74.445 Exempt Signs. If
provisions of this section are in conflict with other standards in this
chapter, the most restrictive shall apply. Residential signs shall be
regulated by the provisions of Chapter 74, Article III related to
residential signs.
a. East Main Street Mixed Use Districts Sub-Districts 1, 2, and 3.
(EM-1, EM-2, EM-3): Business signs, and nameplate signs are
permitted, subject to the following regulations:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
24 of 68
1. The total surface area of all business signs on a lot shall not
exceed four (4) square feet per linear foot of lot frontage.
Business nameplates shall not exceed the sum of three square
feet for each lineal foot of lot frontage.
2. In the case of corner lots, the shortest length of all sides of the
lot with frontage shall be used to calculate the permitted total
surface area.
3. No single business sign surface shall exceed 200 square feet in
area, nor shall two or more smaller signs be so arranged and
integrated as to create a surface area in excess of 200 square
feet.
4. Pylon signs are prohibited.
5. Monument signs are permitted. No monument sign or any part
thereof may project higher than ten feet (10’) above average
grade at the building line. All portions of the sign must be set
back a minimum of five feet (5’) from the property line.
Monument signs may not exceed forty (40) square feet and
shall be included in the total calculation for site signage.
6. No freestanding sign shall be permitted within the sight
triangle.
7. No rooftop signs shall be permitted.
8. Integral roof signs are permitted.
9. Sandwich board signs are prohibited.
10. Consistently changing, flashing, moving, rotating, traveling, or
scrolling electronic variable signs are prohibited.
11. Design details. Signs cannot block or obliterate design details,
windows, or cornices of the building upon which they are
placed.
12. In the East Main Street Sub-District 1 (EM-1) only: One
hanging sign shall be permitted per storefront and shall be
limited to 4½ square feet per side. The hanging sign and
decorative supporting arm shall not project more than two feet
from the building, and the lowest point of a hanging sign must
be no less than eight feet above the sidewalk or ground.
Hanging signs will not be included when calculating the total
sign area allowed on a property.
13. In the East Main Street Sub-District 3 (EM-3) no neon, or light
of similar appearance may be used for interior or exterior
signage visible from Main Street, or to accentuate the building
in any manner except for signs that display open or closed and
provided such signage does not exceed 4 square feet.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
25 of 68
b. West Main Street Mixed Use District (WM): Business signs and
nameplate signs are permitted subject to the following regulations:
1. One identification sign, not to exceed 32 square feet in area,
for private educational institutions, community centers, rest
homes, multiple family uses, nursing homes, and dental
offices. It may be illuminated, but non-flashing. A second sign
may be permitted if located at a primary entrance onto West
Main Street.
2. For single-tenant business, professional office, and retail
buildings a business sign not exceeding 40 square feet in
surface area or four percent of street façade wall area upon
which it is placed, whichever is greater, and indicating only
the name and address of the building, occupant or
management, may be displayed. For corner lots, two such
signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted.
3. Signage shall be limited to 200 square feet in area, including
all signs, with not more than 150 square feet of signage
attached to the building and not more than 60 square feet of
ground sign.
4. Pylon signs are permitted. Businesses that have frontage on
two arterial streets may have two pylon signs but may not
exceed 200 square feet of total signage.
5. For multi-tenant business, professional office, and retail
buildings with multiple entrances, business nameplate signs
shall be limited to one flat wall sign which shall not extend
more than 18 inches from the face of the building or one
awning sign. Each nameplate sign shall not exceed the sum of
three (3) square feet for each lineal foot of frontage. Frontage
is measured as the distance parallel to a parking area, public
right-of-way, or other area in front of the space the tenant
occupies.
6. For multi-tenant business, professional office, and retail
buildings where there is one common entrance to the inside of
the building, one business nameplate sign is permitted which
shall not extend more than 18 inches from the face of the
building not exceeding 40 square feet or four percent (4%) of
street façade wall area, whichever is greater. In no case shall
the allowed signage exceed 150 square feet. Such sign shall
be located above or next to the entrance of the building on the
wall facing the public right-of-way. If the entrance to the
building does not face the public right of way, a sign may be
located on the wall facing the public right-of-way and a
secondary sign no larger than 16 square feet may be located
above or next to the entrance of the building.
5. No freestanding sign may project higher than 25 feet above
average grade at the building line and all portions of the sign
must be setback a minimum of five (5) feet from the property
line. No freestanding sign shall be permitted within the sight
triangle.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
26 of 68
6. Sandwich board signs are prohibited.
7. Rooftop signs are prohibited.
8. Integral roof signs are permitted.
9. Signs shall not block or obliterate design details, windows, or
cornices of the building upon which they are placed.
(7) Building Relationship to Street and Pedestrian Area. In the East Main
Street Sub-Districts 1 and 2 (EM-1 and EM-2), all new commercial,
office, and mixed-use buildings shall provide a variety of active uses
along a public street and/or major pedestrian corridor. This includes,
but is not limited to, the use of multiple street-front shops or
businesses, multiple entrances into large single tenant buildings and
design treatments of entrances, windows, and facades. New buildings
and developments shall comply with the following standards for
building orientation and entrances.
a. Buildings in the East Main Street Sub-District 1 (EM-1) will
together create the “wall of buildings” effect associated with the
traditional “Main Street” areas.
b. All buildings shall have at least one patron entrance facing an
abutting public street, rather than the parking area. A building may
have more than one patron entrance. Patron entrances shall be open
to the public during all business hours.
c. Patron building entrances shall be architecturally emphasized and
visible from the street by utilizing such design features as awnings,
canopies, pillars, special building materials or architectural details.
d. Commercial or mixed-use structures that have over sixty (60)
linear feet of frontage on a major pedestrian area, public sidewalk,
or major street shall have a patron entrance onto the major
pedestrian area, public sidewalk or major street. For building
facades over 200 feet in length facing a street, two or more patron
entrances on the street must be provided.
e. Building entrances shall incorporate arcades, roofs, porches,
alcoves, porticoes and awnings that protect pedestrians from the
rain and sun.
f. Buildings shall include changes in relief on fifteen percent (15%)
of their facades, such as cornices, bases, window treatments, fluted
masonry or other designs for pedestrian interest and scale.
g. Building facades greater than one hundred feet (100’) in length
shall have offset jogs, using elements such as bay windows,
recessed entrances or other articulation so as to avoid long
continuous unbroken building facades.
(8) Windows, Window Walls, Blank Walls and Design of Ground Floor on
Non-residential Buildings.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
27 of 68
a. All development shall provide ground floor windows along
facades, parks, plazas, or other public outdoor spaces. Required
window areas must be either windows that allow views into
working areas or lobbies or pedestrian entrances or display
windows. Required windows shall have a sill no higher than four
feet (4’) above grade, except as follows:
1. Where interior floor levels prohibit such placement, the sill
height may be raised to allow it to be no more than two feet
(2’) above the finished floor level up to a maximum sill height
of six feet (6’) above grade.
b. No less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the ground level facade
facing Main Street shall be transparent (clear or lightly tinted, nonreflective)
glass. The applicant must provide calculations of glass
and solid surfaces. The use of shutters, louvers or interior blinds is
allowed where privacy or restricted views are needed.
c. Darkly tinted, frosted windows or any windows that block two way
visibility are prohibited as ground floor windows along Main
Street facades.
d. All window frames must be dark anodized aluminum.
(9) Upper Story Setbacks.
a. In the East Main Street Sub-District 1 (EM-1), upper story
setbacks shall be required for structures over three (3) stories that
are adjacent or across a street from residential or public park lands.
Upper story setbacks shall be achieved by:
1. Floors above the third floor or fifty feet (50’) shall be stepped
back a minimum of ten feet (10’); and
2. All buildings shall be stepped back such that the height of the
building façade does not exceed an angle greater than 45
degrees from the average street elevation, beginning at a point
at the curb on the opposite side of the street.
3. Exception. The Planning Director or designee may waive the
setback requirements of this subsection provided that the
applicant clearly demonstrates that the proposed project:
aa. Includes window treatments, entry placement, façade
relief and other architectural treatments to provide visual
interest and pedestrian-sensitive design at the street level
and to maintain a human scale in the streetscape; and
bb. Extends the same architectural features above the ground
floor level through variations in design, detail and
proportion and by avoiding designs featuring a monolithic
street facade.
(10) Roofs and Parapets.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
28 of 68
a. In the East Main Street Sub-District 1 (EM-1), rooflines must
complement the character and design of historic East Main Street
businesses.
b. Sloped roofs are not allowed unless the roof form is concealed by a
parapet or false front. Exceptions may be granted if the sloped roof
is used on top of a multi-story building to reduce the overall height
of the façade.
(11) Utility Areas, Mechanical Equipment and Screening.
a. Utility areas, mechanical equipment and screening must be
designed so that they do not detract from the aesthetic appeal of the
district.
b. Materials. The screening of exterior trash, storage areas, service
yards, loading areas, transformers, heating, and air conditioning
units must use the same materials, colors and/or style as the
primary front façade materials.
c. Roof Equipment. All roof equipment will be screened from public
view so as not to be visible from the street. Equipment screens
shall be well designed and detailed, using dark colors.
d. Screening of utility areas. All exterior trash and storage areas,
service yards, loading areas, heating and air conditioning units
must be screened from view. Camouflaging heating and air
conditioning units is an acceptable method of screening. The intent
of the screening is to distract the view of these areas, not to provide
total screening.
Trash collection areas shall be screened from public rights-of-way
and adjacent uses through the use of a six-foot masonry wall
enclosure and gate. Trash enclosures shall be compatible with the
architectural character of the building they serve and shall
incorporate similar materials and colors.
e. Outdoor Merchandise Displays. Outdoor merchandise displays
must be placed against the building or within the landscaped area
between the sidewalk and the street. Outdoor merchandise displays
shall be displayed only during business hours. No outdoor business
display shall be located where it obstructs the line of sight of
passing motorists.
f. Open Storage. Open storage of material, merchandise offered at
wholesale, items for salvage or disposal, or items used in the
operation of the business, is prohibited.
(k) Landscaping. The use of window boxes, hanging flower baskets, vines and/or
other seasonal landscaping is encouraged. Window boxes, hanging baskets and
planters should be used around entries. Vines may be used to cover blank walls.
(l) Parking Requirements.
(1) General regulations.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
29 of 68
a. Parking in the Main Street Mixed Use District (MS) must
adequately serve the users without distracting from the compact
design that makes it a successful commercial corridor.
b. Exceptions. It is recognized that there may be projects that require
a departure from the requirements of this section in order to be
feasible. Possible grounds to be considered in determining possible
reasons for granting exceptions to this section are as follows:
1. Safety
2. Unique site or building characteristics
3. Application of the standards would have a detrimental effect
on the use of the property
4. Public benefit
(2) Off-street parking of vehicles.
a. Off-street parking must be located on the side or rear of buildings
in the East Main Street Sub-Districts 1,2 and 3 (EM-1,EM-2, EM-
3). Parking will be allowed in the front yard of a lot that abuts an
intersection of two major roadways (those designated as an A
Minor Arterial or Major Collector Roadway) but is not permitted
in front of a building along Main Street.
b. Oversized vehicles are prohibited from overnight parking in the
Main Street Mixed Use District (MS) if visible from a public
street.
c. Midsized vehicles are prohibited from overnight parking in the
East Main Street Sub-District 1 (EM-1) if visible from a public
street.
d. No more than three (3) midsized vehicles that are visible from a
public street may be parked overnight on any one property used for
commercial purposes in the East Main Street Sub-District 2 (EM-
2) and the West Main Street Sub-District (WM) provided that
sufficient off-street parking is available. Such midsized vehicles
must be used primarily for business related purposes of a business
located on the same property.
e. Vehicles on residential property are regulated by Section 74-487 of
this Chapter.
f. Overnight parking of semi tractors and/or trailers, dump trucks,
fire trucks, buses, recreational vehicles, boats, farm trucks or
tractors, tank trucks, stored vehicles and special mobile equipment
are prohibited regardless of length, height, or gross vehicle weight.
g. This section shall not prohibit vehicles or trailers from short-term
parking or when loading, unloading, or rendering a service.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
30 of 68
i. This section shall not regulate the size of vehicles for sale, lease or
rent provided such vehicles are located upon a property that has
obtained a conditional use permit for such use.
(3) Minimum Off-street parking. The following table establishes minimum
parking standards for uses in the West Main Street and East Main
Street Sub-Districts 2 and 3 (WM, EM–2 and EM-3); these
requirements may be imposed for new mixed use or multiple family
residential construction or upon a change in use in the East Main Street
Sub-District (EM-1) that includes multi-family residential use if
determined by the City Council to best serve the general welfare of the
City.
Commercial Retail (per 1,000 sq. ft.) 4 spaces
Commercial Services (per 1,000 sq. ft.) 2 spaces
Office (per 1,000 sq. ft.) 2 spaces
Civic (per 1,000 sq. ft) 2 spaces
Fast Food Restaurant (150 sq. ft) 1 space
Dine-in Restaurant (40 sq. ft) 1 space
Hotel/motel (per room) 1 space
Residential Townhouse (per unit) 1.5 spaces
Residential Multifamily (per unit) 1.5 spaces
Other Uses – as determined by the Planning
Director or designee
(4) Maximum Off-Street Parking. Provisions for maximum off-street
parking shall be as follows:
Building Size Maximum Parking
0-5,000 square feet 175% of total parking needed
based on minimum required
5,001 – 9,999 square feet Maximum stalls permitted at
5,000 sf. + [0.5 * (Building square
footage – 5,000) / 1,000)*
Minimum stalls per 1,000 sf
10,000 square feet and greater Maximum stalls permitted at
10,000 sf. + [1.1 * (Building
square footage – 10,000) / 1,000)*
Minimum stalls per 1,000 sf
(5) Shared parking. Shared parking between complementary uses is
encouraged. Access, circulation, use and maintenance agreements are
required as part of the overall development approval for uses with
shared parking.
(6) Parking lots. In instances where parking areas abut the street, the
sidewalk edge must be delineated with landscaping, architectural
fencing or other decorative features.
(7) Vehicular circulation and parking. Parking and vehicular circulation
shall comply with the following standards:
a. Parking drives and drive-thru (drive-up facilities) should be located
away from building entrances, be designed to minimize pedestrian
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
31 of 68
conflicts, and shall not be located between the main building
entrance and Main Street.
b. Surface parking lots shall be oriented behind or to the sides of
buildings unless otherwise allowed in this section.
c. Parking ramps shall be designed to be architecturally integrated
into the overall site and be made of comparable materials and
decorative elements.
(m) Approval Process.
(1) Site Plan Procedures. All development proposals under Section 74.265
(d) 1 shall be reviewed under the site plan approval process as set forth
in this subsection.
a. Application. Application for a site plan review shall be made to the
Planning Department on forms provided by the City and shall be
accompanied by the following:
1. A survey or plat of the property
2. Evidence of ownership or an interest in the property
3. The fee specified in the City’s fee schedule
4. Information regarding project phasing and timing
5. Complete development plans as specified under Section 74.2
of the City Code, signed by a registered architect, civil
engineer, landscape architect or other appropriate design
professional, as required by the State building code
6. Architectural plans (for new construction), showing the
following:
aa. Colored elevations of all sides of the building
bb. Type, color and samples of exterior building materials
cc. Typical floor plans
dd. Dimensions of all structures
ee. The location of exterior trash storage areas and of exterior
electrical, heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
equipment
ff. Utility plans including water, sanitary sewer, and storm
sewer
gg. A plan showing landscape, lighting and signs
hh. Illustrations that show adjacent building elevations to
show the scale of adjacent buildings and landscaping
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
32 of 68
ii. Such other information as may be required by the City to
process the application
b. Public hearing. Upon receipt of a completed application, a date
shall be set for a public hearing before the Planning Commission.
The hearing will be held no less than ten (10) days after mailed
notice is sent to the owners of the property located wholly or
partially within 350 feet of the site. The Planning Commission
shall submit its recommendation to the City Council. Following
appropriate review, the Council shall make a decision regarding
the application.
(2) Other Approvals. In cases where there is uncertainty or disagreement
about compliance with the standards of this section, the Planning
Director or designee may refer development approvals, as listed in
Section 74.265 (d) 2 though 6, to the Planning Commission and City
Council to determine that the proposal meets the standards of this
Section.
(n) Enforceability.
(1) Violation. Unless expressly provided otherwise, it shall be a
misdemeanor for any person or entity to violate any provision of the
City Code, including this Section, any rule or regulation adopted in
pursuance of any such provision, or any order lawfully enforcing the
City Code or this Section. The term “misdemeanor” is defined in
Minnesota Statutes Section 609.02, subd. 3, as amended. In addition to
prosecuting a violation as a misdemeanor, the City may separately, or
in conjunction with the misdemeanor prosecution, bring an action for
specific performance to enforce any provisions of the City Code,
including this Section, any rule or regulation adopted in pursuance of
such provision, or any order lawfully enforcing the City Code,
including this Section.
Section 74-266. Transit Oriented Development District (TOD).
(a) Purpose and Intent of District. The TOD Districts are designed and intended to
encourage a mixture of residential, commercial and civic uses in proximity to
the commuter rail station at densities and intensities that support and increase
transit use. The districts are also intended to:
(1) Encourage a safe and pleasant pedestrian environment near the rail
station and to limit conflicts between pedestrians and vehicles.
(2) Maximize access to transit.
(3) Encourage use of transit infrastructure.
(4) Provide parking in an unobtrusive manner.
(5) Reduce parking requirements by encouraging shared parking and
alternative modes of transportation.
(6) Encourage a sense of activity and liveliness along the street level of
building facades.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
33 of 68
(b) Applicability. The TOD District regulations shall apply to the TOD Districts as
shown on the official zoning map.
(c) Definitions. For the purposes of this Section, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this Section or Section 74-2 of the
City Code. Words not defined shall have the plain meaning generally ascribed
to them.
Convenience and Fuel Station means any building or premises used for the sale
of any motor fuels, oils, or lubricants and automotive services performed same
day such as a car wash. Such uses may also provide for retail sale of food
prepared on site, packaged goods, perishable groceries and limited merchandise.
Congregate living. A non-institutional, independent group living environment
that integrates shelter and service needs of seniors who do not need institutional
supervision and/or intensive health care.
Data center. A facility used to house computer systems and associated
components, such as telecommunications and storage systems. It generally
includes redundant or backup power supplies, redundant data communications
connections, environmental controls (e.g., air conditioning, fire suppression) and
security devices.
Floor area ratio (FAR). The relationship between the amount of useable floor
area permitted in a building and the area of the lot on which the building is
located. FAR is calculated by dividing the gross floor area of a building by the
total area of the lot.
Gross floor area. The sum, in square feet, of the gross horizontal areas of all
floors of a building, as measured from the exterior walls of a building, including
supporting columns and unsupported wall projections (except eaves, uncovered
balconies, fireplaces and similar architectural features), or, if appropriate, from
the center line of a dividing wall between buildings.
Laboratory, medical or dental. An establishment primarily engaged in providing
professional analytic or diagnostic services to the medical profession, or to the
patient, at the direction of a physician; or an establishment primarily engaged in
making dentures, artificial teeth, and orthodontic appliances to order for the
dental profession.
Live/work buildings. Live/work buildings are similar to townhouses; however,
they have two entries: one to the ground floor and another to the residential unit
above. The ground floor unit is typically used for small scale retail or service
retail uses.
Mixed-use buildings. Buildings that accommodate a range of uses in a vertical
format. Typically they contain retail or other active uses at grade and residential
or offices on the upper floors. Community uses such as a day care or medical
offices may also be located in a mixed-use building.
Research, development and testing laboratory. An establishment in which
facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or experimentation are
located, but not facilities for the manufacture of products, except as incidental to
the main purpose of the laboratory.
(d) Transit Oriented Development Districts.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
34 of 68
(1) TOD – R: Transit Oriented Development District with a Residential
Emphasis.
This district is intended to facilitate the creation of compact, pedestrianoriented
neighborhoods. The resulting neighborhood would be
predominantly residential in nature but may include existing
commercial and new compatibly-scaled commercial areas.
Designation as a TOD – R is intended to create a zoning district with
the following characteristics:
a. Concentrations of multi-family and attached housing near the
commuter rail station area with density decreasing as distance
from the rail station increases.
b. New non-residential uses that are transit-supportive.
c. A pedestrian friendly environment that includes access to
transit and pedestrian connectivity within the district.
(2) TOD – E: Transit Oriented Development District with an Employment
Emphasis.
This district is intended to facilitate the creation of a high employment
area in relatively close proximity to the rail station area. Streets and
buildings should be arranged for pedestrian circulation. This district
targets office and commercial uses. Designation as a TOD – E would
create a zoning district with the following characteristics:
a. Concentrations of jobs within ¼ mile of the rail station.
b. Parking minimized by limiting the size and placement of
parking lots.
c. A highly pedestrian setting with an emphasis on pedestrian
connectivity.
d. An area of street level activity.
(e) Use Regulations. The following table indicates allowed land uses within the
TOD Districts. As shown in the chart, P is for Permitted Uses; C is for
Conditionally Permitted Uses; I is for Interim Uses; and N is for Not Permitted.
Uses that are not listed as permitted or permitted with a conditional use permit
or interim use permit are considered prohibited. Surface parking lots not related
to a particular use are not permitted unless used for public transit-related
parking.
TOD - R TOD - E
Residential Uses
Townhouse, rowhouse P N
Dwelling unit located at ground level (mixed-use building) P N
Dwelling unit located above ground floor (mixed-use building) P P
Live-work building P P
Congregate housing for senior populations P C
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
35 of 68
TOD - R TOD - E
Apartments, condominiums, co-ops P P
Civic and Semi-Public Uses
Schools for business, trade, dancing and music N C
Day care centers in a mixed use building P P
Park and public recreation facilities P P
Transit stations and related parking facilities P P
Essential services P P
Commercial Uses
Retail sales and service establishments, financial services (in a
mixed use building).
P P
Drive-through N C
Offices – general, medical, professional in mixed use building P P
Office in free-standing building N P
Service businesses such as beauty shops, barbershops, dry-cleaning
drop-off/pickup (no on-site processing) in a mixed use building.
P P
Data centers N C
Hotels P P
Conference center C P
Convenience and Fuel Station N C***
Theaters (with structured parking) N P
Structured parking facilities P P
Restaurants, including open air or sidewalk cafes (in mixed use
building)
P P
Merchandise stands for outdoor sale of goods at street level (outdoor
storage prohibited)
P P*
Automotive services, detailing, car specialty services (not including
body repair, major repair)
N C
Outdoor sales in conjunction with a permitted use N P
Rental of vehicles (with limited outside storage0 N C
Towing services (with no outside storage of vehicles) N P
Emergency services, ambulance services N P
Research, development and testing laboratory N P
Laboratory, medical or dental N P
Fabrication of office and computer equipment N P
Fabrication of apparel, leather products, and other products from
prepared products
N P
Processing and packaging of drugs, pharmaceuticals, perfumes and
cosmetics
N P
Radio and television broadcasting studios that do not require exterior
towers, antennas or dishes.
N P
Printing, publishing, bookbinding, blueprinting, newspaper
publication
N P
Internet publishing and broadcasting N P
Motion picture and sound recording industries N P
Administrative support services N P
Fitness and recreation centers P ** P
Catalog and mail order N P
Medical appliance assembly N P
Biotechnology N P
Accessory uses P P
National, Regional or Micro Brewery with Taproom N C
Brewpub N P
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
36 of 68
* This use shall meet all requirements and obtain appropriate licenses as required in Chapter 22 (of
the City Code), Article IV Peddlers, Solicitors and Transient Merchants.
** In a mixed-use building.
*** Must be located east of 6th Avenue and have a minimum lot size of 2.0 acres with street
frontage on 7th Avenue and Buchanan Street.
(f) Site Plan Approval Required. A site plan approval is required for all new
construction in a TOD District.
(1) Application. Application for a site plan review shall be made to the
Planning Department on forms provided by the City and shall be
accompanied by the following:
a. A survey or plat of the property.
b. Evidence of ownership or interest in the property.
c. The fee specified in the City’s fee schedule.
d. Information regarding project phasing and timing.
e. Complete development plans as specified under Section 74.2
of the City Code, signed by a registered architect, civil
engineer, landscape architect or other appropriate design
professional, as required by the State Building Code.
f. Architectural plans (for new construction), showing the
following:
1. Colored elevations of all sides of the building.
2. Type, color and samples of exterior building
materials.
3. Typical floor plans.
4. Dimensions of all structures.
5. The location of exterior trash storage areas and of
exterior electrical, heating, ventilation, and air
conditioning equipment.
6. Utility plans including water, sanitary sewer, and
storm sewer.
7. A plan showing landscaping, lighting and signs.
8. Illustrations that show adjacent building elevations to
show the scale of adjacent buildings and landscaping,
9. Such other information as may be required by the
City to process the application.
(2) Public hearing. Upon receipt of a completed application, a date shall be
set for a public hearing before the Planning Commission. The hearing
will be held no less then (10) days after mailed notice is sent to the
owners of property located wholly or partially within 350 feet of the
site. The Planning Commission shall submit its recommendation to the
City Council. Following appropriate review, the Council shall make a
decision regarding the application.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
37 of 68
(g) Specific Conditional Use Permit Standards. The standards in this sub-section
apply to the uses that are listed as conditional uses within the TOD districts and
shall apply in addition to the general criteria for granting conditional use
permits.
(1) Congregate Housing for Senior Populations.
a. Any on-site services shall be for the residents of the facility
only.
b. A designated area for the short-term parking of vehicles
engaged in loading and unloading residents shall be provided.
The designated area shall be located as close as practical to the
principal entrance of the building and shall be connected to the
building by a sidewalk.
(2) Commercial schools and professional training facilities.
a. All activities shall be conducted within an enclosed building.
b. To the extent practical, all new construction or additions to
existing buildings shall be compatible with the scale and
character of the surroundings. Exterior building materials shall
be harmonious with other buildings in the neighborhood.
c. An appropriate transition area between the use and adjacent
property shall be provided by landscaping, screening and other
site improvements consistent with the character of the
neighborhood.
(3) Drive-through.
a. Curb-cut entrances for queuing driveways and exit driveways
shall be consolidated with any other driveway entrances or
exits on the site.
b. A minimum of one hundred feet (100’) leading to the drive-up
window for one lane and sixty feet (60’) per lane when more
than one lane shall be provided for queuing.
c. The queuing area shall not contain any pedestrian crosswalks
or sidewalks. Driveway lanes shall be designed so that
queuing vehicles do not interfere with other vehicle and
pedestrian circulation on the site.
d. Driveways shall not be located between a principal building
and the street, or if a corner site, all adjacent roadways.
e. All queuing lanes shall be clearly identified using striping,
landscaping, and/or signs. Drive-up windows shall be located
to the rear or side of a building.
(4) Conference Center.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
38 of 68
a. Restaurants that are accessory to the conference center shall
only be permitted if located within the conference center
building.
b. Stores, shops and service facilities located within the
conference center building are a permitted accessory use. Such
facilities shall be primarily for the use and convenience of
guests.
(5) Automotive Services.
a. All vehicles parked or stored on site shall display a current
license plate with a current license tab.
b. Outside storage of any kind is prohibited.
c. Junk vehicles may not be located outside at anytime.
d. All vehicles, other than junk vehicles, waiting for repair or
pick-up shall be stored on the site within an enclosed building
or in parking spaces in compliance with Section 74-266.
e. As a condition of approval, the Planning Commission and City
Council may limit the amount of vehicles that may be stored
overnight.
f. All repairs shall be performed within a completely enclosed
building.
(6) Vehicle Rental.
a. All vehicles parked or stored on site shall display a current
license plate with a current license tab. Outside storage of
automotive parts or storage of junk vehicles shall be
prohibited.
b. No fuel pumps shall be provided on site.
c. Parking areas must be in conformance with the parking
requirements set forth is this section.
d. The sale or repair of vehicles shall be prohibited.
e. As a condition of approval, the Planning Commission and City
Council may limit the number of vehicles displayed for rent
on the site.
(7) Convenience and Fuel Stations. The following requirements shall
apply:
a. Temporary outside display of merchandise at services and
gasoline stations is allowed as an accessory use. Such display
shall be maintained in a neat and orderly fashion appurtenant
to the permanent structure and shall not exceed 150 square
feet or 1% of the gross building floor area, whichever is less.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
39 of 68
b. Temporary promotional signs affixed to freestanding signs,
pumps, pump islands, canopies, or any structure other than the
main structure shall be prohibited.
c. No minimum FAR is required.
d. Maximum building setback requirements may be increased if
the property is adjacent to a commercial/industrial service
street as designated in the Anoka Station Master Plan to
accommodate parking within the front setback subject to Ch.
74 Art. V Div. 5 Sec. 74-266 (k) (5) b.
e. The maximum side yard setback may be increased if the lot is
2.0 acres in size or greater.
f. A reduction in open space requirements may be waived or
reduce to no less than 1% of the site if pedestrian amenities
such as benches and bike racks are provided. The percentage
reduction allowed will be recommended by the Planning
Commission and approved by the City Council. The City
Council shall determine if the proposed amenities are
sufficient to meet the requested reduction.
g. Maximum parking requirements may be increased to meet
demand to serve the use if sustainable technology such as
electric vehicle charging stations, solar panels, LED lighting,
or LEED certification standards are met. The allowable
increase in the number of stalls will be recommended by the
Planning Commission and approved by the City Council. The
City Council shall determine if the proposed installations are
sufficient to meet the number of additional stalls requested.
h. All other requirements of Section 74-266 shall apply unless
otherswise stated above.
(h) Bulk and Dimensional Standards. The following requirements apply to all
buildings or uses in a TOD District unless otherwise specified.
(1) Height and Setbacks.
Residential
Townhouse
Residential
Apt., Condo, Coop
Mixed – Use
Building
Commercial, Civic
not in Mixed-Use
Building
Height 3 stories or 35 feet,
whichever is less
2 stories
minimum
4 stories
maximum*
2 stories
minimum
4 stories
maximum*
No minimum
4 stories
maximum*
Setbacks Front: Maximum of
15 feet
Side: 10 feet
Rear: 15 feet
Front: Maximum
of 15 feet
Side: 10 feet
Rear: 15 feet
Front: Maximum
of 8 feet
Side: 10 feet
Rear: None
required
Front: Maximum
of 8 feet
Side: 10 feet
Rear: None
required
* Maximum height may be increased upon issuance of a Conditional Use
Permit. Single-story buildings shall have a foot print of no more than 15,000
square feet.
a. Height and Setback Standards.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
40 of 68
1. If new construction incorporates an existing structure
located within a minimum setback, the Planning
Director or designee may allow the setback for the
building addition to be reduced to the established
setback.
2. All above ground utility structures associated with
electric, natural gas, telecommunication, cable
television distribution lines, pipes, conduits or other
public utilities shall be located behind the minimum
setback unless otherwise approved as part of the site
plan approval. This applies to air vents, utility boxes
and back-flow preventers.
3. Driveways may cross the front setback, but shall be
as near as perpendicular to the street for pedestrian
safety and to minimize the intrusion into any
landscaped area.
4. Balconies may project up to two feet (2’) over the
right-of-way, subject to an approved sidewalk
encroachment agreement. Balconies shall have a
minimum clearance of ten feet (10’) from grade.
5. Side and rear yards adjacent to properties zoned for
single-family residential (R-1). When a lot abuts an
existing single-family residence or a property that
may be used for single-family residential purposes, a
minimum side yard of fifteen feet (15’) and a rear
yard of twenty-five feet (25’) shall be required.
6. Maximum height adjacent to single family
residential. The permitted maximum height shall be
determined by the distance of the structure to the
boundary line of the nearest single-family residential
district. Any required side or rear yard setback shall
be increased one foot for each additional foot of
height.
(2) Minimum residential density.
a. Residential developments and the residential components of
mixed-use buildings shall have a minimum density of eleven
(11) dwelling units per acre. Densities shall be based on the
residential portion of the site.
b. For large and phased projects, the residential density for each
phase shall meet or exceed the minimum density requirements.
If phases cannot meet this requirement, but the overall master
plan for the development meets or exceeds the minimum
density requirement, then approval may be granted for phases
that meet at least eighty percent (80%) of the minimum
density requirements.
(3) Floor area ratio (FAR).
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
41 of 68
a. The total minimum floor area ratio of buildings on a
development site shall not be less than 0.50 square feet of
floor area to 1 square foot of the development site (0.50 FAR).
The FAR shall apply to all non-residential uses except for
civic uses and residential uses in mixed use buildings.
b. For large or phased projects, the FAR for each phase shall
meet or exceed the minimum FAR requirements. If phases
cannot meet this requirement, but the overall master plan
meets or exceeds minimum FAR requirements, approval may
be granted for phases that meet at least eighty percent (80%)
of the minimum FAR requirements.
c. Plazas, courtyards, outdoor cafes, rooftop gardens, and
widened public sidewalks that enhance pedestrian spaces and
amenities can be credited toward meeting the minimum
required FAR. If the pedestrian space/amenities are available
to the public, then the square footage of the amenity shall be
credited at one hundred percent (100%). If private, then the
square footage shall be credited at fifty percent (50%). In no
instance shall more than twenty percent (20%) of the
pedestrian area be credited toward the required FAR.
d. An FAR credit of fifty percent (50%) shall be given for
structured parking facilities that devote at least seventy-five
percent (75%) of the linear street level frontage of the building
to retail, office, civic or institutional uses. Similarly, an FAR
credit shall also be given for structured parking facilities that
provide such uses above the street level and/or on any other
side of the building.
e. The following uses are exempt from meeting the minimum
FAR requirement:
1. Transit stations (bus or rail), parking facilities for
such facilities, and bus shelters.
2. Existing development and expansions of existing
developments.
3. Public parks and playgrounds.
4. Utilities and related facilities.
(i) Open Storage Prohibited. Except as otherwise specified in this section, outside
storage shall be prohibited in the TOD districts.
(j) Open Space Requirement. Developers will be expected to work with the city to
provide a minimum of five percent (5%) of the project site as open space. The
open space may be designed as a square, plaza, terrace, or green, with a variety
of landscaped and paved surfaces and seating areas. This requirement may be
waived in cases where the City’s master plan specifies the location and design of
open space.
(k) Parking Requirements.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
42 of 68
(1) For purposes of this section, new uses within a TOD District shall be
required to meet the minimum/maximum parking spaces as shown in
the following chart. All square footage is measured as ‘gross footage.’)
USE MINIMUM/MAXIMUM NUMBER OF
PARKING SPACES
Residential Maximum of 1.6 parking spaces per dwelling unit
Restaurants Minimum of one parking space per 75 square feet
of restaurant seating space but no more than one
space per 150 square feet of restaurant seating
space.
Retail, Office, and Service Maximum of one space per 250 square feet
Other permitted uses Maximum of one space per 500 square feet
(2) The required/permitted number of parking spaces for any building
within the TOD District, including mixed-use buildings, shall be the
sum total of the requirements for each use in the building.
(3) Parking maximums may be exceeded under the following
circumstances, if one or more of the following is provided.
a. If structured or underground parking is provided on site,
parking may be exceeded by twenty-five percent (25%).
b. If a shared parking agreement is executed, parking may be
exceeded by twenty percent (20%).
c. If all parking spaces are located behind the building and are
not visible from the public right-of-way, parking may be
exceeded by ten percent (10%).
d. If driveways and access points are shared by at least two
adjacent properties, parking may be exceeded by ten percent
(10%).
e. If a provision is made for combining or interconnecting
adjacent parking lots and pedestrian access points, parking
may be exceeded by ten percent (10%).
f. In no case shall the cumulative increase in parking exceed
twenty-five percent (25%).
g. A twenty-five percent (25%) parking reduction in the
minimum number of parking spaces required is allowed if the
principal use is located within 800 feet of a parking facility
with public spaces available to the general public or within
800 feet of a public transit park and ride facility with an
approved joint use agreement.
(4) The off-street parking standards shall conform to the general
requirements for off street parking located in Article IX, Division 2 of
this Chapter, except as otherwise provided for in this section.
(5) No surface parking or maneuvering space shall be permitted within a
required setback or between the primary structure and the front yard,
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
43 of 68
except that driveways providing access to the parking area may be
installed across these areas. It is the intent that these driveways be as
nearly perpendicular to the street right-of-way as possible for
pedestrian safety and to minimize intrusion into the landscaped areas.
a. Exceptions. It is recognized that there may be development
that require a departure from the requirements of this section
be developed and capitalize on the site attributes unique to
individual sites based on location. Criteria to be considered in
determining an exception to this section are as follows:
1. Sites with housing adjacent to the river:
Housing along the Rum River shall capitalize on the
riverfront views and the parking may be located
between the primary structure and the street right-ofway
to preserve the views to the river.
2. Sites that are surrounded on all sides by street
right-of-way:
Buildings and parking shall be placed on sites
balancing visibility along Highway 10 with the desire
for a strong building presence along Pierce Street.
Perimeter surface parking is allowed with enhanced
tree planting, landscaping, and site amenities.
3. Sites adjacent to Buchanan Street:
Properties with primary access off of Buchanan
Street shall have parking in the rear and sides of the
building and provide strong pedestrian connections
from the parking and Buchanan Street. Parking is
allowed adjacent to commercial/industrial service
streets as designated in the Anoka Station Master
Plan as long as parking lots are well landscaped and
screened.
b. The Planning Commission may recommend and the City
Council may approve the proposed development upon
determining that the proposed site design meets one of the
criteria for granting an exception for parking. If the
development meets the criteria for an exception, for
commercial and industrial uses, no off-street parking or
loading shall be located within ten (10) feet of any property
line. For residential uses, no off-street parking or loading
shall be located within five (5) feet of any property line.
(6) On-street parking spaces located along the portion of a public street(s)
abutting the use where parking is currently permitted may be counted
toward the minimum number of parking spaces as required by this
section. Those on-street parking spaces must be located on the same
side of the street as the use, have a dimension of at least twenty feet
(20’) in length, and be located in areas approved by the City’s Public
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
44 of 68
Services Department. On-street parking directly across the street from
the use may be counted if that parking abuts property that is
undevelopable because of physical constraints.
In the event the City, County or State remove any on-street parking that
was allowed to count toward the minimum requirement, the existing
use shall not be required to make up the difference and shall not be
made nonconforming with respect to parking.
On-street parking shall not be counted in calculating maximum parking
spaces.
(7) Parking requirements may be met on-site or off-site at a distance of up
to 800 feet from the permitted use. Off-site parking to meet the
requirements of this section may be provided through a lease, subject to
the review and approval of the City.
(8) Parking that is located to the rear of the primary structure may extend
the entire width of the lot, with the exception of any required screening
or landscaped areas. Parking that is located to the side of the primary
structure shall not cover more than thirty-five percent (35%) of the total
lot width.
(9) Shared parking shall be permitted and encouraged.
(10) Bicycle parking facilities are encouraged.
(11) All parking areas for more than ten (10) motorized vehicles (except for
parking areas for two-family and townhouse dwellings on a single lot)
shall provide screening. If a wall is provided, then the area devoted to
the wall shall be wide enough to allow for its maintenance. The
screening may be eliminated if abutting parking lots are combined or
interconnected with vehicular and pedestrian access.
(12) Structured parking facilities shall meet the following additional
requirements:
a. At least fifty percent (50%) of the linear street level frontage
of the facility shall be devoted to retail, office, civic,
institutional, or residential uses. If seventy-five percent (75%)
or more of the linear street frontage is devoted to such uses,
then the total square footage of these uses shall be credited one
hundred percent (100%) toward the required FAR minimums.
b. If retail, office, civic, institutional or residential uses are
constructed on the rear or side of the facility or above the
ground floor on the street frontage of the facility, then the total
square footage of these areas shall be credited one hundred
percent (100%) toward the required FAR minimums.
c. Underground parking structures are permitted. Subsurface
parking located in the minimum setback shall be permitted
with an eight foot (8’) clearance from the top of the subsurface
structure to the sidewalk, subject to an approved encroachment
agreement. No ventilation shall be permitted in the setback.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
45 of 68
d. A minimum nine foot (9’) clearance shall be maintained on
the first level and any additional level that provides disabled
parking spaces. A minimum seven foot (7’) clearance shall be
maintained throughout the remainder of the parking deck to
ensure the safe movement of vans and emergency vehicles.
(13) Loading standards.
a. Non-residential buildings and structures, excluding parking
structures, subject to the provisions of this Section, shall
provide a minimum number of off-street service/delivery
loading spaces. The loading spaces shall be designed and
constructed so that all parking maneuvers can take place
entirely within the property lines of the premises and shall not
interfere with the normal movement of vehicles and
pedestrians on the public rights-of-way. The loading spaces
shall be a minimum of ten feet (10’) by twenty-five feet (25’)
and shall be provided in accordance with the following:
Non-residential uses with gross floor area:
Less than 50,000 square feet None required
50,000 – 150,000 square feet One (1) space
Each additional 100,000 square feetOne (1) space
Existing buildings are exempt from these standards.
b. No loading spaces shall be permitted within any required or
established setback, or between the primary structure and the
required setback, except that driveways providing access to
the loading area may be installed across these areas.
(l) Design Standards.
(1) Architectural standards.
a. Facades.
1. Visual Breaks. The exterior of new buildings shall be
designed with visual breaks through the use of
decorative tile work, masonry (but not flat concrete
block), belt courses of a different texture and color,
projecting cornices, medallions, opaque or
translucent glass, artwork, vertical articulation,
lighting fixtures, or architectural elements not listed
herein as approved by the City Council.
2. Width. A building more than 45 feet in width shall
be divided into increments of no more than 45 feet
through articulation of the facade. This can be
achieved through combinations of the following
techniques:
aa. Division or breaks in materials
bb. Window bays
cc. Special treatment at entrances
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
46 of 68
dd. Subtle variations in rooflines and parapet
detailing
ee. Building setbacks
ff. Awnings
gg. Repetitive elements
b. Exterior Materials and Detailing.
1. New buildings and structures, additions and
renovations must be constructed of durable materials.
2. In multi-story buildings, the ground floor shall be
distinguished from the floors above by the use of a
combination of the following:
aa. An intermediate cornice line
bb. A difference in building materials or
detailing
cc. An offset in the facade
dd. An awning, loggia or arcade
ee. Special window lintels
ff. Brick/stone corbels
3. The exterior opaque materials on each elevation of a
building must be brick, stone, decorative masonry or
similar materials or a combination thereof according
to the table below. The brick, stone, or decorative
masonry shall be focused on prominent architectural
features, particularly the office components of the
building, elevations that include a primary building
entrance or multiple tenant entrances, corners of
buildings, and the prominent building elevations
fronting on public streets.
Transit Village Uses Percentage of building façade with brick, stone, or decorative masonry
Public Façade* Side Façade Interior Facade
Commercial Uses
Retail 75% 75% 25%
Mixed Use 75% 75% 25%
Professional Office 75% 75% 25%
Office/Service/Flex 75% 75% 25%
Light Industrial/Flex 50% 25% 10%
Residential Uses
Low Density Residential 25% 25% 10%
Medium Density Residential 50% 33% 25%
High Density Residential 50% 33% 25%
Senior Housing 50% 33% 25%
*For purposes of the table above, the public façade shall be determined using the following definition:
Public Façade. Side(s) of a building that is visible from and within two-hundred feet (200’) of a public street, rail
line, public park, public plaza or other public open space,
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
47 of 68
4. The remaining percentage of the building exterior
opaque materials shall be comprised of the following
materials:
aa. Cast stone
bb. Wood shingles (cedar shingles with 6-inch
maximum exposure)
cc. Lap siding, cedar or redwood (6 inch width,
no diagonal siding)
dd. Tongue and groove paneling, cedar or
redwood (6 inch width, no diagonal siding)
ee. Copper (untreated)
ff. Stucco and EFIS
gg. Cement board
hh. Glass (does not include windows)
ii. Dark anodized aluminum
jj. Materials that are similar in character to
those listed above.
5. The following materials are not allowed as exterior
materials:
aa. Painted or unpainted concrete block
bb. Aluminum, vinyl or fiberglass siding or
roofing materials.
cc. Precast concrete materials, unless
specifically approved by the City Council
for a new commercial building.
dd. Painting of previously unpainted brick
ee. Wooden exteriors
6. LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental
Design) Standards. The City encourages the use of
sustainable building materials and construction
techniques through programs such as US Green
Building Council’s LEED program.
7. Alternative Designs or Materials. To encourage
creativity, imagination, innovation and variety in
architectural design, the Planning Commission may
recommend modifications of the requirements of this
Section and the City Council may approve such
modifications upon determining that the proposed
architectural design or exterior facade(s) materials
meet all of the following conditions:
aa. The proposed design or material is
consistent with the purposes of this section.
bb. The proposed design or material would
enhance the architectural appearance of the
building and would be equal or superior to
designs or materials permitted by this
section.
cc. The proposed design or material would be in
harmony with the character of adjacent
buildings and the surrounding district.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
48 of 68
(2) Screening standards.
a. All service entrances, utility structures associated with a
building, and loading docks and/or spaces shall be screened
from the abutting property and from public view from a public
street.
b. Any fences or walls used for screening or other purposes shall
be constructed in a durable fashion of brick, stone and other
masonry materials specifically designed as fencing materials.
The finished side of the fence shall face the abutting property.
Chain link, wood, vinyl or barbed wire fences are not
permitted.
c. The composition of the screening material and the placement
on the lot shall be left up to the discretion of the property
owners as long as the intent of this Section is met. A wall
cannot be substituted for a planting strip along any public
street unless supplemented by landscaping.
d. Landscaping used for screening shall be evergreen and at least
four feet (4’) tall with a minimum spread of two feet (2’) when
planted and no further apart than five feet (5’). Shrubs shall be
adequately maintained so that an average height of five to six
feet can be expected as normal growth within four years of
planting. The average expected height may be reduced to four
feet (4’) for screening along public streets.
e. The maximum height for walls and fences shall be six feet (6’)
or whatever is sufficient to visually screen the use but not less
than four feet (4’).
f. Dumpsters, recycling containers, compactors, and solid waste
handling areas are not permitted in any setback or yard and
shall be screened from adjacent property and from public view
with a six-foot high solid and finished masonry wall with
closeable gates. In no instance shall a chain link fence, wood,
vinyl or barbed wire fence be permitted.
(3) Buffer standards.
a. All uses, other than single-family detached dwelling units,
shall provide landscaping along all property lines abutting
residentially used property located adjacent to a TOD District.
This requirement also applies in situations where an alley with
a right-of-way width of twenty-five feet (25’) or less separates
uses in a TOD District from a non-TOD residential property.
Landscaping shall be provided along all property lines
abutting the alley when adjacent to residential uses. Multifamily
developments in a TOD District are exempt from this
landscaping requirement when they abut other multi-family
uses.
b. In no instance shall a chain link, wood, vinyl or barbed wire
fence be permitted.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
49 of 68
(4) Exterior lighting standards.
a. Exterior lighting shall be used to provide illumination for the
security and safety of entry drives, parking, service and
loading areas, pathways, courtyards and plazas, without
intruding on adjacent properties and shall comply with the
following standards:
1. Poles and fixtures shall be architecturally compatible
with structures and lighting on-site and on adjacent
properties.
2. Security lighting shall be adequate for visibility, but
not overly bright.
3. Metal halide lighting shall be used with a concealed
light source of the “cut-off” variety to prevent glare
and “light trespass” onto adjacent buildings and sites.
4. Poles within landscaped areas and plazas shall have a
maximum height of twenty feet (20’), measured from
grade, and shall be coordinated with city standards.
5. Poles in parking lots shall have a maximum height of
24 feet (24’) measured from finished grade.
6. Lighting fixtures mounted directly on structures shall
be permitted when utilized to enhance specific
architectural elements or to help establish scale or
provide visual interest.
7. “Wall paks” shall be permitted only in loading and
service areas and shall be down-lit and shielded from
view.
8. Shielded illumination or fixtures shall be permitted to
light building mounted signage, building facades, or
pedestrian arcades if they are integrated into a
building’s architectural design.
9. Lighting should highlight entrances, art, terraces, and
special landscape features.
10. Separate pedestrian scale lighting or other low level
fixtures, such as bollards, shall be incorporated for all
pedestrian ways through parking lots and drop-off
areas at entrances to buildings.
11. All primary walkways, steps or ramps along
pedestrian routes shall be illuminated.
b. Light Intensity.
1. A photometric lighting plan is required for all
proposed commercial developments to ensure that
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
50 of 68
adequate and appropriate light levels are provided for
each site condition.
2. Lighting shall not exceed 0.1 foot candle at
residential property lines or 0.5 foot candle on nonresidential
property lines measured on a vertical
plane.
3. The following minimum levels of illumination must
be maintained for each of the specific locations.*
Building entrances 5.0 foot candles
Sidewalks 2.0 foot candles
Bikeways 1.0 foot candles
Courts/Plazas/Terraces 1.5 foot candles
Ramps 5.0 foot candles
Stairways 5.0 foot candles
Underpasses 5.0 foot candles
Waiting Areas 1.0 foot candles
Parking Lots 1.0 foot candles
Roadways 1.5 foot candles
* Values given are in minimum average maintained horizontal foot
candles which are measured at the average point of illumination
between brightest and darkest areas, 4’ – 5’ above the ground surface.
(Source: IES Lighting Handbook – 4th Edition.)
4. Site lighting should provide consistent levels of
illumination, avoiding pockets of very high or low
levels of illumination.
(5) Connectivity and Circulation. Transit oriented development uses shall
be integrated with the surrounding area, easily accessible, and have a
good internal circulation system for a variety of travel modes.
a. A pedestrian sidewalk system shall meet the following
standards:
1. Internal sidewalk connections are required between
buildings and from buildings to all on-site facilities
(parking areas, bicycle facilities, open space, etc.).
All internal sidewalks shall be finished with a hard
surface as required by the City’s Public Services
Department.
2. External sidewalk connections are required to
provide direct connections from all buildings on site
to the existing and/or required sidewalk system and
to adjacent multi-use trails, parks and greenways.
Sidewalks shall be constructed with a hard surface
and of a width as required by the City’s Public
Services Department.
3. The on-site pedestrian circulation system shall be
lighted to a level where employees, residents and
customers can safely use the system at night.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
51 of 68
(7) Urban Open Spaces.
a. Urban open space for public congregation and recreational
opportunities shall be required for all new buildings with a
gross floor area greater than 50,000 square feet. Such
buildings must provide useable open space behind the required
setback and on private property proportionate to the building
square footage according to the following schedule:
Lot Size Open Space Requirement
0 – 20,000 sq. ft. 1 sq. foot/200 sq. feet (gross)
20,001 to 40,000 sq. ft. 1 sq. foot/150 sq. feet (gross)
40,001 + square feet 1 sq. foot/100 sq. feet (gross)
b. Open space may be located on roofs of buildings or enclosed
on the ground floor. A maximum of thirty percent (30%) of
the required open space may be provided on an enclosed
ground floor level.
c. All required open space shall be accessible to the users of the
building and shall be improved with seating, plantings, and
amenities and be visible from the street or pedestrian areas.
d. Floor area ratio credits are allowed for all new developments
when the pedestrian space is available for use by the public,
including widened sidewalk areas.
(m) Street Design.
(1) Street Walls.
a. All non-residential buildings fronting directly on a street shall
be designed so that the first floor street facade of the
building(s) along all streets include clear glass windows and
doors to create pedestrian interest. These openings shall be
arranged so that the uses are visible from and to the street on
at least fifty percent (50%) of the length of the first floor street
level frontage.
b. For all other uses, buildings shall be designed so that the first
floor street facade along all streets includes the use of clear
glass windows and doors arranged so that the uses are visible
from and/or accessible to the street on at least twenty-five
percent (25%) of the length of the first floor street frontage.
When this approach is not feasible, a combination of design
elements shall be used on the building facade or included into
the site design to animate and enliven the streetscape. These
design elements may include but are not limited to the
following: ornamentation, molding, string courses, changes in
material or color, architectural lighting, works of art, fountains
and pools, street furniture, stoops, landscaping and garden
areas, and display areas.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
52 of 68
c. The first floor of all buildings, including structured parking
facilities, shall be designed to encourage and compliment
pedestrian scale interest and activity.
d. Expanses of blank walls shall not exceed twenty (20)
continuous feet in length. A blank wall is a facade that does
not add to the character of the streetscape and does not contain
clear glass windows or doors or sufficient ornamentation,
decoration or articulation.
e. No reflective surfaces shall be permitted on street level
exterior facades.
f. Ventilation grates on the building or emergency exit doors
located on the first floor street facade(s) shall be decorative
and part of the overall building design.
(2) Base of multi-story buildings.
a. The first three (3) floors above street grade shall be
distinguished from the remainder of the building with an
emphasis on providing design elements that will enhance the
pedestrian environment. Such elements as cornices, corbelling,
molding, stringcourses, ornamentation, changes in material or
color, recessing, architectural lighting and other sculpturing of
the base as are appropriate shall be provided to add special
interest to the base.
b. In the design of the building facade, attention shall be paid to
the appearance both during the day and at night. Material and
color changes alone do not meet the requirements of this
section. Design elements that are used to meet the
requirements of this section shall be visually continuous
around the building. In the event that a building facade is not
visible from a public right-of-way, this requirement may be
waived.
c. Special attention shall be given to the design of windows in
the base. Band windows are prohibited. Recessed windows
that are distinguished from the shaft of the building through
the use of arches, pediments, mullions, and other treatments
are permitted.
(3) Top of buildings.
a. All rooftop mechanical equipment on buildings over thirtyfive
feet (35’) in height shall be screened from above or below
(based on the type of mechanical equipment utilized) by
integrating it into the building and roof design to the
maximum extent feasible.
(4) Building entrances and orientation. At least one or more operable
pedestrian entrances per building shall be provided, unless if all three
of the circumstances below exist, only two (2) entrances shall be
required:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
53 of 68
a. When a lot abuts a public street right-of-way, at least one
entrance shall be provided along all building facade(s)
fronting all public rights-of-way.
b. When a lot abuts an existing or proposed public open space
system, multi-use trail, or greenway, entrance(s) shall be
provided on the building façade closest to the public open
space, multi-use trail, or greenway.
c. When abutting a sidewalk in the rail station area, an
entrance(s) shall be provided on the building facade closest to
the station area sidewalk.
(5) Structured parking facilities.
a. Structured parking facilities shall be designed to encourage
and complement pedestrian-scale interest and activity. Such
facilities shall be designed so that motorized vehicles parking
on inside levels of the facility are screened from the street, the
commuter rail station, and/or from residentially zoned or used
property. Decorative elements such as grillwork or louvers
may be utilized to accomplish this requirement.
b. Openings at the street level are limited to vehicular entrances,
pedestrian access to the structure, and ventilation openings.
All such openings shall be decorative and be an integral part
of the overall building design.
(6) Canopies.
a. Canopies, awnings, cornices and similar architectural accents
are permitted on exterior building walls. Such features shall be
constructed of rigid or flexible material design to complement
the streetscape of the area. Any such feature may extend from
the building no more than four feet (4’). In no instance shall
such feature extend over or interfere with the growth or
maintenance of any required tree plantings. Minimum
overhead clearance shall be eight feet (8’). Ground supports
for these features are not permitted in the minimum setback,
sidewalk or public right-of-way.
(7) Signs, banners, flags and pennants.
Signage shall be designed to be integral with the architectural character
of the building to which it belongs. Specifically, the scale, proportion
and color shall be appropriate to the building to which the sign is
attached. Elements to be considered include architectural appearance,
sign size, type of illumination, sign motion, sign setback, surface
colors, and message. The architectural appearance of the sign shall not
be so dissimilar to the existing signage on surrounding buildings as to
cause impairment in property value or constitute a blighting influence.
Where signs, banners, flags and pennants for identification or
decoration are provided, they shall conform to the following:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
54 of 68
a. Wall signs shall have a maximum of 150 total square feet or
five percent (5%) of the building wall area occupied by the
user, whichever is less. Wall signs may be increased by twenty
(20) square feet per sign in lieu of a ground mounted or
monument sign.
b. Signs are permitted to project up to two feet (2’) into the
minimum setback as measured from the building. Under no
circumstances shall a sign project more than four feet (4’)
from the back of the curb. A minimum overhead clearance of
eight feet (8’) from the sidewalk shall be maintained.
c. Marquee signs are permitted.
d. Ground mounted or monument signs are permitted as follows:
1. Signs shall not exceed ten feet (10’) in height and
forty (40) square feet in area.
2. Signs shall be located behind the right-of-way and
out of any sight distance triangle.
3. Signs shall be setback five feet (5’) from any
property line.
e. No freestanding pole signs shall be permitted.
f. No off-premise signs shall be permitted.
g. The following sections shall also apply to signs within the
TOD districts: Section 74-446 General Regulations; Section
74.447 Temporary Signs; and Sections 74.445 Exempt Signs.
If provisions of this Section are in conflict with other
standards in this chapter, the most restrictive shall apply.
Residential signs shall be regulated by the provisions of
Chapter 74, Article III related to residential signs.
(n) Administrative Approval.
To offer some degree of flexibility, the Planning Director has the authority to
administratively alter any of the development and urban design standards by five
percent (5%) in a TOD District. If administrative approval is required for
parking or an item normally approved by the Planning Commission and City
Council, the Planning Director or designee shall only grant approval after
consultation with other city staff (city manager, public services, building
inspections, fire chief, etc.).
On matters that do not involve quantitative measurements, the Planning Director
or designee may also make minor alterations if he/she determines that such
changes would be an acceptable design approach to development and would be
in keeping with the general intent of TOD. Any such approval shall meet the
following criteria:
(1) Incorporates existing buildings, trees, topographic features, or other
existing elements consistent with the TOD intent; and
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
55 of 68
(2) Provides urban open space, seating, fountains, accent landscaping or
other similar urban pedestrian amenities consistent with the intent of
the TOD.
(o) Preliminary Review.
It is strongly recommended that anyone planning to develop or redevelop
property in a TOD District meet with the Planning Department staff (1) during
the conceptual design process in order that the staff may offer input into meeting
the TOD design objectives and (2) during the design development stage to
ensure that the plans meet the minimum TOD District standards.
(p) Enforceability.
Violation. Unless expressly provided otherwise, it shall be a misdemeanor for
any person or entity to violate any provisions of the City Code, including this
Section, any rule or regulation adopted in pursuance of any such provision, or
any other order lawfully enforcing the City Code or this Section. The term
“misdemeanor” is defined in Minnesota Statutes Section 609.02, subd. 3, as
amended. In addition to prosecuting a violation as a misdemeanor, the City may
separately, or in conjunction with the misdemeanor prosecution, bring an action
for specific performance to enforce any provisions of the City Code, including
this Section, any rule or regulation adopted in pursuance of such provision, or
any order lawfully enforcing the City Code, including this Section.
Section 74-267. South Ferry Riverfront District (SFRD)
(a) Purpose and intent of the District. The purpose of the standards for the South
Ferry Riverfront District (SFRD) is to promote harmonious development,
redevelopment and rehabilitation of structures in this district. It is intended that
the standards will:
(1) Protect the riparian areas and promote recreational use of this stretch
of the Rum River.
(2) Encourage the redevelopment of some areas adjacent to the river and to
strengthen connections to and from the remainder of the City.
(3) Encourage the transformation over time of certain areas to open space
and mixed use development.
(4) Improve the quality of development along the higher-volume South
Ferry Street, which serves as a gateway into the City.
(5) Encourage biking and walking.
(b) Definitions. The definitions in PART 6106.0050 DEFINITIONS as amended are
hereby adopted by reference. For the purposes of this Section, the following
words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed by Section 74-2 of the City
Code. Words not defined shall have the planning meaning generally ascribed to
them.
(c) Subareas and Intended Character.
The SFRD has been divided into four subareas, each of which are intended to
achieve the general character described below:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
56 of 68
(1) Subarea 1– (North Mixed Use)
This area is intended to transition to a mix of high-density housing and
a small area of commercial, with the Main Street frontage
accommodating low-traffic commercial use and the Ferry Street
frontage as high-density residential with gardens and walking paths
along the river frontage.
(2) Subarea 2 – (Open Space – Low Density Residential)
This area is intended to transition to a mix of open space and lowdensity
residential and/or commercial (restaurant, office, bed and
breakfast) use of the existing historic property. The open space will
provide prominent views of the river to enhance the gateway nature of
South Ferry Street.
(3) Subarea 3 – (Low Density Residential)
This area is intended to preserve the low-density residential that exists
along the corridor. Existing and future single family homes along the
river in this area will complement the riverfront lots available to the
community.
(4) Subarea 4 – (South Mixed Use)
This area is intended to transition to a mixed use area to include public
and private recreation, lodging, restaurant(s), service retail, and high
density residential. This area includes Peninsula Point Park which can
accommodate an excursion boat service, docks, canoe launching and
other additional recreational uses.
(d) Permitted Uses
Different uses are permitted in each subarea as shown in the following table.
Abbreviations used in the table shall have the following meanings: “P” indicates
that a use is permitted by right; “C” indicates a use that is permitted upon
obtaining a conditional use permit; and “I” indicates a use that is permitted upon
obtaining an interim use permit. A blank cell indicates that the listed use is not
allowed in the respective subarea. Any uses not specifically listed as permitted,
conditionally permitted, or permitted with an interim use permit, or as allowed
elsewhere in the City Code, shall be considered prohibited.
Use Category
Specific Use
Subareas
North
Mixed Use
1
Open Space –
Low Density
Residential
2
Low
Density
Residential
3
South
Mixed Use
4
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
57 of 68
Use Category
Specific Use
Subareas
North
Mixed Use
1
Open Space –
Low Density
Residential
2
Low
Density
Residential
3
South
Mixed Use
4
RESIDENTIAL
Single family detached P P
Multiple dwelling C C
State licensed residential
facility or housing with
services under M.S. 144
D (6 or fewer)*
P P
A state licensed daycare
serving 12 or fewer*
P P
A group family daycare
facility licensed under
Mn Rules 9502.0315 to
9502.445 to serve 14 or
fewer*
P P
A state licensed
residential facility serving
from 7 to 16*
C C
A state licensed daycare
facility serving 13 to 16*
C C
PUBLIC AND CIVIC
Open Space P P P P
Parks/Recreation Facility P P P P
Utilities and public
service
P P P P
Cultural exhibits,
museum
P
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
58 of 68
Use Category
Specific Use
Subareas
North
Mixed Use
1
Open Space –
Low Density
Residential
2
Low
Density
Residential
3
South
Mixed Use
4
Marinas C
COMMERCIAL
Sit down restaurant P C
Brewpub P
Bed and Breakfast C C C
Hotel/Motel C
Office, administrative or
professional
C
Service retail P P
Docks C C
Parking P
OTHER
Event Center (Conference
Center)
C C
(e) Accessory Uses. The following accessory uses are permitted in the South Ferry
Riverfront District:
(1) Transit facilities
(2) Information kiosks
(3) Accessory uses typical to residential use of property
(4) Accessory uses typical to commercial use of property, if approved with
the site plan approval.
(f) Bulk and Dimensional Standards. The following table includes the bulk and
dimensional standards for each subarea in the SFRD. :
*Uses permitted by Minn. Stats. § 462.357
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
59 of 68
Subarea 1 Subarea 2 Subarea 3 Subarea 4
Lot size – residential single
family
15,000 sq. ft 15,000 sq, ft.
Lot width – residential
single family
75’ 75’
Building height 40’ 35’ 35’ 35’
Building Coverage 50% 40%
Impervious Surface 85% 30% 30% 85%
Residential Setbacks –
single family
Front 25’
Side 10’
Rear 25’
Riparian 100’
Front 25’
Side 10’
Rear 25’
Riparian 100’
Residential Setbacks –
multiple family
Front 15’ min,
35’ max
Side 10’
Rear 20’
Riparian 75’
Front 15’ min,
35’ max
Side 10’
Rear 20’
Riparian 100’
Commercial/Mixed use
setbacks
Front 15’ min,
35’ max
Side 10’
Rear 20’
Riparian 75’
Front 15’ min,
35’ max
Side 10’
Rear 20’
Riparian 100’
Front 15’ min,
35’ max
Side10’
Rear 20’
Riparian 100’
Front 15’ min,
35’ max
Side10’
Rear 20’
Riparian 100’
Parking setbacks –
residential – single family
5’
Riparian 50’
5’
Riparian 50’
Parking setbacks – multifamily
residential
10’
Riparian 50’
10’
Riparian 50’
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
60 of 68
Parking setbacks –
commercial /mixed use
Front (Ferry
Street) 15’
Side 5’
Rear 5’
Riparian 50’
Front (Ferry
Street) 15’
Side 5’
Rear 5’
Riparian 50’
Front (Ferry
Street) 15’
Side 5’
Rear 5’
Riparian 50’
Front (Ferry
Street) 15’
Side 5’
Rear 5’
Riparian 50’
(g) Architectural Standards.
(1) Design Elements for Commercial and Mixed Use Buildings.
a. New buildings and structures, additions and renovations must
be constructed of durable materials.
b. The primary exterior opaque materials on each elevation of a
building, except for the service side, must be brick, stone,
decorative masonry or similar materials or a combination
thereof.
c. No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the building
exterior opaque materials on each elevation, except for the
service side of the building, shall be comprised of the
following accent materials:
1. Cast stone
2. Wood shingles (cedar shingles 6 inch maximum
exposure) for trim
3. Tongue and groove paneling (cedar or redwood 6
inch width, no diagonal siding).
4. Copper (untreated)
5. Stucco
6. Cement board
7. Glass (does not include windows)
8. Dark anodized aluminum
9. Materials that are similar in character to those listed
above.
d. The following materials are not allowed as exterior opaque
materials:
1. Painted or unpainted concrete block
2. Aluminum, vinyl or fiberglass siding or roofing
materials
3. Precast concrete panels
4. Painting of previously unpainted brick
5. Wooden exteriors
e. In multi-story buildings, the ground floor shall be
distinguished from the floors above by the use of a
combination of the following:
1. An intermediate cornice line
2. A difference in building materials or detailing
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
61 of 68
3. An offset in the façade
4. An awning, trellis, loggia or arcade
5. Special window lintels
6. Brick/stone corbels
f. LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design)
Standards. The City encourages the use of sustainable building
materials and construction techniques in SFRD projects
through programs such as the US Green Building’s
Council’s LEED program.
g. Alternative Designs or Materials. To encourage creativity,
imagination, innovation, and variety in architectural
design, the Planning Commission may recommend
modifications of the requirements of this Section and the
City Council may approve such modifications upon
determining that the proposed architectural design or exterior
facade material(s) meets all of the following conditions:
1. The proposed design or material is consistent with
the purposes of this section.
2. The proposed design or material would enhance the
architectural appearance of the building, and would
be equal or superior to designs or materials permitted
by this section.
(2) Design Elements for Single Family and Multi-family.
a. At least 75% of the opaque materials of the front façade must
consist of two of the following materials*:
1. Brick, stone (if 75% of the façade is brick or stone
a second material is not required).
2. Wood
3. Cement board lap siding with accent shakes.
4. Vinyl or Aluminum Siding (no more than 30% of
the front façade shall consist of vinyl or aluminum
siding).
* Other additional materials may be used only if 75%
of the façade consists of materials listed above.
b. A minimum of eleven (11) design features listed below must
be incorporated into the design of each house unless otherwise
specified in other parts of this section, as follows:
At least four (4) design features from the following list must
be used in construction of a residential building:
1. Change in elevation of roof ridge.
2. Change in direction of roof ridge.
3. Roof with dormers (minimum of two (2) dormers,
unless Eyebrow Dormer).
4. Bay or Oriel Window.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
62 of 68
5. Porch or Veranda (covering a minimum of 40% of
the overall width of the front façade and a minimum
of eight (8) feet in depth.
6. Portico or Shed Roof Accent over the front entry
(minimum covered area of 4’ by 10’).
7. Façade modulation (other than items listed herein;
minimum of 12 inches in depth)
8. Roof overhangs (minimum 12 inches on front, side
and rear elevations).
9. Roof pitch of 8-12 or 12-12.
c. At least three (3) design features from the following list must
be used in construction of a residential building:
1. Hip roof.
2. Gable accent.
3. Side-by-side windows (within 8”; minimum of 50%
of windows in each story)
4. Door sidelight(s)
5. Door transom.
6. Window transom.
7. Side garage bump-out (minimum size 3’ by 10’,
exclusive of garage area).
d. The remaining four (4) items may be selected from the
following list or from the items listed above.
1. Decorative door architrave.
2. Decorative window architrave.
3. Decorative window cornice.
4. Decorative trim molding (including, at a minimum,
fascia, soffit & corner trim).
5. Architectural elements (e.g. quoins, pilasters, soldier
courses, friezes, cornices, dentils, etc.)
6. Pent roof or pent roof return.
7. Accent siding.
8. Shutters (all front, rear and side elevations).
9. Window grids (permanent).
10. Decorative front door (minimum 25% glazing).
11. Decorative gable vents.
12. Keystone (over all first floor, front façade windows
and doors).
In multi-story buildings, the ground floor shall be
distinguished from the floors above by the use of a
combination of the following:
1. An intermediate cornice line
2. A difference in building materials or detailing
3. An offset in the façade
4. An awning, trellis, loggia or arcade
5. Special window lintels
6. Brick/stone corbels
f. LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design)
Standards. The City encourages the use of sustainable building
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
63 of 68
materials and construction techniques in SFRD projects
through programs such as the US Green Building’s Council’s
LEED program.
g. Alternative Designs or Materials. To encourage creativity,
imagination, innovation, and variety in architectural
design, the Planning Commission may recommend
modifications of the requirements of this Section and the
City Council may approve such modifications upon
determining that the proposed architectural design or exterior
facade material(s) meets all of the following conditions:
1. The proposed design or material is consistent with
the purposes of this section.
2. The proposed design or material would enhance the
architectural appearance of the building, and would
be equal or superior to designs or materials permitted
by this section.
(3) Exterior Lighting.
Exterior lighting shall be used to provide illumination for the security
and safety of entry drives, parking, service and loading areas,
pathways, courtyards and plazas, without intruding on adjacent
properties and shall comply with the following standards:
a. Poles and structures shall be architecturally compatible with
structures and lighting on-site and on adjacent properties.
b. Security lighting shall be adequate for visibility, but not overly
bright.
c. Metal halide lighting shall be used with a concealed light
source of the “cut-off” variety to prevent glare and “light
trespass” onto adjacent buildings and lots.
d. Poles within landscaped areas and plazas shall have a
maximum height of twenty feet (20”), measured from grade,
and shall be consistent with city standards.
e. Poles in parking lots shall have a maximum height of 24 feet
(24’) measured from finished grade.
f. Lighting fixtures mounted directly on structures shall be
permitted when used to enhance specific architectural
elements or to help establish scale or provide visual interest.
g. “Wall paks” shall be permitted only in loading and service
areas, shall be down-lit and shielded from view.
h. Shielded illumination of fixtures shall be permitted to light
building mounted signage, building facades, or pedestrian
arcades if they are integrated into a building’s architectural
design.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
64 of 68
i. Lighting should highlight entrances, art, terraces and special
landscape features.
j. Separate pedestrian scale lighting or other low level fixtures,
such as bollards, shall be incorporated for all pedestrian ways
through parking lots and drop-off areas at entrances to
buildings.
k. All primary walkways, steps or ramps along pedestrian routes
shall be illuminated.
(4) Light intensity.
a. A photometric lighting plan is required for all proposed
commercial developments to ensure that adequate and
appropriate light levels are provided for each site condition.
b. Lighting shall not exceed 0.1 foot candle at residential
property lines or 0.5 foot candle on non-residential property
lines measured on a vertical plane.
c. The following minimum levels of illuminations must be
maintained for each of the specific locations.*
Building entrances 5.0 foot candles
Sidewalks 2.0 foot candles
Bikeways 1.0 foot candles
Courts/Plazas/Terraces 1.5 foot candles
Ramps 5.0 foot candles
Stairways 5.0 foot candles
Underpasses 5.0 foot candles
Waiting Areas 1.0 foot candles
Parking lots 1.0 foot candles
Roadways 1.5 foot candles
* Values given are in minimum average maintained
horizontal foot candles which are measured at the average
point of illumination between brightest and darkest areas, 4’ –
5’ above the ground surface. (Source: IES Lighting Handbook
– 4th Edition)
d. Site lighting should provide consistent levels of illumination,
avoiding pockets of very high or low levels of illumination.
(h) Signs. Signage shall be designed to be integral with the architectural character
of the building to which they belong. Specifically, the scale, proportion and
color shall be appropriate to the building to which the sign is attached. Elements
to be considered include architectural appearance, sign size, type of
illumination, sign motion, sign setback, surface colors, and message. The
architectural appearance of the sign shall not be so dissimilar to the existing
signage on surrounding buildings as to cause impairment in property value or
constitute a blighting influence.
The following sections shall also apply to signs within the South Ferry
Riverfront District (SFRD): Section 74.446 General Regulations; Section 74.447
Temporary Signs; and Section 74.445 Exempt Signs. If provisions of this
section are in conflict with other standards in this chapter, the most restrictive
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
65 of 68
shall apply. Residential signs shall be regulated by the provisions of Chapter 74,
Article III related to residential signs.
(1) Business signs and nameplate signs are permitted, subject to the
following regulations:
a. The total surface area of all business signs on a lot shall not
exceed four (4) square feet per linear foot of lot frontage.
Business nameplates shall not exceed the sum of three square
feet for each lineal foot of lot frontage.
b. In the case of corner lots, the shortest length of all sides of the
lot with frontage shall be used to calculate the permitted total
surface area.
c. No single business sign surface shall exceed 200 square feet in
area, nor shall two or more smaller signs be so arranged and
integrated as to create a surface area in excess of 200 square
feet.
d. Pylon signs are prohibited.
e. Monument signs are permitted. No monument sign or any part
thereof may project higher than ten feet (10’) above average
grade at the building line. All portions of the sign must be set
back a minimum of five feet (5’) from the property line.
Monument signs may not exceed forty (40) square feet and
shall be included in the total calculation for site signage.
f. No freestanding sign shall be permitted within the sight
triangle.
g. No rooftop signs shall be permitted.
h. Integral roof signs are permitted.
i. Sandwich board signs are prohibited.
j. Consistently changing, flashing, moving, rotating, traveling, or
scrolling electronic variable signs are prohibited.
(2) Design details. Signs cannot block or obliterate design details,
windows, or cornices of the building upon which they are placed.
(i) Utility Areas, Mechanical Equipment and Screening
(1) Design. Utility areas, mechanical equipment and screening must be
designed so they do not detract from the aesthetic appeal of the district.
(2) Materials and Screening. All exterior trash, storage areas, service yards,
loading areas, transformers, heating and air conditioning units must be
screened and must use the materials, colors and/or style of the primary
front facade materials. Trash collection areas shall be screened from
public rights-of-way and adjacent uses through the use of a six-foot
masonry wall enclosure and gate. Trash enclosures shall be compatible
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
66 of 68
with the architectural character of the building they serve and shall
incorporate similar materials and colors.
(3) Roof Equipment. All mechanical equipment on the ground or roof,
such as heating and air conditioning units and transformers, shall be
screened on all sides or placed so as not to be visible from public
streets. Such screening shall be compatible with the building.
Camouflaging heating and air conditioning units is an acceptable
method of screening and the intent of the screening is to distract the
view of these areas, not to provide total screening.
(4) Outdoor merchandise displays. Outdoor merchandise displays must be
placed against the building or within the landscaped area between the
sidewalk and the street. Outdoor merchandise displays shall be
displayed only during business hours. No outdoor business shall be
located where it obstructs the line of sight of passing motorists.
(5) Open storage. Open storage of material, merchandise offered at
wholesale items for salvage or disposal, or items used in the operation
of a business, is prohibited.
(j) Vegetation. Within the shore impact zones, the vegetation must be managed as
provided below:
(1) Existing vegetation in a natural state shall be maintained;
(2) Restoration of vegetation to a natural state is encouraged;
(3) Limited cutting, trimming, or clearing of trees, shrubs, understory, and
groundcover vegetation is allowed for:
a. The minimum necessary for development as permitted by City
Ordinance, County and State law;
b. Docks, slips, mooring facilities, marina or other similar
recreational use;
c. The removal of trees, limbs, or branches that are dead, dying,
diseased, or infested, which removal is necessary to prevent
spread of disease or infestation or to address a safety hazard as
determined by a representative designated by the local
government;
d. The removal of invasive, nonnative plants as determined
necessary by a representative designated by the local
government;
e. Woodland or habitat management and restoration activities
sponsored and approved by a resource agency or the city;
(4) In areas cleared of vegetation, vegetation must be reestablished either
by allowing regeneration naturally or with plantings subject to a
restoration plan approved by a resource agency or the city.
(k) Parking Requirements. Parking shall be as required under Chapter 74, Article
IX, Division 2.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
67 of 68
(1) In instances where parking areas abut the street, the parking lot edge
must be delineated with landscaping, architectural fencing or other
decorative features.
(l) Approval Process.
(1) Site Plan Procedures. All development proposals under Section 74.265
(d) (1) shall be reviewed under the site plan approval process as set
forth in this subsection.
(2) Application. Application for a site plan review shall be made to the
Planning Department on forms provided by the City and shall be
accompanied by the following:
a. A survey or plat of the property;
b. Evidence of ownership or an interest in the property;
c. The fee specified in the City’s fee schedule;
d. Information regarding project phasing and timing;
e. Complete development plans as specified under Section
74.2 of the City Code, signed by a registered architect,
civil engineer, landscape architect or other appropriate
design professional, as required by the State building code;
and
f. Architectural plans (for new construction), showing the
following:
1. Colored elevations of all sides of the building
2. Type, color and samples of exterior building
materials
3. Typical floor plans
4. Dimensions of all structures
5. The location of exterior trash storage areas and of
exterior electrical, hearing, ventilation, and air
conditioning equipment
6. Utility plans including water, sanitary sewer and
storm sewer
7. A plan showing landscaping, lighting and signs
8. Illustrations that show adjacent building elevations
to show the scale of adjacent buildings and
landscaping
9. Such other information as may be required by the
City to process the application.
(3) Public hearing. Upon receipt of a completed application, a date
shall be set for a public hearing before the Planning Commission. The
hearing will be held no less than ten (10) days after mailed notice is
sent to the owners of the property located wholly or partially
within 350 feet of the site. The Planning Commission shall submit
its recommendation to the City Council. Following appropriate
review, the Council shall make a decision regarding the application.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 5
68 of 68
(4) Other Approvals. In cases where there is uncertainty or
disagreement about compliance with the standards of this section, the
Planning Director or designee may refer development approvals,
as listed in Section 74.265 (d) 2 through 6, to the Planning
Commission and City Council to determine that the proposal
meets the standards of this Section.
(m) Enforceability. Unless expressly provided otherwise, it shall be a
misdemeanor for any person or entity to violate any provision of the City
Code, including this Section, any rule or regulation adopted in pursuance
of any such provision, or any order lawfully enforcing the City Code or this
Section. The term “misdemeanor” is defined in Minnesota Statutes Section
609.02, subd. 3, as amended. In addition to prosecuting a violation as a
misdemeanor, the City may separately, or in conjunction with the
misdemeanor prosecution, bring an action for specific performance to enforce
any provisions of the City Code, including this Section, any rule or regulation
adopted in pursuance of such provision, or any order lawfully enforcing the
City Code, including this Section.
Sections 74-268 thru 74-269. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 6
Page 1 of 5
CHAPTER 74. ZONING
ARTICLE V. District Regulations
DIVISION 6. Overlay Districts
Section 74-270 Sensitive Development District
(a) Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of the Sensitive Development
District is to create residential development that is designed to prevent and
mitigate irreversible damage to natural resources and to preserve and enhance
their values to the public. Development shall be regulated to minimize the risk
of environmental damage to these areas. This is accomplished through density
control, lot size, public land dedication and tree preservation. Residential
development in these areas should encourage creativity, variety and use of
quality materials. River use and recreation on and along the Rum River is
encouraged as the Rum River is viewed as a recreational asset to the City.
(b) Establishment of District Boundaries. Boundaries for the Sensitive
Development District are as shown on the Official Zoning Map.
(c) Applicability. In the event other City ordinances or State Statutes address the
same topics covered in this Section, the more restrictive language shall apply.
(d) Uses. Permitted, interim, accessory, and prohibited uses in this district shall be
governed by the R-1, Single Family District with the following exceptions:
(1) Conditional uses in the R-1 district shall be prohibited in the Sensitive
Development District.
(2) Townhouse use is permitted east of the westerly line of the southeast
corner of the northwest quarter of Section 31, Township 32, Range 24.
(e) Lot requirements. The lot area requirements for the Sensitive Development
District are as follows:
(1) Every lot within the Rum River Wild and Scenic River District on
which a single-family dwelling is to be erected shall not be less than
15,000 square feet. Every lot not within the Rum River Wild and
Scenic River District on which a single-family dwelling is to be erected
shall not be less than 12,500 square feet, except for lots east of the
easterly line of the west half of the southwest quarter of the southwest
quarter of Section 30, Township 32, Range 24 may be a minimum of
10,000 square feet.
(2) Townhouse lot area regulations: The minimum lot area per dwelling
unit shall not be less than 4,500 square feet.
(3) Every lot on which a single-family dwelling is to be erected shall not be
less than 75 feet in width, nor less than 120 feet in depth. Lots on culde-
sac streets shall have a minimum frontage of 50 feet on the right-ofway
line.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 6
Page 2 of 5
(4) In no case shall the impervious surface coverage of a non-riparian singe
family lot exceed 35 percent of the area of the lot. Lots within the Rum
River Wild and Scenic River District shall not exceed a 25 percent
impervious surface coverage. Impervious surface coverage for
townhomes shall not exceed 50 percent of the area of the lot.
(5) Lots within the Rum River Wild and Scenic River District shall be
governed by requirements set forth in the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources Rum River Wild and Scenic Regulations and the
City of Anoka Rum River Protection ordinance.
(f) Density. No more than 45 single family lots may be created west of the westerly
line of the southeast corner of the northwest quarter of Section 31, Township 32,
Range 24. No more than 60 townhouse lots or 35 single family lots may be
created east of the westerly line of the southeast corner of the northwest quarter
of Section 31, Township 32, Range 24. Residential densities in all other
Sensitive Development District areas shall be governed by lot size requirements
listed in this Section.
(g) Front, side, and rear yard requirements. Front, side, and rear yard requirements
shall be governed by the R-1, Single Family District standards for single family
use and by R-3, Low Density Multiple Family District standards for townhomes.
(h) Maximum building height. The maximum building height shall be governed by
the R-1, Single Family District standards for single family use and by R-3, Low
Density Multiple Family District standards for townhomes.
(i) Special regulations. Special regulations in the Sensitive Development District
shall be as follows:
(1) Riparian lots may only be used for public purpose. Private docks may
be located on public lands provided agreements are in place to allow
such docks. Any installation of docks must meet regulations set forth
by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources and the City of
Anoka. Any other public uses of land shall follow regulations set forth
in the City of Anoka Rum River Protection ordinance.
(2) Any lot line of non-riparian lots west of the westerly line of the
southeast corner of the northwest quarter of Section 31, Township 32,
Range 24 must be setback a minimum of 220 feet from the property
line of the river.
(3) Planned Unit Developments (PUD’s) are not permitted within the
Sensitive Development Overlay District.
(4) Private lots may not be located upon any existing public easements
used for trail purposes.
(j) Tree Preservation/Reforestation.
(1) Any tree removal must meet regulations set forth in other Sections of
this Code including, but not limited to, the Rum River Protection and
Tree Preservation sections.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 6
Page 3 of 5
(2) Each single family lot shall be required to have a minimum of four
trees on the lot. Trees shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter
if deciduous, or six (6) feet in height if coniferous, measured at 4.5 feet
above ground. Trees that exist on a newly subdivided lot may be used
towards this calculation.
(3) Each single family lot shall be required to have a total of ten shrubs
located on the lot, four of which shall be located in the required front
yard.
(k) Architectural control.
(1) No more than one single-family dwelling with the same exterior
configuration shall be erected on any five abutting, contiguous,
successive or adjoining lots starting at any point, leading in any
direction or around any corner.
(2) Garages.
a. Side or Rear Entry Garages. For single family dwellings, the
primary garage entry may face either the rear or side property
line, but shall not face the interior of the lot. If this option is
chosen, only seven (7) design features in part (4) below shall
be required. Driveways leading to the garage shall be no
greater than 12 feet wide starting at the front property line
until a point eight (8) feet in front of the front line of the
garage.
b. Front Facing Garages. For single family dwellings, if the
primary garage entry faces the right-of-way, the following
design features shall be required:
1. The garage must be stepped back 5 feet from the
front line of the house for property that is zoned
Sensitive Development and is located south of
County Road 116.
2. Windows on the garage door.
3. Decorative paneling. Flat front garage doors are
prohibited.
4. The color of the garage door must be similar to that
of the house.
c. For townhouses, the primary garage entry door shall be
located at the rear of the unit.
(3) Design Elements for Single Family and Townhouses.
a. At least 75% of the opaque materials of the front façade must
consist of two of the following materials*:
1. Brick, stone (if 75% of the façade is brick or stone a
second material is not required).
2. Wood
3. Cement board lap siding with accent shakes.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 6
Page 4 of 5
4. Vinyl or Aluminum Siding (no more than 30% of the
front façade shall consist of vinyl or aluminum
siding).
* Other additional materials may be used only if 75% of the
façade consists of materials listed above.
A minimum of eleven (11) design features listed below must be
incorporated into the design of each house unless otherwise specified in
other parts of this section.
b. At least four (4) design features from the following list must
be used in construction of a residential building:
1. Change in elevation of roof ridge.
2. Change in direction of roof ridge.
3. Roof with dormers (minimum of two (2) dormers,
unless Eyebrow Dormer).
4. Bay or Oriel Window.
5. Porch or Veranda (covering a minimum of 40% of
the overall width of the front façade and a minimum
of eight (8) feet in depth.
6. Portico or Shed Roof Accent over the front entry
(minimum covered area of 4’ by 10’).
7. Façade modulation (other than items listed herein;
minimum of 12 inches in depth)
8. Roof overhangs (minimum 12 inches on front, side
and rear elevations).
9. Roof pitch of 8-12 or 12-12.
c. At least three (3) design features from the following list must
be used in construction of a residential building:
1. Hip roof.
2. Gable accent.
3. Side-by-side windows (within 8”; minimum of 50%
of windows in each story)
4. Door sidelight(s)
5. Door transom.
6. Window transom.
7. Side garage bump-out (minimum size 3’ by 10’,
exclusive of garage area).
d. The remaining four (4) items may be selected from the
following list or from the items listed above.
1. Decorative door architrave.
2. Decorative window architrave.
3. Decorative window cornice,
4. Decorative trim molding (including, at a minimum,
fascia, soffit & corner trim).
5. Architectural elements (e.g. quoins, pilasters, soldier
courses, friezes, cornices, dentils, etc.
6. Pent roof or pent roof return.
7. Accent siding.
8. Shutters (all front, rear and side elevations).
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 6
Page 5 of 5
9. Window grids (permanent).
10. Decorative front door (minimum 25% glazing).
11. Decorative gable vents.
12. Keystone (over all first floor, front façade windows
and doors).
(l) Enforceability. Violation. Unless expressly provided otherwise, it shall be a
misdemeanor for any person or entity to violate any provisions of the City Code,
including this Section, any rule or regulation adopted in pursuance of any such
provision, or any other order lawfully enforcing the City Code or this Section.
The term “misdemeanor” is defined in Minnesota Statutes Section 609.02, subd.
3, as amended. In addition to seeking prosecution of a violation as a
misdemeanor, the City may separately, or in conjunction with the misdemeanor
prosecution, bring an action for specific performance to enforce any provisions
of the City Code, including this Section, any rule or regulation adopted in
pursuance of such provision, or any order lawfully enforcing the City Code,
including this Section.
Sections 74-271 through 74-275. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 7
Page 1 of 3
CHAPTER 74. ZONING
ARTICLE V. District Regulations
DIVISION 7. Institutional Districts
Section 74-276 Anoka County Rum River Human Services (ACRRHS) District
(a) Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of the Anoka County Rum River
Human Services District is to provide a basis for current and future space needs
planning within the District.
(b) Application. This district is designed as a special purpose district. The standards
contained in this Article will apply only to the Anoka County Rum River
Services District, generally described as the area north of an extension of
existing Grant Street, west of the 7th Avenue, east of the Rum River, and south
of the Anoka High School, and specifically as shown on the official zoning map
for the City of Anoka.
(c) Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the ACRRHS District
only if said uses are at the direction or under the control of the State of
Minnesota or the County of Anoka:
(1) Residential treatment facilities for chemical dependency, corrections,
mental health, and those in transition from treatment to independent
living.
(2) Residential facilities for short-term housing.
(3) Administration and program offices/facilities.
(4) Cafeterias/food service.
(5) Program space for distribution of household goods.
(d) Accessory Uses. The following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses in the
ACRRHS District:
(1) Heating facilities/power plant.
(2) Laundry.
(3) Maintenance facilities.
(4) Storage structures.
(5) Transit shelters.
(6) Outdoor recreation areas.
(7) Trails.
(8) Pavilions.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 7
Page 2 of 3
(e) Setbacks. The following setback regulations shall apply in the ACRRHS
District:
(1) Structures, whether principal buildings or accessory structures, shall be
setback a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from neighboring
properties.
(2) Parking shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from neighboring
properties.
(3) The distance between structures within the campus shall be a minimum
of 15 feet or as required by the State Building Code, whichever is
greater.
(f) Height.
(1) Existing structures shall not be increased in height. Additions to
existing structures shall be of the same or lesser height as the existing
structure.
(2) New structures shall be limited to a maximum of four stories unless a
conditional use permit to increase the height is obtained from the City.
(g) Site plan required. Site plan approval is required for construction of principal
buildings and accessory structures in the ACRRHS District. Information shall be
submitted for site plan review according to Chapter 74, Article II, Section74-38,
as amended. In addition, the following information must be submitted:
(1) Applicable information, such as number of beds, number of employees
on a major shift, seating capacities, etc. to determine required parking
spaces and traffic circulation impacts.
(h) Exterior Materials on Existing Buildings. All accessory structures and
subsequent additions to a principal building existing at the time of adoption of
this ordinance shall:
(1) Be constructed of the same exterior materials or materials designed to
simulate the materials on the principal building;
(2) Shall be of the same general appearance; and
(3) Shall be of the same architectural design.
(i) Building permits. Building permits shall be obtained as required by the State
Building Code.
(j) Overlay district standards. The following environmental overlay district
standards shall apply where appropriate:
(1) Shoreland Regulations
(2) Rum River Wild and Scenic Regulations
(3) Floodplain Regulations
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE V; DIVISION 7
Page 3 of 3
Where overlay district standards are in conflict, the most restrictive standard shall apply.
(k) Parking and loading. Unless otherwise regulated by this Article, parking and
loading shall be regulated by Chapter 74, Article IX, Division 2 of the City
Code, as amended.
(l) Impervious Surface. No more than 85% of a lot may be covered by impervious
surface, and no more than 50% of a lot may be covered by buildings.
(m) Enforceability. Violation. Unless expressly provided otherwise, it shall be a
misdemeanor for any person or entity to violate any provisions of the City Code,
including this Section, any rule or regulation adopted in pursuance of any such
provision, or any other order lawfully enforcing the City Code or this Section.
The term “misdemeanor” is defined in Minnesota Statutes Section 609.02, subd.
3, as amended. In addition to seeking prosecution of a violation as a
misdemeanor, the City may separately, or in conjunction with the misdemeanor
prosecution, bring an action for specific performance to enforce any provisions
of the City Code, including this Section, any rule or regulation adopted in
pursuance of such provision, or any order lawfully enforcing the City Code,
including this Section.
Sections 74-277 through 74-280. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VI; DIVISION 1
CHAPTER 74. ZONING
ARTICLE VI. Mississippi River Control Corridor/Rum River Protection*
----------
*State law references--Shoreline development, Minn. Stats. § 103F.201 et seq.; municipal shore land
management, Minn. Stats. § 103F.221; Minnesota Wild and Scenic Rivers Act, Minn. Stats. § 103F.301 et seq.
----------
DIVISION 1. Generally.
Section 74-281. Findings and purpose.
(a) The City Council finds that the Mississippi River Corridor within the
metropolitan area and the City, and the Rum River Corridor within the City are
unique and valuable local, regional, state and national resources. These rivers
are essential elements in the local, regional, state and national transportation,
sewer and water, and recreational systems and serve important biological and
ecological functions. The prevention and mitigation of irreversible damage to
these resources and the preservation and enhancement of their natural, aesthetic,
cultural, and historic values is in the furtherance of the health, safety and general
welfare of the City.
(b) The Council further finds that the critical area district and the Rum River
Management District are characterized by certain soil types, slopes, and water
levels which, without proper corrective action, are unsuitable for development.
The preservation of trees and woodlands, marshes, swamps, wetlands, drainage
ways, and watercourses, within these districts serves important ecological,
recreational and aesthetic functions to the benefit of existing and future
residences of the municipality and therefore is in furtherance of the health,
safety, and general welfare of the City.
(c) It is the purpose and intent of this article to prevent and mitigate irreversible
damage to these natural resources and to preserve and enhance their values to
the public. Development shall be so regulated so as to minimize the risk of
environmental damage to these areas. By doing so, private home owners and
governmental units are protected from incurring high maintenance and capital
costs resulting from the necessity to correct the deficiencies encountered as a
result of inappropriate or improper development.
Section 74-282. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section:
Crown cover means the ratio between the amount of land shaded by the vertical
projection of the branches and foliage area of standing trees to the total area of land,
usually expressed as percentage.
Development means the construction, installation or alteration of any structure, the
extraction, grading or filling, clearing or other alteration of terrestrial or aquatic
vegetation, land or the course, current or cross section of any water body or watercourse
or the division of land into two or more parcels.
1 of 5
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VI; DIVISION 1
Development permit means any building permit, zoning permit, plat approval, rezoning,
certification, conditional or special use permit or variance.
Dimensional requirement means minimum and maximum setbacks, yard requirements
and/or structure height or size restrictions established in this chapter for the various
zoning districts.
Litter means slightly decomposed organic material on the floor of a woodland area.
Ordinary high water level means the boundary of public waters and wetlands, and shall
be an elevation delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a
sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly that point
where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly
terrestrial. For watercourses, the ordinary high water level shall be the operating elevation
of the normal summer pool.
Restrictive soils means soils which have permeability rates of less than five minutes per
inch; or in which bedrock is less than five feet below the ground surface; or in which the
water table is permanently or seasonably less than five feet below the ground surface; or
where the slope of the surface is greater than 12 percent.
Slope means the inclination of the natural surface of the land from the horizontal, usually
measured in one of three ways: (i) as a ratio, the horizontal distance to the vertical
distance; (ii) as a percentage, the vertical distance over the horizontal distance; (iii) by
degrees, measured from the horizontal to the vertical.
Structure means anything manufactured, constructed or erected which is normally
attached to or positioned on land, including portable structures.
Tree means any woody plant that has at least one trunk with a diameter four feet above
the ground of four inches or greater.
Utility line means all transmission or distribution systems of any public, semi-public, or
private utility, including but not limited to electric lines, sewer lines, water lines,
telephone lines, gas lines, oil pipe lines, and any other lines, pipes or cables.
Wetland means any low area permanently or seasonally covered with shallow water
including marsh, swamp, bog, wet meadow, slough, or intermittent lake greater than one
acre in size or floodplain and denoted on the City wetlands map.
Woodland means a group of trees at least one-half acre in area and with a crown cover of
50 percent or greater.
Section 74-283. Establishment of district boundaries.
This article shall apply to all public and private lands in the following described districts:
(a) The critical area overlay district which is the Mississippi River Corridor Critical
Area as set forth and legally described in Minnesota State Executive Order No.
7919 as recorded in the State Register, Monday, March 12, 1979.
(b) The Rum River Management Overlay District which is the Rum River
Management Area as set forth and legally described in the Management Plan for
the Rum River (6MCAR 1.2700-1.2720) and the Minnesota Wild and Scenic
Rivers Act (Minn. Stats. § 103F.301 et seq.).
2 of 5
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VI; DIVISION 1
(c) These districts shall be identified on the official zoning map referenced in
Section 74-62.
Section 74-284. Administration procedures.
Adoption and administrative procedure for this article shall comply with Minn. Reg.
NR 81.
Section 74-285. Substandard lots.
Lots of record in the office of the county register of deeds on March 29, 1981, which do
not meet the requirements of NR33(c)(1)(aa) through (dd) may be allowed as building
sites provided such use is permitted in the zoning district, the lot is in separate ownership
from abutting lands, and sanitary and dimensional requirements of this chapter are
complied with except that such lots which meet or exceed 60 percent or more of the lot
width standards of these regulations may be considered as a separate parcel of land for
the purposes of sale or development, if on-site sewage disposal systems can be installed
so as to comply with these regulations.
Section 74-286. Public areas.
All plans for public campgrounds, accesses (both trails and roads for boat launch
facilities), and open space recreational uses within the Rum River Management Overlay
District shall be submitted to the Minnesota Commissioner of Natural Resources for
approval in compliance with MN. Reg. NR 79(b)(2) as amended by 6 MCAR
1.2720(A)(4)(3).
Section 74-287. Development standards.
The following standards shall be met when any development is undertaken within the
critical area overlay district or the Rum River Management Overlay District:
(a) No filling, grading, dredging, excavation, or construction shall be allowed
within any wetland area, nor on lands abutting, adjoining or affecting such areas
if such activity upon those adjacent area incompatible with city policies
expressed here and in other documents. Development is prohibited if it results in
loss and damage to public and private improvements through inundation by
flood waters and subsequent construction of storm sewers and other public
projects, in the permanent destruction of natural resources, loss of water
retention facilities, open space and wild life habitats or impairment of public and
private water supplies. Wetland area may not be used in determining minimum
area requirements for building sites or subdivision plats unless such
development is in accordance with section 74-192 or unless they are dedicated
to the public for such uses described in chapter 54, article III, division 2 of this
Code.
(b) A minimum amount of filling may be allowed when necessary, as determined by
the zoning administrator, but in no case shall the total filling cause the natural
flood storage capacity of the wetland to fall below the projected volume of
runoff from the entire area wetland water shed generated by a ten year storm,
nor shall the total filling cause the total natural nutrient stripping capacity of the
wetland to fall below the nutrient production of the wetland water shed for its
projected development. Only fill free of chemical pollutants and organic wastes
may be used. Wetlands shall not be used for solid waste disposal.
3 of 5
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VI; DIVISION 1
(c) Dredging may be allowed only when a boat channel is required for access to a
navigable lake or river, or when it will not have a significant adverse effect upon
the ecological and hydrological characteristics of the wetland. Dredging, when
allowed, shall be located so as to maximize the activity in the areas of lowest
vegetation density, shall not significantly change the water flow characteristics,
and the size of the dredged area shall be limited to the absolute minimum for the
permitted purpose.
(d) Development shall be conducted so that the maximum number of trees is
preserved by the clustering of structures in existing cleared areas and natural
clearings, and the utilization of other site design techniques. Grading, contouring
and paving shall be performed to minimize any detrimental effect on root zone
aeration and stability of existing trees. Existing trees shall be provided with a
watering area equal to at least one-half the crown cover. When trees are
removed, the density of trees must be restored, utilizing nursery stocks of a
minimum of 1¾-inch diameter measured one foot above the ground, using
species generally accepted as suitable for the purpose to that which existed
before the development, provided that in no case need the density exceed ten
trees per acre. Development shall not reduce the existing crown cover greater
than 50 percent and shall be conducted in such a manner as to preserve the under
story and litter. Trees used in reforestation or landscaping must be compatible
with the local landscape and climatic conditions.
(e) No on-site sewage disposal systems shall be allowed in restrictive soils. All of
those permitted in other areas must meet requirements of 6 MCAR s. 4.8040
involving construction standards and inspection procedures.
(f) No development shall be permitted on land having a slope, before alteration, in
excess of 18 percent unless the applicant establishes that the following
conditions are met:
(1) The foundation and underlying material of any structure, including
roads, shall be adequate for slope condition and soil type.
(2) The applicant can demonstrate that development can be accomplished
without increasing erosion, beyond that anticipated on a less than 18
percent slope, and that there is proper utilization of controls to reduce
runoff to nondestructive levels.
(3) The proposed development presents no danger of falling rock, mud,
uprooted trees, or other material to structures, recreational facilities,
public lands, and public waters downhill.
(4) All structures other than buildings and roadway surfaces, but including
retaining walls, shall meet the following design requirements:
a. Retaining walls or terrace contours shall not exceed five feet
in height;
b. Construction shall be of natural stone or wood;
c. The use of gabions non-wood pilings, metal retaining walls is
specifically prohibited unless the visible portion has the
appearance of natural stone or wood;
4 of 5
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VI; DIVISION 1
d. The minimum width of terraces shall be in the ratio of 2:1 to
the height.
(g) Steps shall be taken at all times to limit soil erosion. During any
construction period steps shall be taken to ensure that soil loss will be
less than five tons/acre/year, that immediately following any
construction, soil loss will be less than two tons/acre/year and that
within 15 days following construction, vegetation shall be planted to
reduce the soil loss to less than one-half ton/acre/year.
(h) Utility lines and any other associated facilities should be constructed
along existing corridors or rights-of-way and make use of existing
bridges or utility crossings. New corridors or rights-of-way shall be
located so as to minimize potential environmental damage.
Sections 74-288--74-305. Reserved.
5 of 5
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VI; DIVISION 2
CHAPTER 74. ZONING
ARTICLE VI. Mississippi River Control Corridor/Rum River Protection*
----------
*State law references--Shoreline development, Minn. Stats. § 103F.201 et seq.; municipal shore land
management, Minn. Stats. § 103F.221; Minnesota Wild and Scenic Rivers Act, Minn. Stats. § 103F.301 et seq.
----------
DIVISION 2. Environmental Permit.
Section 74-306. Required.
Any person undertaking development to or on any land within the overlay districts shall,
prior to commencing the work, obtain an environmental permit (permit) from the City,
except as hereinafter provided in this Article. An environmental permit must be obtained
prior to construction of any utility line be it overhead or underground, and prior to
construction, reconstruction, removal or abandonment of any road or railroad within
these districts under standards of Minn. Reg. NR79(J).
Section 74-307. Emergency and exemptions.
When emergency work necessary to preserve life or property is required, the person
performing it shall report all pertinent facts relating to the work to the City engineer and
zoning administrator prior to the commencement of work. The zoning administrator shall
review the facts and determine whether an emergency exists and shall authorize in
writing the commencement of the emergency work. Within ten days following the
commencement of that activity the person conducting the work shall apply for the
issuance of an environmental permit and may be required to perform such work as is
determined to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment to the wetland
occasioned by such emergency work. The removal of trees, seriously damaged by storms
or other acts of God, or diseased trees, shall not be prohibited.
Section 74-308. Applications.
(a) Environmental permits shall be issued by the zoning administrator except where
noted in this Article. A written application for an environmental permit must be
submitted to the zoning administrator. Such application shall include a site plan
with adequate evidence to show that the proposed use will conform to the
standards set forth in this Article. Five sets of clearly legible blue or black-lined
copies or drawings and required information shall be submitted to the zoning
administrator and shall be accompanied by a receipt from the administrator
evidencing the payment of all required site plan fees. No permit or variance shall
be issued unless the applicant in support of his application shall submit
engineering data, surveys, site plans and other information as the City may
require in order to determine the effects of such development on the affected
lands and water areas. Such data, etc., shall be prepared by hydrologists,
biologists, botanists, or other technical persons as required by the zoning
administrator. Approval may be expressly given in conjunction with other
development permits applied for, but no approval shall be implied from the
granting of such development permits nor from the necessity to apply for a
permit as described in this section. The site plan must comply with this section.
1 of 5
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VI; DIVISION 2
(b) The site plans shall be prepared to a scale appropriate to the size of the project
and suitable for the review to be performed, which shall not be less than one
inch equals 200 feet or more than one inch equals ten feet.
(c) The following information shall be provided in the site plan:
(1) The name and address of the owner and developer, the legal description
and address of the property, north point, date, scale of drawing, and
number of sheets.
(2) Location of the property including such information as the name and
numbers of adjoining railroads, roads, existing subdivisions, buildings,
and other landmarks.
(3) Existing topography as indicated on a contour map having contour
intervals, of one foot on a zero percent to three percent slope, two feet
on a three percent to ten percent slope, and five feet on a ten percent or
greater slope: the topography map shall also clearly delineate any bluff
line, all streams, including intermittent streams and swales, rivers,
water bodies, and wetlands located on the site, including depth of
water, bottom slope, a description of body materials and all vegetation
which may be found in the water body, a statement of water turbidity, a
statement of water quality, and a classification given to the water body
by the state department of natural resources and the state pollution
control agency, if any. The topography map shall indicate the floodway
and/or flood fringe lines and shall indicate the ordinary high water level
of the river.
(4) A plan delineating existing drainage of the water setting forth in which
direction, the volume and at what rate storm water is conveyed from the
site, and setting forth those areas of the site where storm water collects
and is gradually percolated into the ground or slowly released to stream
or lake.
(5) A description of the soils of the site, including a map indicating soil
types by areas to be distributed as well as soil report prepared by a soil
scientist containing information on the suitability of the soils for the
type of development proposed and for the type of sewage disposal
proposed and describing any remedial steps to be taken by the
developer to render the soils suitable. All areas proposed for grading
shall be identified by soil type, both as a soil type of existing topsoil
and soil type of the new contour. The location and extent of any erosion
areas shall be indicated.
(6) A description of the flora and fauna, which occupy the site and are
occasionally found thereon, setting forth with detail those areas where
unique plant or animal species may be found on the site.
(7) A description of any features, buildings or areas which are of historic
significance.
(8) A map indicating proposed finished grade shown at contours at the
same intervals as provided above or as required to clearly indicate the
2 of 5
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VI; DIVISION 2
relationship of proposed changes to existing topography and remaining
features.
(9) A landscape plan drawn to an appropriate scale, including dimensions
and distances and the location, type, size and description of all existing
vegetation, clearly locating and describing any vegetation proposed for
removal and all proposed landscape materials which will be added to
the site as part of the development.
(10) A proposed drainage plan of the developed site delineating in which
direction, the volume, and at what rate storm water will be conveyed
from the site and setting forth the areas of the site where storm water
will be allowed to collect and gradually percolate into the ground, or be
slowly released to stream or lake. The plan shall also set forth hydraulic
capacity of all structures to be constructed or existing structures to be
utilized, including volume of holding ponds and design of the storm
drainage system.
(11) An erosion and sedimentation control plan indicating the type, location,
and necessary technical information on control measures to be taken
both during and after construction, including a statement expressing the
calculated anticipated gross soil loss expressed in tons/acre/year both
during and after construction which complies with standards in
subsection 74-287(7).
(12) The proposed size, alignment, height, and intended use of any
structures to be erected or located on the site, including building
elevations (front, rear and sides).
(13) A clear delineation of all areas which shall be paved or surfaced
including a description of the surface material to be used.
(14) A description of the method to be provided for vehicular and pedestrian
access to the proposed development and public access to the river
and/or public river view opportunities both before and after
development; a description of the development's impact on existing
views of and along the river.
(15) A description of all parking facilities to be provided as part of the
development of the site including an analysis of parking needs
generated by the proposed development.
(16) A delineation of the area or areas to be dedicated for public use.
(17) A delineation of the location and amounts of excavated soils to be
stored on the site during construction.
(18) Any other information pertinent to the particular project which in the
opinion of the inspector or applicant is necessary or helpful for the
review of the project.
(d) Three classifications of development are hereby established:
(1) Development on more than one parcel of residential property or any
development of commercial or industrial property;
3 of 5
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VI; DIVISION 2
(2) Construction of one new single-family home;
(3) Any additions, alterations or modifications to one, existing singlefamily
home.
(e) Developments described in subsection (d)(1) of this section must provide all of
the information requested in subsection (c) of this section. Developments
described in subsection (d)(2) of this section must provide information requested
in subsections (c)(1)--(3) and (7)--(9) of this section, as modified to locate and
describe any vegetation proposed for removal and all proposed landscape
materials which will be added to the site as part of the development and
subsections (c)(12), (13), and (18) of this section. Developments described in
subsection (d)(3) of this section must provide information requested in
subsections (c)(1), (2), (12), (13), and (18) of this section.
Section 74-309. Expiration; extension and revisions.
(a) A permittee shall begin the work authorized by the permit within 60 days from
the date of issuance of the permit unless otherwise specified in the permit. The
permittee shall complete the work authorized by the permit within the time limit
specified in the permit which in no event shall be more than 12 months from the
date of issuance. The permittee shall notify the zoning administrator at least 24
hours prior to the commencement of work.
(b) Should the work not be commenced as specified in this section, then the permit
shall be void. However, if prior to the date established for commencement of
work, the permittee makes written request to the zoning administrator for an
extension of time to commence the work setting forth the reasons for the
required extension, the administrator may grant one extension of not greater than
one year.
(c) Any revision of the original approved site plan must be approved by the City
Council after recommendation by the Planning Commission and zoning
administrator.
(d) A permit may be approved subject to compliance with conditions which are
specifically set forth in the permit and are necessary to insure compliance with
the requirements contained in this article. Such conditions may limit the size,
kind or character of the proposed development, require the construction of other
structures, including special foundations and soil stabilization structures,
establish required monitoring procedures, require such alterations of the site as
may be necessary, require execution of an agreement between the City and the
developer, require surety in the form of a performance bond, escrow or letter of
credit. Accompanying such agreement and surety shall be a statement from the
owner indicating the City's right of entry to the property if it becomes necessary
to complete the agreed work.
Section 74-310. Fees.
A schedule of fees for the examination and approval of site plans leading to an
environmental permit, and the inspection of all required improvements and conditions in
such plans, shall be determined by the City Council. The City Council may from time to
4 of 5
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VI; DIVISION 2
time change such schedule. Prior to approval of any site plan, such fees shall be paid to
the zoning administrator and be deposited to the credit of the general fund.
Section 74-311. Effect of permit.
The granting of an environmental permit under the provisions of this article shall in no
way affect the owners or the permittee's responsibility to obtain the approval required by
any other statute, ordinance or regulation of any federal or state agency or subdivision
thereof.
Sections 74-312--74-340. Reserved.
5 of 5
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VII
1 of 19
CHAPTER 74. ZONING
ARTICLE VII. Floodplains
---------
*State law references – Floodplain management, Minn. Stats §103F.101 et seq.; floodplain management
ordinances, Minn. Stats. §103F.121
---------
Section 74-341. Statutory Authorization.
The legislature of the State of Minnesota has, in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 103F and
Chapter 462 delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations
designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Council of Anoka, Minnesota,
does ordain as follows.
Section 74-342. Purpose.
(a) This Article regulates development in the flood hazard areas of the City of
Anoka. These flood hazard areas are subject to periodic inundation, which may
result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of
commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for
flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base. It is the purpose of
this Article to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by
minimizing these losses and disruptions.
(b) National Flood Insurance Program Compliance. This Article is adopted to
comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program
codified as 44 Code of Federal Regulations Parts 59 -78, as amended, so as to
maintain the community’s eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program.
(c) This Article is also intended to preserve the natural characteristics and functions
of watercourses and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater
impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian
habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and
enhance community and economic development.
Section 74-343. General Provisions.
(a) How to Use This Article: This Article adopts the floodplain maps applicable to
the City of Anoka and includes three floodplain districts: Floodway, Flood
Fringe, and General Floodplain.
(1) Where Floodway and Flood Fringe districts are delineated on the
floodplain maps, the standards in Sections 74-351 through 74-74-354
Floodway Overlay District or Section 74-355 Flood Fringe Overlay
District will apply, depending on the location of a property.
(2) Locations where Floodway and Flood Fringe districts are not delineated
on the floodplain maps are considered to fall within the General
Floodplain district. Within the General Floodplain district, the
Floodway District standards in Sections 74-351 through 74-74-354
Floodway Overlay District apply unless the floodway boundary is
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VII
2 of 19
determined, according to the process outlined in Section 74-356
General Floodplain Overlay District. Once the floodway boundary is
determined, the Flood Fringe District standards in Section 74-355
Flood Fringe Overlay District may apply outside the floodway.
(b) Lands to Which Article Applies: This Article applies to all lands within the
jurisdiction of the City of Anoka shown on the Official Zoning Map and/or the
attachments to the map as being located within the boundaries of the Floodway,
Flood Fringe, or General Floodplain overlay Districts.
(1) The Floodway, Flood Fringe and General Floodplain Districts are
overlay districts that are superimposed on all existing zoning districts.
The standards imposed in the overlay districts are in addition to any
other requirements in this Article. In case of a conflict, the more
restrictive standards will apply.
(2) If there are any discrepancies between this Article and the City Code,
the most restrictive shall apply within the Floodway, Flood Fringe and
General Floodplain overlay districts.
Section 74-344. Incorporation of Maps by Reference.
The following maps are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of the
Official Zoning Map and this Article. The attached material includes the Flood Insurance
Study for Anoka County, Minnesota, and Incorporated Areas, dated December 16, 2015
and the Flood Insurance Rate Map panels enumerated below, dated December 16, 2015,
all prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. These materials are on file
in the City Clerk’s office.
27003C0281E
270030C282E
270030C283E
270030C284E
270030C292E
270030C301E
270030C303E
270030C311E
Section 74-345. Interpretation.
The boundaries of the zoning districts are determined by scaling distances on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map.
(a) Where a conflict exists between the floodplain limits illustrated on the official
zoning map and actual field conditions, the flood elevations shall be the
governing factor. The Zoning Administrator must interpret the boundary
location based on the ground elevations that existed on the site on the date of the
first National Flood Insurance Program map showing the area within the
regulatory floodplain, and other available technical data.
(b) Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries will be given a
reasonable opportunity to present their case to the City Council and to submit
technical evidence (refer to Section 74-37(d) Appeals and Section 74-37(e)
District Court Appeals).
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VII
3 of 19
Section 74-346. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
It is not intended by this Article to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements,
covenants, or other private agreements. However, where this Article imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this Article prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with
this Article are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
Section 74-347. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.
This Article does not imply that areas outside the floodplain districts or land uses
permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Article
does not create liability on the part of the City of Anoka or its officers or employees for
any flood damages that result from reliance on this Article or any administrative decision
lawfully made hereunder.
Section 74-348. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Article must be
interpreted according to common usage and so as to give this ordinance its most
reasonable application. For the purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall
apply:
Base Flood Elevation means the elevation of the “regional flood.” The term “base flood
elevation” is used in the flood insurance survey.
Basement (for purposes of this Article only) means any area of a structure, including
crawl spaces, having its floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides,
regardless of the depth of excavation below ground level.
Critical Facilities means facilities necessary to a community’s public health and safety,
those that store or produce highly volatile, toxic or water-reactive materials, and those
that house occupants that may be insufficiently mobile to avoid loss of life or injury.
Examples of critical facilities include hospitals, correctional facilities, schools, daycare
facilities, nursing homes, fire and police stations, wastewater treatment facilities, public
electric utilities, water plants, fuel storage facilities, and waste handling and storage
facilities.
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials.
Equal Degree of Encroachment means a method of determining the location of floodway
boundaries so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are capable of conveying a
proportionate share of flood flows.
Farm Fence means a fence as defined by Minn. Statutes Section 344.02, Subd. 1(a)-(d).
An open type fence of posts and wire is not considered to be a structure under this
Article. Fences that have the potential to obstruct flood flows, such as chain link fences
and rigid walls, are regulated as structures under this Article.
Flood means a temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage of a
wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.
Flood Frequency means the frequency for which it is expected that a specific flood stage
or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VII
4 of 19
Flood Fringe means that portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway. Flood fringe
is synonymous with the term “floodway fringe” used in the Flood Insurance Study for
Anoka County, Minnesota.
Flood Prone Area means any land susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source (see “Flood”).
Flood Related Repetitive Loss means damages sustained by a structure on two separate
occasions during a ten year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such
flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
Floodplain means the beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or watercourse
which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood.
Floodproofing means a combination of structural provisions, changes, or adjustments to
properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the reduction or elimination of
flood damages.
Floodway means the bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and those
portions of the adjoining floodplain which are reasonably required to carry or store the
regional flood discharge.
Lowest Floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement).
An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building
access, or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s
lowest floor.
Manufactured Home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent
foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does
not include the term “recreational vehicle.”
Obstruction means any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence, stockpile,
refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting into any channel,
watercourse, or regulatory floodplain which may impede, retard, or change the direction
of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such
water.
One Hundred Year Floodplain means lands inundated by the “Regional Flood” (see
definition).
Reach means a hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a stream
or river influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction. In an urban area, the segment
of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings would most typically
constitute a reach.
Recreational Vehicle means a vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is 400 square feet
or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is designed to be selfpropelled
or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and is designed primarily not for
use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping,
travel, or seasonal use. For the purposes of this ordinance, the term recreational vehicle is
synonymous with the term “travel trailer/travel vehicle.”
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VII
5 of 19
Regional Flood means a flood which is representative of large floods known to have
occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to
occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 1% chance or 100-year recurrence
interval. Regional flood is synonymous with the term "base flood" used in a flood
insurance study.
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation (RFPE) means an elevation not less than one foot
above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by
encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a floodway.
Special Flood Hazard Area means a term used for flood insurance purposes synonymous
with “One Hundred Year Floodplain.”
Substantial Damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the cost
of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50
percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement means within any consecutive 365-day period, any
reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair), repair after
damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction”
of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred “substantial
damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however,
include either:
(a) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or
local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the
local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe
living conditions.
(b) Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude
the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.” For the purpose of this
Article, “historic structure” is as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Part
59.1.
Section 74-349. Establishment of Zoning Districts.
(a) Floodway Overlay District. The Floodway Overlay District includes those areas
designated as floodway on the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in Section 74-
344 Incorporation of Maps by Reference.
(b) Flood Fringe Overlay District. The Flood Fringe Overlay District includes those
areas designated as floodway fringe on the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in
Section 74-344 Incorporation of Maps by Reference, as being within Zone AE
but being located outside of the floodway.
(c) General Floodplain Overlay District. The General Floodplain Overlay District
includes those areas designated as Zone A or Zone AE without a floodway on
the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in Section 74-344 Incorporation of Maps
by Reference.
Section 74-350. Compliance.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VII
6 of 19
Within the floodplain districts established in this Article, the use of any land, the use,
size, type and location of structures on lots, the installation and maintenance of
transportation, utility, water supply and waste treatment facilities, and the subdivision of
land must comply with the terms of this Article and other applicable regulations. All uses
not listed as permitted uses or conditional uses in Sections 74-351 through 74-74-534
Floodway Overlay District, Section 74-355 Flood Fringe Overlay District and 74-356
General Floodplain Overlay District, respectively, are prohibited.
In addition, a caution is provided here that:
(a) All structures must be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
(b) As-built elevations for elevated or floodproofed structures must be certified by
ground surveys and flood-proofing techniques must be designed and certified by
a registered professional engineer or architect as specified in the general
provisions of this Article and specifically as stated in Section 74-360
Administration of this Article.
(c) Critical facilities, as defined in Section 74-348, are prohibited in all floodplain
districts.
Section 74-351. Floodway Overlay District (FW).
(a) Permitted Uses: The following uses, subject to the standards set forth in
Section 74-352 Standards for Floodway Permitted Uses, are permitted uses if
otherwise allowed in the underlying zoning district or any applicable overlay
district:
(1) General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture,
truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.
(2) Industrial-commercial loading areas, and parking areas.
(3) Open space uses, including but not limited to private and public golf
courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat
launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, and
single or multiple purpose recreational trails.
(4) Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas.
(5) Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines and pipelines, provided
that the Department of Natural Resources’ Area Hydrologist is notified at
least ten days prior to issuance of any permit, and that the standards in
Sections 74-354 Standards for Floodway Conditional Uses, 74-354(c)
Accessory Structures, and 74-35(c4f) Floodway developments of this
Article are met.
(6) Temporary docks which are removed seasonally within the Mississippi
River Control Corridor.
Section 74-352. Standards for Floodway Permitted Uses.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VII
7 of 19
(a) The use must have a low flood damage potential.
(b) With the exception of the uses listed in Section 74-351(5) Railroads streets,
bridges, utility transmission lines and pipelines, the use must not obstruct flood
flows or increase flood elevations and must not involve structures, fill,
obstructions, excavations or storage of materials or equipment.
(c) Any facility that will be used by employees or the general public must be
designed with a flood warning system that provides adequate time for
evacuation if the area is inundated to a depth and velocity such that the depth (in
feet) multiplied by the velocity (in feet per second) would exceed a product of
four upon occurrence of the regional (1% chance) flood.
Section 74-353. Conditional Uses.
The following uses may be allowed as conditional uses following the standards and
procedures set forth in Section 74-360(c) Conditional Uses of this Article and further
subject to the standards set forth in Section 74-353 Standards for Floodway Conditional
Uses, if otherwise allowed in the underlying zoning district or any applicable overlay
district.
(a) Structures accessory to the uses listed in Section 74-351(a) Permitted Uses
above and the uses listed in (b) – (e) below.
(b) Marinas, boat rentals, permanent or temporary docks (within the Rum River
Protection Corridor), permanent docks (within the Mississippi River Control
Corridor), piers, wharves, and water control structures.
(c) Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials.
(d) Placement of fill or construction of fences that obstruct flood flows. Farm
fences, as defined in Section 74-348 Definitions, are permitted uses.
(e) Levees or dikes intended to protect agricultural crops for a frequency flood
event equal to or less than the 10-year frequency flood event.
Section 74-354. Standards for Floodway Conditional Uses.
(a) All Uses. A conditional use must not cause any increase in the stage of the 1%
chance or regional flood or cause an increase in flood damages in the reach or
reaches affected.
(b) Fill; Storage of Materials and Equipment:
(1) The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding,
flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or
plant life is prohibited.
(2) Fill, dredge spoil, and other similar materials deposited or stored in the
floodplain must be protected from erosion by vegetative cover,
mulching, riprap or other acceptable method. Permanent sand and
gravel operations and similar uses must be covered by a long-term site
development plan.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VII
8 of 19
(3) Temporary placement of fill, other materials, or equipment which
would cause an increase to the stage of the 1% percent chance or
regional flood may only be allowed if the City Council has approved a
plan that assures removal of the materials from the floodway based
upon the flood warning time available.
(c) Accessory Structures:
(1) Accessory structures must not be designed for human habitation.
(2) Accessory structures, if permitted, must be constructed and placed on
the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of
flood waters:
a. Whenever possible, structures must be constructed with the
longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow; and
b. So far as practicable, structures must be placed approximately
on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining structures.
(3) Accessory structures must be elevated on fill or structurally dry
floodproofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 floodproofing
classifications in the State Building Code. All floodproofed accessory
structures must meet the following additional standards:
a. The structure must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement and designed to
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls; and
b. Any mechanical and utility equipment in the structure must be
elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation
or properly floodproofed.
(4) As an alternative, an accessory structure may be internally/wet
floodproofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 floodproofing classifications in the
State Building Code, provided the accessory structure constitutes a
minimal investment and does not exceed 576 square feet in size. A
detached garage may only be used for parking of vehicles and limited
storage. All structures must meet the following standards:
a. To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there
must be a minimum of two “automatic” openings in the
outside walls of the structure, with a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding; and
b. There must be openings on at least two sides of the structure
and the bottom of all openings must be no higher than one foot
above the lowest adjacent grade to the structure. Using human
intervention to open a garage door prior to flooding will not
satisfy this requirement for automatic openings.
(d) Structural works for flood control that will change the course, current or cross
section of protected wetlands or public waters are subject to the provisions of
Minnesota Statutes, Section 103G.245.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VII
9 of 19
(e) A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway must not cause an
increase to the 1% chance or regional flood. The technical analysis must assume
equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a stream.
(f) Floodway developments must not adversely affect the hydraulic capacity of the
channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary watercourse or drainage
system.
Section 74-355. Flood Fringe Overlay District (FF).
(a) Permitted Uses: Permitted uses are those uses of land or structures allowed in
the underlying zoning district(s) that comply with the standards in Sections 74-
355(a1).
(1) All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated on fill
so that the lowest floor, as defined, is at or above the regulatory flood
protection elevation. The finished fill elevation for structures must be
no lower than one foot below the regulatory flood protection elevation
and the fill must extend at the same elevation at least 15 feet beyond
the outside limits of the structure.
a. All service utilities, including ductwork, must be elevated or
water-tight to prevent infiltration of floodwaters.
b. As an alternative to elevation on fill, an accessory structure
that constitutes a minimal investment and that does not exceed
576 square feet in size may be internally floodproofed in
accordance with Section 74-354(c) Accessory Structures.
c. The cumulative placement of fill or similar material on a
parcel must not exceed 1,000 cubic yards, unless the fill is
specifically intended to elevate a structure in accordance with
Section 74-355(b) of this Article, or if allowed as a conditional
use under Section 74-355(d) below.
d. The storage of any materials or equipment must be elevated on
fill to the regulatory flood protection elevation.
e. The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to
human, animal, or plant life is prohibited.
f. Fill must be properly compacted and the slopes must be
properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or
other acceptable method.
g. All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or
above an elevation not more than two feet below the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
h. Accessory uses such as yards, railroad tracks, and parking lots
may be at an elevation lower than the regulatory flood
protection elevation. However, any facilities used by
employees or the general public must be designed with a flood
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VII
10 of 19
warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if
the area is inundated to a depth and velocity such that the
depth (in feet) multiplied by the velocity (in feet per second)
would exceed a product of four upon occurrence of the
regional (1% chance) flood.
i. Interference with normal manufacturing/industrial plant
operations must be minimized, especially along streams
having protracted flood durations. In considering permit
applications, due consideration must be given to the needs of
industries with operations that require a floodplain location.
j. Flood fringe developments must not adversely affect the
hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of
any tributary watercourse or drainage system.
k. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles must meet the
standards of Section 74-359 Manufactured Homes,
Manufactured Home Parks, and Recreational Vehicles of this
Article.
(b) Conditional Uses: The following uses and activities may be allowed as
conditional uses, if allowed in the underlying zoning district(s) or any applicable
overlay district, following the procedures in Section 74-360(c) Conditional Uses
of this Article. Conditional uses must meet the standards in Sections 74-
355(a1e) through 74-355(a1k) and Section 74-74-355(c) Standards for Flood
Fringe Conditional Uses.
(1) Any structure that is not elevated on fill or floodproofed in accordance
with Section 74-355(a) Permitted Uses of this Article.
(2) Storage of any material or equipment below the regulatory flood
protection elevation.
(3) The cumulative placement of more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill when
the fill is not being used to elevate a structure in accordance with
Section 74-355(a) Permitted Uses of this Article.
(c) Standards for Flood Fringe Conditional Uses:
(1) The standards listed in Sections 74-355(a1d) The storage of any
material… through 74-355(b) Conditional Uses apply to all conditional
uses.
(2) Basements, as defined by Section 74-348 Definitions of this Article, are
subject to the following:
a. Residential basement construction is not allowed below the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
b. Non-residential basements may be allowed below the
regulatory flood protection elevation provided the basement is
structurally dry floodproofed in accordance with Section 74-
355(c4) The placement of more than… of this Article.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VII
11 of 19
(3) All areas of nonresidential structures, including basements, to be placed
below the regulatory flood protection elevation must be floodproofed in
accordance with the structurally dry floodproofing classifications in the
State Building Code. Structurally dry floodproofing must meet the FP-1
or FP-2 floodproofing classification in the State Building Code, which
requires making the structure watertight with the walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components
capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects
of buoyancy. Structures wet floodproofed to the FP-3 or FP-4
classification are not permitted.
(4) The placement of more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill or other similar
material on a parcel (other than for the purpose of elevating a structure
to the regulatory flood protection elevation) must comply with an
approved erosion/sedimentation control plan.
a. The plan must clearly specify methods to be used to stabilize
the fill on site for a flood event at a minimum of the regional
(1% chance) flood event.
b. The plan must be prepared and certified by a registered
professional engineer or other qualified individual acceptable
to the City Council.
c. The plan may incorporate alternative procedures for removal
of the material from the floodplain if adequate flood warning
time exists.
(5) Storage of materials and equipment below the regulatory flood
protection elevation must comply with an approved emergency plan
providing for removal of such materials within the time available after
a flood warning.
Section 74-356. General Floodplain Overlay District (GF).
(a) Permitted Uses:
(1) The uses listed in Section 74-351 Standards for Floodway Conditional
Uses of this Article, Floodway Overlay District Permitted Uses, are
permitted uses.
(2) All other uses are subject to the floodway/flood fringe evaluation
criteria specified in Section 74-356 General Floodplain Overlay
District below. Section 74-351 Floodway Overlay District applies if the
proposed use is determined to be in the Floodway Overlay District.
Section 74-355 Flood Fringe Overlay District applies if the proposed
use is determined to be in the Flood Fringe Overlay District.
(b) Procedures for Floodway and Flood Fringe Determinations:
(1) Upon receipt of an application for a permit or other approval within the
General Floodplain Overlay District, the Zoning Administrator must
obtain, review and reasonably utilize any regional flood elevation and
floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VII
12 of 19
(2) If regional flood elevation and floodway data are not readily available,
the applicant must furnish additional information, as needed, to
determine the regulatory flood protection elevation and whether the
proposed use would fall within the Floodway or Flood Fringe District.
Information must be consistent with accepted hydrological and
hydraulic engineering standards and the standards in 74-356(b3) below.
(3) The determination of floodway and flood fringe must include the
following components, as applicable:
a. Estimate the peak discharge of the regional (1% chance) flood.
b. Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based
upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank
areas.
c. Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the
regional flood without increasing flood stages more than onehalf
(0.5) foot. A lesser stage increase than 0.5 foot is required
if, as a result of the stage increase, increased flood damages
would result. An equal degree of encroachment on both sides
of the stream within the reach must be assumed in computing
floodway boundaries.
(4) The Zoning Administrator will review the submitted information and
assess the technical evaluation and the recommended Floodway and/or
Flood Fringe Overlay District boundary. The assessment must include
the cumulative effects of previous floodway encroachments. The
Zoning Administrator may seek technical assistance from a designated
engineer or other expert person or agency, including the Department of
Natural Resources. Based on this assessment, the Zoning Administrator
may approve or deny the application.
(5) Once the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries have been
determined, the Zoning Administrator must process the permit
application consistent with the applicable provisions of Section 74-351
Floodway Overlay District and 74-355 Flood Fringe Overlay District
of this Article.
Section 74-357. Subdivisions.
(a) Subdivisions: No land may be subdivided which is unsuitable for reasons of
flooding or inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment facilities.
Manufactured home parks and recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds are
considered subdivisions under this ordinance.
(1) All lots within the floodplain districts must be able to contain a
building site outside of the Floodway District at or above the regulatory
flood protection elevation.
(2) All subdivisions must have road access both to the subdivision and to
the individual building sites no lower than two feet below the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VII
13 of 19
(3) For all subdivisions in the floodplain, the Floodway and Flood Fringe
Overlay District boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation
and the required elevation of all access roads must be clearly labeled on
all required subdivision drawings and platting documents.
(4) In the General Floodplain District, applicants must provide the
information required in Section 74-356 General Floodplain Overlay
District of this Article to determine the regional flood elevation, the
Floodway and Flood Fringe Overlay District boundaries and the
regulatory flood protection elevation for the subdivision site.
Section 74-358. Public Utilities, Railroads, Roads, and Bridges.
(a) Public Utilities: All public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer,
and water supply systems to be located in the floodplain must be floodproofed in
accordance with the State Building Code or elevated to the regulatory flood
protection elevation.
(b) Public Transportation Facilities: Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges to be located
within the floodplain must comply with Sections 74-351 Floodway Overlay
District and 74-355 Flood Fringe District of this Article. These transportation
facilities must be elevated to the regulatory flood protection elevation where
failure or interruption of these facilities would result in danger to the public
health or safety or where such facilities are essential to the orderly functioning
of the area. Minor or auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower
elevation where failure or interruption of transportation services would not
endanger the public health or safety.
(c) On-site Water Supply and Sewage Treatment Systems: Where public utilities are
not provided: 1) On-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and 2) New or
replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into flood waters and they must not be subject to impairment or
contamination during times of flooding. Any sewage treatment system designed
in accordance with the state’s current statewide standards for on-site sewage
treatment systems is considered to be in compliance with this Section.
Section 74-359. Manufactured Homes, Manufactured Home Parks, and Recreational Vehicles.
(a) Manufactured Homes: New manufactured home parks and expansions to
existing manufactured home parks are prohibited in any floodplain district.
(b) Outside Storage of Recreational Vehicles: Where outside storage of
Recreational Vehicles are permitted, the recreational vehicle must have a current
license required for highway use, is highway ready, meaning on wheels or the
internal jacking system, and no permanent structural type addition shall be
attached to the vehicle.
Section 74-360. Administration.
(a) Permit Requirements:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VII
14 of 19
(1) Permit Required. A permit must be obtained from the Zoning
Administrator prior to conducting the following activities:
a. The erection, addition, modification, rehabilitation, or
alteration of any building, structure, or portion thereof.
Normal maintenance and repair also requires a permit if such
work, separately or in conjunction with other planned work,
constitutes a substantial improvement as defined in this
Article.
b. A change of use of a building, structure, or land.
c. The construction of a dam, fence, or on-site septic system.
d. The change or extension of a nonconforming use.
e. The repair of a structure that has been damaged by flood, fire,
tornado, or any other source.
f. The placement of fill, excavation of materials, or the storage
of materials or equipment within the floodplain.
g. Relocation or alteration of a watercourse - including new or
replacement culverts and bridges), unless a public waters work
permit has been applied for.
State law reference – Authority for above, Minn. Stat.
§103G.245.
h. Any other type of “development” as defined in this Article.
(2) Application for Permit. Permit applications must be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator.
(3) Certificate of Zoning Compliance for a New, Altered, or
Nonconforming Use. No building, land or structure may be occupied or
used in any manner until a certificate of zoning compliance has been
issued by the Zoning Administrator stating that the use of the building
or land conforms to the requirements of this Article.
(4) Certification. The applicant is required to submit certification by a
registered professional engineer, registered architect, or registered land
surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were
accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this Article.
Floodproofing measures must be certified by a registered professional
engineer or registered architect.
(5) Record of First Floor Elevation. The Zoning Administrator must
maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all new structures and alterations or additions to existing
structures in the floodplain. The Zoning Administrator must also
maintain a record of the elevation to which structures and alterations or
additions to structures are floodproofed.
(6) Notifications for Watercourse Alterations. Before authorizing any
alteration or relocation of a river or stream, the Zoning Administrator
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VII
15 of 19
must notify adjacent communities. If the applicant has applied for a
permit to work in public waters pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Section
103G.245, this will suffice as adequate notice. A copy of the
notification must also be submitted to the Chicago Regional Office of
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
(7) Notification to FEMA When Physical Changes Increase or Decrease
Base Flood Elevations. As soon as is practicable, but not later than six
months after the date such supporting information becomes available,
the Zoning Administrator must notify the Chicago Regional Office of
FEMA of the changes by submitting a copy of the relevant technical or
scientific data.
(b) Variances:
(1) Variance Applications. An application for a variance to the provisions
of this Article will be processed and reviewed in accordance with
applicable state statutes and Section 74-37 Appeals and variances of
the Zoning Ordinance.
(2) Adherence to State Floodplain Management Standards. A variance
must not allow a use that is not allowed in that district, permit a lower
degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood protection elevation
for the particular area, or permit standards less than those required by
state law.
(3) Additional Variance Criteria. The following additional variance criteria
of the Federal Emergency Management Agency must be satisfied:
a. Variances must not be issued by a community within any
designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge would result.
b. Variances may only be issued by a community upon (i) a
showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that
failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the
granting of a variance will not result in increased flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws
or ordinances.
c. Variances may only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief.
(4) Flood Insurance Notice. The Zoning Administrator must notify the
applicant for a variance that: 1) The issuance of a variance to construct
a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of
insurance coverage; and 2) Such construction below the base or
regional flood level increases risks to life and property. Such
notification must be maintained with a record of all variance actions.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VII
16 of 19
(5) General Considerations. The City Council may consider the following
factors in granting variances and imposing conditions on variances and
conditional uses in floodplains:
a. The potential danger to life and property due to increased
flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments;
b. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others;
c. The proposed water supply and sanitation systems, if any, and
the ability of these systems to minimize the potential for
disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions;
d. The importance of the services to be provided by the proposed
use to the community;
e. The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location;
f. The availability of viable alternative locations for the
proposed use that are not subject to flooding;
g. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing
development and development anticipated in the foreseeable
future;
h. The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive
Land Use Plan and flood plain management program for the
area;
i. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
j. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site.
(6) Submittal of Hearing Notices to the Department of Natural Resources
(DNR). The Zoning Administrator must submit hearing notices for
proposed variances to the DNR sufficiently in advance to provide at
least ten days’ notice of the hearing. The notice may be sent by
electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist.
(7) Submittal of Final Decisions to the DNR. A copy of all decisions
granting variances must be forwarded to the DNR within ten days of
such action. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail to
the respective DNR area hydrologist.
(8) Record-Keeping. The Zoning Administrator must maintain a record of
all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and must
report such variances in an annual or biennial report to the
Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program, when
requested by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(c) Conditional Uses:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VII
17 of 19
(1) Administrative Review. An application for a conditional use permit
under the provisions of this Article will be processed and reviewed in
accordance with Chapter 74; Article IV Conditional Uses of the Zoning
Ordinance.
(2) Factors Used in Decision-Making. In passing upon conditional use
applications, the City Council must consider all relevant factors
specified in other sections of this Chapter and those factors identified in
Section 74-360(b5) Variances of this Article.
(3) Conditions Attached to Conditional Use Permits. The City Council may
attach such conditions to the granting of conditional use permits as it
deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this Article. Such conditions
may include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities.
b. Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation.
c. Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed
restrictions.
d. Requirements for construction of channel modifications,
compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective
measures.
e. Floodproofing measures, in accordance with the State
Building Code and this Article. The applicant must submit a
plan or document certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures are
consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and
associated flood factors for the particular area.
(4) Submittal of Hearing Notices to the Department of Natural Resources
(DNR). The Zoning Administrator must submit hearing notices for
proposed conditional uses to the DNR sufficiently in advance to
provide at least ten days’ notice of the hearing. The notice may be sent
by electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist.
(5) Submittal of Final Decisions to the DNR. A copy of all decisions
granting conditional uses must be forwarded to the DNR within ten
days of such action. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S.
Mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist.
Section 74-361. Nonconformities.
(a) Continuance of Nonconformities: A use, structure, or occupancy of land which
was lawful before the passage or amendment of this Article but which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this Article may be continued subject to the
following conditions. Historic structures, as defined by this Article as a
Substantial Improvement, are subject to the provisions of Sections 74-361(a1) –
74-361(a4) of this Article.
(1) A nonconforming use, structure, or occupancy must not be expanded,
changed, enlarged, or altered in a way that increases its flood damage
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VII
18 of 19
potential or degree of obstruction to flood flows except as provided in
Section 74-361(a2) below. Expansion or enlargement of uses,
structures or occupancies within the Floodway District is prohibited.
(2) Any addition or structural alteration to a nonconforming structure or
nonconforming use that would result in increasing its flood damage
potential must be protected to the regulatory flood protection elevation
in accordance with any of the elevation on fill or floodproofing
techniques (i.e., FP-1 thru FP-4 floodproofing classifications) allowable
in the State Building Code, except as further restricted in 74-361(a3)
and 74-361(a5) below.
(3) If the cost of all previous and proposed alterations and additions
exceeds 50 percent of the market value of any nonconforming structure,
then the entire structure must meet the standards of Section 74-351
(Floodway Overlay District) or 74-355 (Flood Fringe Overlay District)
of this ordinance for new structures depending upon whether the
structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe Overlay Districts,
respectively. The cost of all structural alterations and additions must
include all costs such as construction materials and a reasonable cost
placed on all manpower or labor.
(4) If any nonconforming use, or any use of a nonconforming structure, is
discontinued for more than one year, any future use of the premises
must conform to this Article. The Assessor must notify the Zoning
Administrator in writing of instances of nonconformities that have been
discontinued for a period of more than one year.
(5) If any nonconformity is Substantially Damaged, as defined in Section
74-348 of this Article, it may not be reconstructed except in conformity
with the provisions of this Article. The applicable provisions for
establishing new uses or new structures in Sections 74-351 Floodway
Overlay District or 74-355 Flood Fringe Overlay District will apply
depending upon whether the use or structure is in the Floodway or
Flood Fringe, respectively.
(6) Any Substantial Improvement, as defined in Section 74-348 of this
Article, to a nonconforming structure requires that the existing structure
and any additions must meet the requirements of Section 74-351
Floodway Overlay District or 74-355 Flood Fringe Overlay District of
this Article for new structures, depending upon whether the structure is
in the Floodway or Flood Fringe Overlay District.
Section 74-362. Penalties and Enforcement.
(a) Violation Constitutes a Misdemeanor: Violation of the provisions of this Article
or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or
conditional uses) constitute a misdemeanor and will be punishable as defined by
law.
(b) Other Lawful Action: Nothing in this Article restricts the City of Anoka from
taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation. If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the Zoning
Administrator within the specified period of time, each additional day that lapses
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VII
19 of 19
will constitute an additional violation of this Article and will be prosecuted
accordingly.
(c) Enforcement: Violations of the provisions of this Article will be investigated
and resolved in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 74; Article II, Section
74-31 Violations and penalties of the zoning ordinance/code. In responding to a
suspected ordinance violation, the Zoning Administrator and the City Council
may utilize the full array of enforcement actions available to it including but not
limited to prosecution and fines, injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for
corrective measures or a request to the National Flood Insurance Program for
denial of flood insurance availability to the guilty party. The City of Anoka must
act in good faith to enforce these official controls and to correct ordinance
violations to the extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
Section 74-363. Amendments.
(a) Floodplain Designation – Restrictions on Removal: The floodplain designation
on the Official Zoning Map must not be removed from floodplain areas unless it
can be shown that the designation is in error or that the area has been filled to or
above the elevation of the regulatory flood protection elevation and is
contiguous to lands outside the floodplain. Special exceptions to this rule may
be permitted by the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources
(DNR) if the Commissioner determines that, through other measures, lands are
adequately protected for the intended use.
(b) Amendments Require DNR Approval: All amendments to this Article must be
submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of the Department of Natural
Resources (DNR) prior to adoption. The Commissioner must approve the
amendment prior to community approval.
(c) Map Revisions Require Ordinance Amendments. The floodplain district
regulations must be amended to incorporate any revisions by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency to the floodplain maps adopted in Section 74-
344 Incorporation of Maps by Reference of this Article.
Sections 74-364 thru 74-440. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VIII
1 of 15
CHAPTER 74. ZONING
ARTICLE VIII. Signs
Section 74-441. Purpose and findings.
The purpose and finding of this article are as follows:
(a) Purpose. This Article is intended to establish a comprehensive and balanced
system of sign control that accommodates the need for a well-maintained, safe,
and attractive community, and the need for effective communications, including
business identification. It is the intent of this article to promote the health, safety
and welfare, aesthetics, and image of the community by regulating signs that are
intended to communicate to the public, and to use signs which meet the City's
goals by authorizing:
(1) Permanent signs which establish a high standard of aesthetics;
(2) Signs which are compatible with their surroundings;
(3) Signs which are designed, constructed, installed and maintained in a
manner that does not adversely impact the public safety or unduly
distract motorists;
(4) Signs which are large enough to convey the intended message;
(5) Signs that are proportioned to the scale of, and are architecturally
compatible with, principal structures;
(6) Permanent signs which give preference to the on-premise owner or
occupant; and
(7) Temporary commercial signs and advertising displays which provide
an opportunity for grand openings and occasional sales events while
restricting signs which create continuous visual clutter and hazards of
public right-of-way intersections.
(b) Findings. The City finds it necessary for the promotion and preservation of the
public health, safety, welfare and aesthetics of the community that the
construction, location, size and maintenance of signs be controlled. Further, the
City finds:
(1) Permanent and temporary signs have a direct impact on and
relationship to the image of the community;
(2) The manner of installation, location and maintenance of signs affects
the public health, safety, welfare and aesthetics of the community;
(3) An opportunity for visible identification of community businesses and
institutions must be established;
(4) The safety of motorists, cyclists, pedestrians and other users of public
streets and property is affected by the number, size, location and
appearance of signs that unduly divert the attention of drivers;
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VIII
2 of 15
(5) Installation of signs suspended from, projecting over, or placed on the
tops of buildings, walks or other structures may constitute a hazard
during periods of high winds and an obstacle to effective firefighting
and other emergency service;
(6) Uncontrolled and unlimited signs adversely impact the image and
aesthetic attractiveness of the community and thereby undermine
economic value and growth;
(7) Uncontrolled and unlimited signs, particularly temporary signs which
are located within or adjacent to public right-of-way or are located at
the driveway/street intersections, result in roadside clutter and
obstruction of views of oncoming traffic. This creates a hazard to
drivers and pedestrians and also adversely impacts a logical flow of
information;
(8) Commercial signs are generally incompatible with residential uses and
should be strictly limited in residential zoning districts; and
(9) The right to express noncommercial opinions in any zoning district
must be protected, subject to reasonable restrictions on size, height,
location and number of signs.
Section 74-442. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section:
Address sign means a sign communicating street address only, whether written or in
numerical form.
Advertising sign means a sign which directs attention to business, commodity, service,
activity, or entertainment not necessarily conducted, sold, or offered upon the premises
where such sign is located.
Awning or canopy means a structure made of cloth, metal, or other material affixed to a
building in such a manner that the structure may be fixed, raised, or retracted to a position
against the building.
Banners and pennants means attention-getting devices which resemble flags and are of
paper, cloth, or material of a plastic-like consistency.
Billboard. See "Advertising sign" or "Off-premises sign."
Building frontage means that building elevation that fronts on a public street where
customer access to the building is available.
Business sign means a sign which directs attention to a business or profession or to a
commodity or service, sold, offered or manufactured, or to an entertainment offered on
the premises where such sign is located.
Campaign sign. See "Political sign."
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VIII
3 of 15
Canopy and Marquee signs means any message or identification which is affixed to a
projection or extension of a building or structure, erected is such a manner as to provide a
shelter or cover over the approach to any entrance of a store, building, or place of
assembly.
Construction sign means a temporary sign erected on the premises on which construction
is taking place, during the period of such construction, indicating the name of the
architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors or similar artisans, or the owner,
financial supporters, sponsors, and similar individuals or firms having a role or interest
with respect to the structure or project.
Directional sign means signs limited to directional messages, principally for pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, such as "one-way," "entrance," "exit."
Electronic variable message sign means signs whose message may be changed at
reasonable intervals by electronic process or remote control and whose only movement is
the periodic changing of information against a solid, colorless background, engineered
for maximum legibility and readability, and having a contact light level and glare
reducing screens.
Facade sign. See "Wall sign."
Flashing sign means a directly or indirectly illuminated sign changing natural or artificial
lights or color effects by any means whatsoever.
Freestanding sign means a sign which is self-supporting and affixed to a frame structure
not attached to a building.
Governmental sign means a sign which is erected by a governmental unit for the purpose
of identifying and directing or guiding traffic.
Ground monument sign means a sign not supported by exposed posts or poles which is
architecturally designed and located directly at grade where the base width dimension is
50 percent or more of the greatest width of the sign.
Hanging sign means a projecting sign whose sign face is attached indirectly to a building
by a supporting arm or hanger from above. Also, known as a shingle sign.
Holiday sign means signs or displays which depict a message pertaining to a National or
State holiday, and no other matter.
Identification sign means a sign giving the nature, logo, trademark, or other identifying
symbol, address, or any combination of the name, symbol, and address of a building,
business, residential development, or establishment on the premises where it is located.
Illuminated sign means a sign lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting either by lights
on or in the sign or directed toward the sign.
Informational-directional sign means any sign giving information to employees, visitors
or delivery vehicles, but containing no advertising, may include name or business, but
must predominantly represent a directional or informational message.
Institutional sign means a sign or bulletin board which identifies the name and
characteristics of a public, semipublic, or private institution, including churches,
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VIII
4 of 15
hospitals, nursing homes, school, and other nonprofit and charitable organizations, on the
site where the sign is located.
Integral sign means a sign with the names of buildings, date of construction,
commemorative tablets and the like, which are of a permanent type of construction and
which are an integral part of the building or structure.
Marquee means a permanent roof-like structure extending from part of the wall of a
building but not supported by the ground, and constructed of durable material such as
metal or glass.
Message center/time and temperature display means a sign having electrically changing
copy which displays current time, temperature, and/or public service announcements.
Multi-tenant center means a group of commercial retail establishments with visual
appearance as a contiguous structure which may or may not be planned, constructed or
managed as a total entity.
Nameplate sign means a sign, located on the premises, giving the name or address, or
both, of the owner or occupant of a building or premises.
Nonconforming sign means any sign lawfully existing on the effective date of the
ordinance from which this article is derived, or amendment thereto, that renders such sign
nonconforming because it does not conform to all the standards and regulations of the
adopted or amended article.
Off-premises sign means a sign advertising a business, commodity, service, or
entertainment conducted, sold, or offered other than upon the premises where the sign is
maintained. The term off-premise sign shall include an outdoor advertising sign
(billboard) on which space is leased or rented by the owner thereof to others for the
purpose of conveying a commercial or noncommercial message.
On-premises sign means a sign which advertises the business, commodity, service, or
entertainment offered upon the same premises as those upon which the sign is built.
Political sign means a temporary sign announcing or supporting political candidates or
issues in connection with any national, state or local election.
Portable sign means a sign which is attached to a trailer or other mobile structure, and
may be moved from place to place.
Projecting sign means a sign, other than a wall sign, which is affixed to a building and
which extends perpendicular from the building wall.
Public sign means a sign of a public, non-commercial nature, to include safety, danger
signs, trespassing signs, traffic signs, signs indicating scenic or historical points of
interest, memorial plaques, and the like, when signs are erected by an order of a public
officer or employee in performance of official duty.
Pylon sign means a freestanding sign supported by a post or posts so that the sign and
supports are finished to grade by encasing the posts in a material consistent with the sign
and where the base width dimension is a minimum of ten percent up to and including 50
percent of the greatest width of the sign. The sign placed on the posts must be a minimum
of ten feet from grade at the base of the sign.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VIII
5 of 15
Readerboard sign means any sign having a message not permanently affixed to a sign
face and the copy is manually changed.
Real estate sign means a sign pertaining to the sale, lease or rental of the premises, or a
portion of the premises, on which the sign is located.
Roof sign means a sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or that is wholly
dependent upon a building for support and that projects above the top walk or edge of a
building with a flat roof, the eave line of the building with a gambrel, gable or hip roof,
or the deck line of a building with a mansard roof.
Roof sign, integral means any sign erected or constructed as an integral or essentially
integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such that no part of the sign extends
vertically above the highest portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is
separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six inches. The term "roof
sign, integral" includes name of building, date of constructions, commemorative tablet,
and the like which are of a permanent type of construction and which are an integral part
of the building.
Rotating sign means a sign which revolves or rotates on its axis by mechanical means.
Sign means a name, identification, description, display, illustration or device which is
affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or land in view
of the general public and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person,
institution, or business.
Sign area means the entire face of a sign, including the advertising surface and any
framing, trim, or molding but not including the supporting structure. Only one side of a
double-face or V-type sign structure shall be used in computing total surface area. When
letters or graphics are mounted directly on a wall in such a way as to be without a frame,
the dimensions of calculating square footage shall be the area four inches beyond the
periphery formed around such letters or graphics in a plane figure bounded by straight
lines connecting the outer most points thereof. Each wall surface utilized to display a
message or to attract attention shall be measured as a sign.
Sign structure means the supports, foundations, uprights, bracing and framework for a
sign, including the sign area.
Storefront means that portion of a building frontage occupied by a single tenant space
having a public entrance within the building frontage. Also, is known as business front.
Surface area of a sign means the entire area within a single, continuous, perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of the actual sign surface. It does not include any structural
elements outside the limits of such sign and not forming an integral part of the display.
Only one side of a double-face or v-type sign structure shall be used in computing total
surface area. Letters or graphics mounted directly on a wall in such a way as to be
without a frame shall be calculated as follows: the square footage shall be the area four
inches beyond the periphery formed around such letters or graphics in a plane figure
bounded by straight lines, connecting the outer most points thereof. Each surface utilized
to display a message(s) to attract attention shall be measured as a sign.
Temporary sign means a sign or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric,
plywood, or other light material and designed or intended to be displayed for a short
period of time.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VIII
6 of 15
Trailer sign means a sign which is attached to a trailer or other mobile structure, and may
be moved from place to place.
Wall sign means a sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a building or structure in
such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for, or forms the
background surface of, the sign and that does not project more than 24 inches from such
building or structure.
Section 74-443. Reserved.
Section 74-444. Compliance with article and permits.
All signs hereafter erected, constructed or maintained, except official traffic and street
signs, shall conform with the provisions of this Article and any other ordinances or
regulations of the City. A sign permit shall be required for each sign, the fee for which
shall be determined by a fee schedule established by resolution of the City Council. The
following information shall be filed with the building inspector prior to issuance of a sign
permit:
(a) A drawing of the proposed sign, or signs, showing dimensions and described
materials, lettering, colors, illumination and support systems.
(b) A drawing of the building face and site plan showing the location of the
proposed sign as necessary.
(c) A cross section of the building face showing how the sign will be attached and
how far it will extend from the building.
(d) A building sign plan for a building with more than one use or business, showing
all signs.
(e) The location and size of existing site signage that will remain on the site.
(f) The name and address of the applicants; the location of the building, structure,
or lot on which the sign is to be erected; the position of the sign in relation to
nearby buildings or structures; the name of the person that will be erecting the
sign; and, the written consent of the owner, if different from the applicant, of
any land on which the sign is to be erected.
Section 74-445. Exempted signs.
(a) The following signs are exempt from the requirements of this Article:
(1) Informational signs not exceeding two square feet in area displayed
strictly for the convenience of the public, including signs which
identify restrooms, waste receptacles, addresses, door bells, mailboxes,
or building entrances.
(2) Memorial plaques, cornerstones, and historical tablets.
(3) Wall or window occupational signs or marquee, awning, or canopy
signs giving the name or profession of a business, provided the sign
does not exceed four square feet in area.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VIII
7 of 15
(4) Public signs, street signs, warning signs, railroad crossing signs, signs
of public service companies for the purpose of safety, or private traffic
directional signs of not over eight square feet.
(5) Temporary political signs, per MS 211B.045, as may be amended from
time to time, except that such signs shall not be located in the public
right-of-way.
(6) Temporary political signs in non state general election years provided
that such signs may only be posted from August 1 until ten (10) days
after the election and that such signed may not be located in the public
right-of-way.
(b) The following signs do not require a permit or permit fee; however, the other
requirements of this article shall apply:
(1) Temporary real estate signs pertaining only to the sale, rental, or
development of the premises upon which they are displayed.
(2) Construction signs designating the architects, lending institutions,
engineers, or contractors when placed on a site where a building is to
be constructed within 90 days.
(3) Temporary window signs.
(4) Other exterior temporary signs of under 12 square feet.
Section 74-446. General regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to all signs permitted in all districts:
(a) Signs shall not be permitted within the public right-of-way or on easements,
except that the City Manager or designee of the City Manager may allow
temporary signs for local community event to be erected upon a site designated
by the City. A banner permit is required for such signs, which will be permitted
for a period not exceeding two (2) weeks. Banners that promote religious,
political, business or personal causes will not permitted.
(b) Signs painted on a building shall be governed by the square footage limitations
specified in the appropriate zoning districts.
(c) No sign, unless otherwise specified, shall project more than 24 inches over a
public sidewalk, or be less than eight feet above the walk or grade.
(d) No sign, except nameplate signs and directional signs as allowed, shall project
more than 24 inches across a required front yard or a required side yard.
(e) No sign shall be placed that resembles any official marker erected by a
governmental agency or displays such words as "Stop" or "Danger."
(f) No sign shall be permitted to obstruct any window, door, fire escape, stairway or
opening intended to provide required light, air, ingress or egress for any building
or structure.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VIII
8 of 15
(g) The owner, lessee or manager of a ground or freestanding sign and the owner of
the land on which such sign is located shall keep grass or weeds and other
growth cut, and debris and rubbish cleaned up and removed from the lot on
which such sign is located.
(h) Billboards, business signs and nameplate signs which may be or hereafter
become rotted, unsafe, or unsightly shall be repaired or removed by the licensee
or owner of the property upon which the sign stands, upon notice of the zoning
administrator or a designee of the zoning administrator or the building inspector
or a designee or the building inspector.
(i) Where a sign is illuminated, the following regulations shall apply:
(1) There shall be no signs having blinking, flashing, or fluttering lights or
which change in brightness or color, except theater marquee signs
which shall be limited to the hours from noon to midnight.
(2) Electronic variable message signs are permitted which provide public
service information or advertise activities conducted on the premises on
which the sign is located.
(3) Illuminated sign lighting shall be confined principally to the sign's
surface and shall not spill onto adjacent properties in a manner which
creates a hazard or is unreasonably annoying.
(j) Awnings and canopies are allowed. All portions of any awning sign shall be at
least eight feet above any public walkway. Fixed awnings may extend over
public property not more than four feet from the face of a supporting building.
Moveable awnings may extend over public property not more than eight feet
from the face of a supporting building, but no portion shall extend nearer than
two feet to the face of the nearest curbline measured horizontally or interfere
with public placements in the right-of-way (trees, benches, planters, etc.). In no
case shall the awning extend over public property greater than two-thirds of the
distance from the property line to the nearest curb in front of the building site.
Awning supports shall not be permitted to extend down into public property.
Signage placed on an awning shall apply to the total allowable building signage
allocation.
(k) All freestanding signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all property
lines and no part of such a sign shall be located in the sight triangle of a corner
lot in violation of subsection 74-485(10).
(l) No directional signs may be placed within 15 feet of the closest edge of a site
entrance.
(m) It shall be unlawful to use a parked vehicle or trailer as a sign in circumvention
of this Article.
Section 74-447. Temporary signs.
Temporary signs are permitted under the following regulations:
(a) Real estate signs.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VIII
9 of 15
(1) One temporary real estate sign is permitted for the sale or lease of an
existing building or vacant lot for each street frontage of the parcel and
must be located on the premises. Such sign shall not exceed 12 square
feet in area in a residential district or 32 square feet in all other districts.
(2) One temporary development real estate sign not exceeding 64 square
feet in area and located on the property shall be permitted on each
public street frontage of a commercial, industrial, or residential
development with ten or more dwelling units for rent or sale. No more
than two directional signs not exceeding 32 square feet in area shall be
permitted on a collector or arterial street leading directly to such
development.
(b) Construction signs. One construction sign not exceeding 32 square feet in area
in all districts shall be permitted on each street frontage of a development site.
Such signs shall be removed within 14 days after the development is
constructed.
(c) Political signs. Political signs, per MS 211B.045, as may be amended from time
to time, except that such signs shall not be located in the public right-of-way.
(d) Window signs. Temporary window signs shall be permitted in a commercial
district and shall not occupy over 40 percent of the window area on any building
frontage.
(e) Beacons, search lights, and portable signs.
(1) The zoning administrator or building inspector may issue permits for
the use of portable signs, revolving beacons, search lights or other
exterior temporary signs for grand openings or special occasions in
commercial and industrial districts, as well as for institutional uses in
residential districts.
(2) Permits for portable signs shall be for a maximum of 30 days and shall
not be issued in conjunction with the same business activity for more
than 90 days in any calendar year. No more than three permits shall be
issued to the same business activity per calendar year.
(3) Search lights and revolving beacons shall not be directed into
residential areas or onto streets and shall be permitted no more than six
days per calendar year for the same business activity.
(4) No permit shall be required for temporary signs of an entirely
noncommercial, celebratory nature. Celebratory signs shall include
banners or other signs celebrating a victory by a local team, a local
festival, or some other nonprofit social event. Such signs, however,
may not be displayed for more than four consecutive weeks and no
business activity or person may display more than two celebratory
signs per year.
(5) As a condition for issuance of a permit, the building inspector may
impose such requirements for materials, manner of construction, and
method of erection of the sign as are reasonably necessary to assure the
health, safety, and welfare of the public.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VIII
10 of 15
(6) A portable sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in gross surface for each
exposed face, nor exceed an aggregate gross surface area of 64 square
feet.
(7) Portable signs shall be located only upon the lots upon which the
unique, special, or limited activities, services, or sales are to occur.
Such signs may be located within required front, rear, or side yards, but
shall not extend over any lot line nor within 15 feet of any point of
vehicular access to a public roadway.
(8) Portable signs shall not project higher than six feet as measured from
the base of the sign or the grade of the nearest adjacent roadway,
whichever is higher.
(9) Any lighted portable sign used for more than 30 days in one year must
have permanent wiring suitable for exterior use and be approved by the
building inspector.
(10) Portable signs used at the City armory, or other public facility, which
advertise and promote community wide sales and events are exempt
from the regulations of subsections (5)b., f., g. and h of this section, but
a permit must be obtained and shall be limited to seven days per event.
Any business so using these facilities may obtain such a permit in
addition to any portable sign permit it obtains for its own business
location.
(f) Banners. Banners are permitted when securely fasted to the building on all four
corners with wall anchors. Ropes are not permitted. The surface area of the
banner shall be included in the total square footage of the allowable signage for
an entire site.
(g) Pennants, and streamers. Pennants and streamers may be used without a permit
but must be well maintained, not frayed, torn, or tattered. Pennants and
streamers may not be attached to city utility poles or be located within any
public right-of-way.
(h) Posters and fliers. Posters and fliers may not be affixed to trees or City utility
poles or be located within any public right-of-way.
(i) Municipal signs. Municipal signs shall be permitted in all districts subject to the
following requirements:
(1) The design shall be approved by the City Council and be owned and
maintained by the City.
(2) Signs shall be set back at least ten feet from any property line and 15
feet from any street right-of-way.
(3) The message portion of a municipal sign shall not exceed 60 square
feet in area and no more than eight square feet may be devoted to the
name or logo of any donor.
(j) Temporary signs. Temporary signs shall be located upon the lot for which the
activity, service, or sales are to occur.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VIII
11 of 15
Section 74-448. Signs in residence districts.
In all residence districts, no sign, business sign, nameplate sign or advertising sign shall
be erected except for the following:
(a) A nameplate sign or professional nameplate sign identifying the owner or
occupant of a building or dwelling unit, provided that the surface area does not
exceed two square feet. This sign may be placed in any front yard and may be
illuminated,
(b) A sign pertaining to the lease or sale of a building or property, provided that
such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in surface area and shall not be
illuminated.
(c) Temporary signs advertising a new subdivision development. Each subdivision
or development shall be allowed the following signs:
(1) One sign not to exceed 64 square feet in surface area, no more than 15
feet in height.
(2) One sign not to exceed 12 square feet in surface area, no more than 15
feet in height.
(3) Directional signs not to exceed two square feet in surface area;
provided that each subdivision shall be limited to one such sign per
major thoroughfare approach to the subdivision or development. No
such sign shall be allowed on minor residential streets.
(d) Temporary non-illuminated signs identifying an engineer architect, contractor,
or product engaged in or used in the construction of a building, provided that
such signs shall not exceed 12 square feet each in surface area and are not more
than 15 feet in height; and provided that such signs are removed prior to
occupancy of the building.
(e) One identification sign, not to exceed 32 square feet in area, for the following
uses: church, school, university or college, sanitarium, club, library, apartment
building and/or complex or similar uses. Such signs shall be solely for the
purpose of displaying the name of the institution or apartment building and/or
complex and its activities or services. It may be illuminated, but not flashing. A
second sign may be permitted if located at a primary entrance on a major
thoroughfare.
(f) Directional signs not to exceed four square feet in surface area for the following
uses: church, school, university or college, hospital, sanitarium, club, library or
similar use, provided that each shall be limited to one such sign per major
thoroughfare approach. No such sign shall be allowed on minor residential
streets.
(g) One nameplate sign for a dwelling group of five or more units, not exceeding
five square feet in surface area. Such signs may indicate the names and
addresses of the buildings or it may be a directory for occupants.
(h) Directional signs in any parking area necessary for the orderly movement of
traffic, provided that such sign shall not be used as advertising space and shall
not be illuminated.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VIII
12 of 15
Section 74-449. B-1 Highway Business District.
(a) Business signs and nameplate signs are permitted in a B-1 district subject to the
following regulations:
(1) One identification sign, not to exceed 32 square feet in area, for private
educational institutions, community centers, rest homes, nursing
homes, and dental offices. It may be illuminated, but non-flashing. A
second sign may be permitted if located at a primary entrance on a
major thoroughfare.
(2) For business and professional office buildings, a business sign not
exceeding 40 square feet in surface area or four percent of wall area
upon which it is placed, whichever is greater, and indicating only the
name and address of the building, occupant or management, may be
displayed. For corner lots, two such signs, one facing each street, shall
be permitted but may be combined to have one sign not to exceed 60
square feet.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions in subsection (a)(2) of this section,
business signs for multi-tenant centers shall be regulated as follows:
a. A multi-tenant center will be allowed a freestanding
nameplate sign not exceeding 60 square feet in surface area.
b. The Planning Commission may recognize separate sign plans
for multi-tenant buildings which will supercede the ordinance.
The sign plans which have been approved by the Planning
Commission will have the effect of a sign ordinance for
specific property. The procedure for approval of sign plans
that exceeds the limits of this Code shall be that of a variance
described in section 74-35.
(4) Notwithstanding the provisions in subsection (a)(2) of this section,
business signs for single-tenant conditional or permitted uses shall be
limited to 200 square feet in area, including all signs, with not more
than 150 square feet of signage attached to the building and not more
than 60 square feet of ground sign. Businesses which have frontage on
two arterial streets may have two pylon signs but may not exceed 200
square feet of total signage.
(b) In the B-1 highway business district, no sign shall project higher than 25 feet
above average grade at the building line or the height of the building, whichever
is greater. Integral roof signs are permitted in the B-1 district.
(c) All signs and signposts must be placed at a minimum of five feet setback from
the property line in the B-1 highway business district.
Section 74-450. B-2 Shopping Center Business District.
(a) Business and nameplate signs are permitted in B-2 shopping center business
districts, subject to the following regulations:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VIII
13 of 15
(1) Each shopping center shall be permitted two freestanding signs not
more than 200 square feet each in surface area. No part of either sign
shall be closer than 30 feet from a street right-of-way nor 60 feet from a
side lot line.
(2) Business nameplate signs shall be limited to flat wall signs which shall
not extend more than 18 inches from the face of the building; except
that a sign may be placed on the roof of a covered walk or marquee in a
building complex, provided it does not extend above the roof or parapet
line of the building. Each nameplate sign shall not exceed the sum of
three square feet for each lineal foot of frontage.
(b) Billboards shall not be erected within a developed, integrated shopping center
property in the B-2 shopping center business district.
(c) In the B-2 shopping center business district, no sign shall project higher than the
height of the corresponding business structure
Section 74-451. B-3 General Business District.
(a) In the B-3 general business district, business signs, and nameplate signs are
permitted, subject to the following regulations:
(1) The total surface area of all business signs on a lot shall not exceed the
sum of four square feet per lineal foot of lot frontage. Business
nameplates shall not exceed the sum of three square feet for each lineal
foot of lot frontage.
(2) In the case of corner lots, the average length of all sides of the lot with
frontage shall be used to calculate the permitted total surface area. In
addition, the surface area of business signs on any one side of a lot shall
not exceed the sum of four square feet per lineal foot of the lot frontage
on that side. Business nameplates shall not exceed the sum of three
square feet for each lineal foot of lot frontage.
(3) No single business sign surface shall exceed 200 square feet in area,
nor shall two or more smaller signs be so arranged and integrated as to
create a surface area in excess of 200 square feet.
(b) No sign in the B-3 general business district shall project higher than 25 feet
above average grade at the building line or above the height of the building,
whichever is greater.
(c) No rooftop signs in the shall be permitted in the B-3 general business district.
Integral roof signs are permitted in the B-3 district.
(d) One hanging sign shall be permitted per storefront in the B-3 general business
district and shall be limited to 4½ square feet per side. The hanging sign and
decorative supporting arm shall not project more than two feet from the
building, and the lowest point of a hanging sign must be no less than eight feet
above the sidewalk or ground. Hanging signs will not be included when
calculating the total sign area allowed on a property.
Section 74-452. B-4 Limited Commercial District.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VIII
14 of 15
(a) Each establishment or enterprise in the B-4 limited commercial district may
have wall signs and projecting signs on each wall, provided that the aggregated
area of such signs does not exceed 40 square feet or four percent of the wall area
on which it is placed, whichever is greater.
(b) In a shopping center or multi-tenant building in the B-4 limited commercial
district, each establishment may have a wall sign not exceeding six square feet.
Two or more smaller signs may not be so integrated as to create a sign
exceeding 40 square feet.
(c) Freestanding signs are allowed for projects containing more than one building
and which are located on sites of one acre or more in the B-4 limited
commercial district. These signs shall not exceed 60 square feet.
(d) Ground-mounted or freestanding business signs which consolidate all tenants
are allowed in the B-4 limited commercial district. These signs shall not exceed
40 square feet and shall not exceed eight feet above grade at sign location. The
minimum front yard setback from street right-of-way lines shall be 15 feet.
Businesses on corner lots in the B-4 limited commercial district may have two
such signs or combine allowed signage to one structure which may not exceed
60 square feet.
(e) Each establishment may have one freestanding sign with a maximum area of 40
square feet. These signs shall not extend more than eight feet above ground level
and must maintain a minimum front yard setback from the street right-of-way of
15 feet. In the event an establishment abuts two or more streets which are at
least collector or arterial in character, one such freestanding sign may be erected
along each street.
Section 74-453. M-1 Light Industrial District.
(a) Business signs and nameplate signs are permitted within M-1 light industrial
districts, subject to the following regulations:
(1) The total surface area of all business signs on a lot shall not exceed the
sum of two square feet per lineal foot of frontage. No single business
sign surface shall exceed four percent of the wall area upon which the
sign is placed or 100 square feet, whichever is less. In the case of
corner lots, the side with the least frontage shall be used to calculate
permitted area. Signs shall be professionally constructed of materials
that are compatible with the exterior materials of the corresponding
building structure.
(2) Each business site shall be permitted one monument sign not over 60
square feet in surface area. No part of such sign shall be closer than ten
feet from a street right-of-way. Monument signs shall be constructed of
materials that are of the same durability or similar to the exterior
materials of the corresponding business structure. Facilities in this
district that are governed by the covenants for the Anoka Enterprise
Park (AEP) must obtain approval of the sign from the Anoka Enterprise
Park Architectural Review Board prior to City issuance of a building
permit to construct such sign.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE VIII
15 of 15
(3) Each business shall be permitted one directional sign on major
thoroughfare approaches not to exceed eight feet in height and shall not
exceed two square feet in area.
(4) On-site directional signage shall not exceed six feet in height and shall
not be more than four square feet in area.
(b) Billboards and other outdoor advertising signs shall not be a permitted use in
M-1 light industrial districts.
(c) No sign shall project above the permitted building height in the M-1 light
industrial districts. Integral roof signs are permitted in the M-1 light industrial
district.
Section 74-454. M-2 Industrial District.
(a) Within M-2 industrial district, business signs, nameplate signs, and advertising
signs (billboards) are permitted, subject to the following regulations:
(1) The total surface area of all business signs on a lot shall not exceed
three square feet for each lineal foot of lot frontage. In the case of
corner lots, the side with the least frontage shall be used to calculate
permitted area. No single business sign surface area shall exceed 200
square feet in area, nor shall two or more smaller signs be so arranged
and integrated as to create a surface area in excess of 200 square feet.
(2) Each business site shall be permitted one monument or pylon sign not
to exceed 80 square feet in area. No part of such sign shall be closer
than ten feet from a street right-of-way.
(b) The height and illumination sign provisions of the M-1 light industrial district
shall apply in the M-2 general industrial district.
(c) Advertising signs (billboards) shall be permitted subject to the following
regulations:
(1) Advertising signs are prohibited within 200 feet of all public parks or
residential structures.
(2) No advertising sign shall be closer than 50 feet to any property line or
right-of-way line.
(3) No advertising sign shall be erected closer than 1,000 feet to another
such sign on the same side of the street.
(4) Advertising signs shall not exceed 300 square feet in area nor 35 feet in
height as measured perpendicularly from the height of the highest point
of the sign structure to the grade level directly below the sign. Existing
grade may not be altered for the purpose of increasing sign height.
Sections 74-455--74-480. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 1
Page 1 of 11
ARTICLE IX. Supplemental Regulations
DIVISION 1. Generally
Section 74-481. Accessory Uses.
The following accessory uses, in addition to those specified elsewhere in this chapter,
shall be permitted in any residential district, if the accessory uses do not alter the
character of the premises in respect to their use for the purposes permitted in the district:
(a) The operation of necessary facilities and equipment in connection with schools,
colleges, universities, hospitals and other institutions permitted in the district.
(b) Recreation, refreshment and service buildings in public parks and playgrounds.
Section 74-482. Accessory Buildings.
(a) Any accessory building in excess of 200 square feet must meet minimal
requirements of the State Building Code.
(b) In case an accessory building is attached to the main building, it shall be made
structurally part of the main building and shall comply in all respects with the
requirements of this chapter applicable to the main building.
(c) An accessory building, unless attached to and made a part of the main building,
shall not be closer than five (5) feet to the main building, except as otherwise
provided in this section.
(d) A detached accessory building shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height for a
building with a shed or flat roof, eighteen (18) feet in height for a gable, hip,
gambrel, mansard, arch or round roof, or the height of the principal building,
whichever is less.
(e) The wall height of a detached accessory building shall not exceed twelve (12)
feet.
(f) A detached accessory building shall not be located in any required front yard or
within five (5) feet of any side or rear lot line.
(g) In any residential zoning district the style, color, and facing material of a garage
shall be compatible with the principal building. No garage shall have a facing
material that consists of factory fabricated or pre-engineered steel and/or
finished metal panels or other similar material.
(h) No accessory building in a business or mixed use zoning district shall have a
facing material that consists of metal, aluminum or other similar materials.
(i) In residential districts, temporary accessory buildings and/or containers used for
construction purposes are permitted for a period of up to six (6) months after the
initial issuance of a building permit. Temporary buildings used for this purpose
may be of any material.
Section 74-483. Height Regulations.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 1
Page 2 of 11
(a) Where the average slope of a lot is greater than one foot rise or fall in seven feet
of horizontal distance from the established street elevation at the property line,
one story in addition to the number permitted in the district in which the lot is
situated shall be permitted on the downhill side of any building.
(b) In any district with a height limit of less than 50 feet, public and semipublic
buildings, schools and churches, hospitals and other institutions permitted in the
district may be erected to a height not exceeding 50 feet. The front, rear and side
yards shall be increased one foot for each one foot by which the building
exceeds the height limit established in this chapter for such district.
(c) Height limitations set forth elsewhere in this chapter may be increased by 100
percent when applied to the following:
(1) Monuments.
(2) Flag poles.
(3) Cooling towers.
(4) Elevator penthouses.
(d) Height limitations as set forth elsewhere in this chapter may be increased with
no limitation when applied to the following; provided, that a conditional use
permit is issued to increase height:
(1) Church domes, spires, belfries and roof ridges.
(2) Schools, colleges and university buildings.
(3) Chimneys or smokestacks.
(4) Television and radio broadcasting antennae.
(e) Height limitations set forth in the R-3, R-4, B-2 and B-3 districts may be
increased to six stories or 65 feet of height where the lot is not adjacent to, or
closer than, 200 feet to any lot in any R-F, R-1 or R-2 district, and provided a
conditional use permit is issued for such height increase, as required by this
chapter.
Section 74-484. Area Regulations.
No lot shall be so reduced that the area of the lot or dimensions of the open spaces shall
be smaller than prescribed in this chapter.
Section 74-485. Yard Regulations.
Measurements shall be taken from the nearest point of the wall of the building to the lot
line in question, subject to the following qualifications:
(a) Cornices, canopies or eaves may extend into the required front yard a distance
not exceeding four feet, six inches.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 1
Page 3 of 11
(b) Fire escapes may extend into the required front yard a distance not exceeding
four feet, six inches.
(c) A landing place or uncovered porch may extend into the required front yard a
distance not exceeding six feet, if the landing place or porch has its floor no
higher than the entrance floor of the building. An open railing no higher than
three feet may be placed around such place.
(d) The architectural features enumerated in subsections (1) through (3) of this
section may also extend into any side or rear yard to the same extent, except that
no porch, terrace or outside stairway shall project into the required side yard
distance, and except on existing lots that are 50 feet or less in width, in such
instance, allowable architectural features may project into the required side yard
a distance of two feet.
(e) On double frontage lots, the required front yard shall be provided on both
streets.
(f) In the districts where filling stations are allowed, pumps and pump islands may
be located within a required yard; provided that they are not less than 15 feet
from any street right-of-way lines.
(g) The required minimum side yard for churches shall be 25 feet from any
residence lot line.
(h) The required front yard of a corner lot shall not contain any wall, fence or other
structure, tree, shrub or other growth which may cause danger to traffic on a
street or public road by obscuring the view.
(i) The required front yard of a corner lot shall be unobstructed above a height of
two feet and below a height of seven feet above top of curb line in a triangular
area, two sides of which are the lines running along the sides of the streets or the
curb lines from the point of intersection of the two street lines as extended and a
point 25 feet from such intersection and along each street line the third side of
the triangle being the line between the latter two points. Also, boulevards
between curb lines and right-of-way lines shall be unobstructed above a height
of two feet and below a height of seven feet above the top of the curb line.
(j) In determining the depth of rear yard for any building where the rear yard opens
into the alley, one-half the width of the alley, but not exceeding ten feet, may be
considered a portion of the rear yard, subject to the following qualifications:
(1) The depth of any rear yard shall not be reduced to less than ten feet by
the application of this exception.
(2) If the door of any building or improvement, except a fence, opens
toward an alley, it shall not be erected or established closer than a
distance of 15 feet from the property line.
Section 74-486. Garages.
No single-family or two-family dwelling shall be erected in any zoning district unless a
garage, detached or attached and covering an area of at least 400 square feet, is also
erected in the same parcel at the same time. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 1
Page 4 of 11
by the building inspector until all the work for which the building permit was issued has
been completed.
Section 74-487. Trucks in Residential Districts.
(a) For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
(1) Definitions in Minn. Stat. § 168.002, as amended, shall be adopted by
reference.
(2) Midsize vehicle means any motorized vehicle or trailer more than eight
(8) feet and up to nine (9) feet in height, or more than twenty-two (22)
feet and up to twenty-five (25) feet in length, or more than 12,000
pounds and up to 15,000 pounds gross vehicles weight.
(3) Oversize vehicle means any motorized vehicle or trailer more than nine
(9) feet in height, or more than twenty-five (25) feet in length, or more
than 15,000 pounds gross vehicle weight.
(4) Height is measured from the ground to the highest point on the vehicle
at recommended tire pressure. All accessories, attachments, and
materials carried on the vehicle are considered part of the vehicle.
(5) Length is measured at the longest point of the vehicle or, if the vehicle
is a trailer, the horizontal distance between the front and rear edges of
the trailer bed. All accessories, attachments and materials carried on
the vehicle are considered part of the vehicle.
(b) One (1) midsize vehicle or trailer may be parked or stored on a residential
property in accordance with off-street parking and loading regulations as
regulated by Chapter 74, Article IX, Division 2.
(c) One (1) oversize recreational vehicle/recreational equipment that is owned by
the occupant of the premises may be parked or stored outside in a residence
district in accordance with off-street parking and loading regulations as
regulated by Chapter 74, Article IX, Division 2.
(d) Farm trucks, semi-trailers, special mobile equipment, truck tractors, farm
implements or tractors, trucks carrying or designed to carry explosive or
flammable materials, buses operated for hire or for commercial purposes, and
earth-moving equipment are prohibited from parking in residential zoning
districts, regardless of the length, height or gross vehicle weight.
(e) This section shall not prohibit vehicles or trailers, as described in subsection (b)
through (d) of this section, from short-term parking of vehicles when loading,
unloading, or rendering a service.
(f) No auxiliary motors or engines on any vehicle or equipment shall be allowed to
operate except when actively loading, unloading or performing a service.
(g) The Zoning Administrator or his/her designee may grant an administrative
waiver, in writing, to a resident to allow:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 1
Page 5 of 11
(1) A resident to temporarily park or store an oversized vehicle outside at
their place of residence once per year for a period of up to seven (7)
days.
Section 74-488. Walls, fences, and hedges.
(a) A fence is defined, for the purpose of this section, as any partition, structure,
wall, or gate erected as a divider marker, barrier or enclosure and located along
the boundary, or within the required yard. For the purpose of this section, a
fence shall not include naturally growing shrubs, trees or other foliage.
(b) No fence shall be erected or substantially altered in the city without securing a
permit from the building inspector. All such permits shall be issued upon a
written application which shall set forth the type of fence to be constructed, the
material to be used, height, and exact location of the fence. A fee as determined
by the City Council shall be paid with each application.
(c) Fences, when constructed to enclose any lot or tract of land, shall be located in
such a way that the entire fence shall be on the property of the owner. Posts and
framework shall be placed within the property lines of the owner and the actual
fencing material, such as chain link, lumber, pickets, etc., shall be placed on the
side of the fence which faces the street or adjacent property.
(d) No fence shall be allowed or constructed on street rights-of-way. Fences may,
by permit, be placed on public utility easements so long as the structures do not
interfere in any way with existing underground or over ground utilities. The City
or any utility company have authority to use such easements, shall be not be
liable for repair or replacement of such fences in the event they are moved,
damaged or destroyed by virtue of the lawful use of such easement.
(e) In single and two-family residential districts, no fence may exceed four feet in
height above the ground level, in front of the front line of the residential
structure, along any street or highway right-of-way, or in the front yard as
defined by this chapter. In these two districts, fences along the side lines to the
rear line, including rear lines abutting street or highway right-of-way, may not
exceed six feet in height above the ground level.
(f) The required front yard of a corner lot shall not contain any fence which may
cause danger to traffic on a street or public road, by obscuring driver's view. On
corner lots, no fence shall be permitted within the intersection sight distance
triangle.
(g) Off-street parking and loading zones and landscaped areas for nonresidential and
for multiple-family residential development adjoining one- or two-family
residence districts shall be screened by a minimum of six-foot high fence and/or
a planting buffer screen. Plans of such screen or fence shall be submitted for
approval as part of the site plan review by the Planning Commission and the
City Council. Such plans shall be part of the application for a building permit
and such fence or landscaping shall be installed as part of the initial construction
and be maintained in a sightly condition, compatible with the surrounding area.
(h) Every fence shall be constructed in a workmanlike manner and of substantial
material reasonably suited to the purpose for which the fence is to be used.
Barbed wire is not allowed in any residence district but may be installed in
commercial or industrial districts with approval by the building inspector.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 1
Page 6 of 11
(1) Fence Materials. The following fence materials are allowed in all
residential districts unless otherwise stated in this Chapter.
a Treated wood, cedar, or redwood;
b. Composite including plastic or simulated wood;
c. Decorative brick or stone;
d. Wrote iron or aluminum designed to simulate wrought-iron;
e. Coated or non-coated chain link;
f. Split rail
g. Other materials or fence types as approved by the City.
(i) Every fence shall be maintained in a condition of good repair, and shall not be
allowed to become and remain in a condition which would constitute a public
nuisance or a dangerous condition. The building inspector is authorized to
notify the owner or owners of the condition and allow owner or owners sixty
(60) days in which to repair or demolish the fence.
(j) Fences shall be constructed in conformity with the wind, stress, foundation,
structural and other requirements of the State Building Code when applicable.
Section 74-489. Tree Preservation.
(a) Standards of Preservation During Construction or Grading
(1) Intent. Developments, structures, utilities, and all other site activities
must be designed, installed, and constructed so that the maximum
numbers of trees are preserved on all lots or parcels.
(2) For the purpose of this section, a significant tree shall be defined as any
live, healthy tree measuring eight (8) inches in diameter or greater,
measured at 4.5 feet above the ground.
(3) Tree Preservation Plan Required. To minimize tree loss and to mitigate
tree removal on wooded lots or parcels with trees, a tree preservation
plan must be submitted for approval along with any land disturbance
permit, grading permit, site plan, or plat approval. All site activity
associated with the proposed permit or plat must be in compliance with
the approved tree preservation plan.
(4) Tree Preservation Plan. A registered architect, landscape architect,
forester, or engineer must prepare the tree preservation plan. The plan
must include a scaled drawing or survey including the following
information:
a. A tree inventory indicating the amount, species, location and
condition of all existing significant trees and clumps of nonsignificant
trees within the limits of the proposed activity.
b. Identification of significant trees to be protected, preserved,
undisturbed or to be removed.
c. Location of existing and proposed structures, improvements,
utilities and existing and proposed contours.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 1
Page 7 of 11
d. Protection techniques that will be utilized to minimize
disturbance to all trees remaining on site. Trees must be
protected from direct and indirect root damage and trunk and
crown disturbance. The following preservation standards
apply:
1. Construction activities including parking, material
storage, dirt stockpiling, concrete washout and other
similar activities must be done as to not damage or
destroy a significant tree.
2. Protective fencing must be installed around trees that
are not being removed. Such fences must be at least
four feet high and must consist of polyethylene safety
fencing. Fencing must remain in place until
construction is completed or other landscaping has
been installed and the City Forester has approved the
removal of the fencing.
e. A tree replacement plan indicating size, species, location, and
planting specifications of all street and replacement trees.
(5) Tree Replacement.
a. Each significant tree removed or damaged through
construction or grading, or found to have been damaged
within one (1) year after completion of construction, must be
replaced on-site at a ratio of 1:1 except for:
1. Non Residentially Zoned Property: In no case need
the tree replacement density exceed eight (8) trees
per acre in non-residentially zoned districts.
2. Residential Zoned Property: In no case need the tree
replacement density exceed eight (8) trees per acre on
lots one (1) acre or more or subdivisions that occur
on unplatted land over one (1) acre. On residentially
zoned lots less than one acre, a one to one (1:1)
replacement of all trees will be required for the first
seven (7) trees removed from the lot.
3. Significant trees removed that the City Forester
determines to be undesirable, invasive, or diseased
shall not need to be replaced.
b. Street trees shall not be counted towards the number of
replacement trees required on a site.
c. Replacement trees shall be a minimum 2 1/2 inches in
diameter if deciduous, or six (6) feet in height if coniferous,
measured at 4.5 feet above ground, and shall be a species
similar to those which were destroyed unless otherwise
required by the City Forester. Replacement trees shall be
balled and burlap.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 1
Page 8 of 11
d. Mississippi River Control Corridor/Rum River Corridor. Any
lands within the Mississippi River Control Corridor/Rum
River Corridor shall meet tree replacement/preservation
regulations set forth in Article VI, Division I, Section 74-287
of this chapter.
(6) Tree Replacement Fee. If the developer is unable to replace the
required amount of trees due to physical circumstances unique to the
site, a tree replacement fee in an amount established by the City
Council shall be paid in lieu of tree replacement.
(7) Trees on Public Property. Trees on public property shall be regulated
by Chapter 70, Article IV, Trees On Public Property.
(8) Inspection and Enforcement. Prior to commencement of site grading or
excavation, the site shall be staked and fenced for tree protection per
the approved tree preservation plan. Construction activities shall cease
until compliance with the tree preservation plan has been achieved.
Violations of this section shall be considered a misdemeanor.
Sections 74-490 Metal Roof.
(a) Prefinished metal roofs are permitted in all districts provided:
(1) The metal roof shall not have exposed fasteners, semi-concealed
fasteners, or any fastener system that does not adhere directly to the
support system.
(2) Any metal roof that is not a high-quality commercial thickness/weight
according to the Building Code is prohibited.
(3) Any metal roof that has not been treated with a factory applied colorcoating
system
is prohibited.
(4) Must have a color retention guarantee minimum of 20 years.
(5) There shall be no open ended rivets or seams where the roofline meets the fascia.
(b) Single family homes,
townhomes
and rowhomes
shall be allowed to use
slate, shingle, shake,
tile, or similar design
pre- finished metal
roofs. Standing seam metal roof design is not allowed on single family homes,
townhomes, and rowhomes, with the exception of copper accents or trim.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 1
Page 9 of 11
Section 74-491. Temporary Accessory Buildings.
(a) Definitions.
Temporary accessory building. A building used for a temporary purpose which has a roof
but is without a foundation or footings, is designed to be removable, and is not designed
to be permanently attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utility system.
Such buildings are typically constructed of a canvas or other fabric over a PVC, metal or
wood frame.
(b) One temporary accessory building is permitted on each parcel in all residential districts,
subject to the following standards:
(1) A temporary accessory building permit must be obtained.
(2) The area of the temporary accessory building will be included in the impervious
surface calculations for the property.
(3) The size of the temporary accessory building shall not exceed 12’ x 26’.
(4) The temporary accessory building shall be securely anchored to withstand the
weather and prevent against collapsing.
(5) The temporary accessory building shall be placed in the rear yard, a minimum of
five feet (5’) from either the side or rear lot line. For riparian lots, the temporary
building must be placed on the river side of the property and must meet the
structure setback requirements from the river or placed no closer than that of the
existing primary structure if the primary structure does not meet setback
requirements. In the case of a corner lot, a temporary accessory building may be
located in a side yard.
(6) The temporary accessory building can be placed on the site for a period of no
more than six (6) months per calendar year. In cases where weather prevents
timely removal, one 30-day extension may be granted administratively. Such
extension shall require an extension permit.
(7) The temporary accessory building must be constructed of durable, fire retardant
materials.
(8) The temporary accessory building shall not exceed the height of any other
accessory structures on the site or 15’, whichever is less.
(9) For purposes of this Section, tents and canopies erected for events, weddings,
family gatherings, etc. are not required to get a temporary building permit if
erected for a period of two weeks or less.
(10) All applicable requirements of the State Building Code and the State Fire Code
shall be met.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 1
Page 10 of 11
(11) Materials stored in the temporary accessory building must meet the standards of
the State Fire Code.
(12) The temporary accessory building must remain in good repair throughout the
time it is erected on the site. Frames without a covering are not permitted.
(13) A temporary accessory building erected on a site shall be counted toward the
maximum number of accessory buildings allowed by this Ordinance.
(14) A pre-existing temporary accessory building that existed prior to
August 21, 2015, and that is in compliance with this Section is permitted until
November 1, 2016 and is not subject to Section 74-491(b)(6) until said date, at
which point any pre-existing temporary accessory building must meet all
regulations set forth in this Section. Any temporary accessory building installed
after August 21, 2015 must meet all regulations set forth in this Section.
Section 74-492. Accessory Structure Administrative Site Plan Approval
(a) For the purpose of enforcing this Chapter, an accessory structure site plan approval shall be
required of all persons intending to erect, alter, or place any building or structure that is
otherwise exempt from needing a building permit under MN Statute 1300.0120, Subp. 4,
A.(1) .
(b) The accessory structure site plan review shall be approved by the zoning administrator or their
designee upon a written finding that the proposal meets the requirements of the applicable
zoning district and is in compliance with the relevant ordinance standards.
(c) Administrative site plan approval shall be processed according to the procedures and criteria
set forth in City Code Chapter 74, Section 74-38 (g).
(d) Application materials. The person seeking site plan approval must fill out and submit to the
zoning administrator a completed application. The review fee shall be established by the City
Council and recorded in the Anoka Fee Schedule. The applicant shall submit the following
information as part of the application:
(1) A site plan showing the following information:
a. Location and dimensions of lot lines, buildings, driveways, off-street
parking spaces, sidewalks, patios, and other forms of impervious lot
coverage as determined by the zoning administrator.
b. Distances between buildings.
c. Front, side, and rear lot lines with dimensions.
d. Location of any easements or underground utilities.
e. Other information deemed necessary to determine compliance with
City Code.
(2) A narrative describing how the structure will be used.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 1
Page 11 of 11
(3) A signed statement by the applicant stating that they are aware that Anoka City Code
prohibits residential occupancy and home occupations in accessory structures.
(4) Any other information requested by the zoning administrator in order to allow a
reasonable review of the requested proposal.
Section 74-493. Prohibited Dwelling Units.
No garage, recreational vehicle or trailer, camper, house boat, semi-trailer, tent, shed, storage
container, or other accessory building or temporary structure may be used as a dwelling unit.
Sections 74-494—74-505. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 2
Page 1 of 10
ARTICLE IX. Supplemental Regulations
DIVISION 2. Off-Street Parking and Loading.
Section 74-506. Application of parking and loading regulations.
The regulations and requirements set forth in this division shall apply to all off-street
parking facilities including driveways, parking lots and storage areas, in all zoning
districts of the City unless otherwise exempted in this chapter.
Section 74-507. Site plan drawing necessary.
All applications for a building permit, driveway permit, or certificate of occupancy in all
zoning districts shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale indicating the location
and dimensions of the driveway, off-street parking and loading spaces, and storage areas
and a description of materials to be used in compliance with the requirements set forth in
this chapter. All applications shall be submitted to the Planning Department. The
Planning Department will distribute the application to the appropriate department(s) for
review and will issue the permit.
Section 74-508. Minimum area regulations.
Each parking space shall be the following size or larger based on the angle of parking:
Angle of
Parking
Stall
Width
Stall
Depth to
Curb
Traffic
Flow
Direction
Drive
Lane
Width
45° 9' 22’ One-way 14’
60° 9' 21’ One 16’
75° 9' 21’ One 18’
90° 9' 18’ Two-way 24’
Exceptions may be made for compact vehicle spaces under the following conditions:
(a) The design promotes compact car stall use (e.g. designing all compact stalls at
the entrance of the lot).
(b) All compact car stalls are clearly designated by signage.
(c) No more than 40 percent of all required parking stalls are designated for
compact cars. Each compact parking space shall be no less than eight (8) feet by
eighteen (18) feet.
Section 74-509. Computing requirements.
In computing the number of parking spaces required, the following rules shall govern:
(a) Floor space shall mean the gross floor area of the specific use.
(b) When determining the number of off-street parking spaces, fractional results of
one-half or more shall constitute another space.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 2
Page 2 of 10
(c) The parking space requirement for a use not specifically mentioned in this
article shall be the same as required for a use of similar nature as determined by
the City Planning Commission.
(d) In stadiums, sports arenas, churches, and other places of public assembly in
which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews, or other similar seating
facilities, each 22 inches of such seating facilities shall be counted as one seat
for the purpose of determining requirements.
Section 74-510. Reduction and use of parking and loading space.
When demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City Council that up to ten percent of the
number of parking spaces required by this ordinance would not be needed for the
particular use in question, a reduced number of parking spaces may be approved subject
to the following:
(a) The application for reduction shall be accompanied by supporting data
specifically applying to the particular use in question.
(b) The applicant must also provide each of the following:
(1) A detailed parking plan demonstrating that the parking otherwise
required by this ordinance can be provided on the site within ordinance
design standards; and
(2) A covenant in recordable form, approved as to form and content by the
City attorney, executed by all property owners, which covenant
provides that the owners, heirs, successors and assigns, will not use the
area identified for expansion parking for any use except landscaping or
to cause compliance with the off-street parking requirements of this
chapter.
(c) The City may order installation of previously exempted parking spaces at any
time when, in the City's judgment, conditions indicate the need for such parking,
and the property owner shall comply with such order.
Section 74-511. Fences and planting screens.
Off-street parking and loading areas located in commercial, industrial, and multiplefamily
districts and adjoining residence districts shall be screened by a minimum six-foot
high fence, wall or a planted buffer screen; plans of such screen, fence, or wall shall be
submitted for approval as part of the application for a building permit, and such fence,
wall or landscaping shall be installed as a part of the initial construction.
Section 74-512. Access.
(a) Parking and loading space shall have proper access from a public right-of-way.
(b) The number and width of access drives shall be so located as to minimize traffic
congestion and traffic hazard.
Section 74-513. Location of parking facilities.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 2
Page 3 of 10
All off-street parking facilities required by this ordinance shall be located and restricted
as follows:
(a) Required off-street parking shall be on the same lot under the same ownership as
the principal use being served, or within 200 feet pedestrian travel distance
thereof.
(b) Head-in parking, directly off of and adjacent to a public street, with each stall
having its own direct access to the public street, shall be prohibited, except for
single-family, two-family, townhouses, and quadhome dwellings and public
safety buildings.
(c) The boulevard portion of the street right-of-way shall not be used for parking.
Section 74-514. Parking lots in residential districts.
When in its opinion the best interests of the community will be served thereby, the City
Council may permit, temporarily or permanently, the use of land in a residential district,
other than the single- and two-family residential districts, for a parking lot provided that:
(a) A conditional use permit is issued under article IV, division 3 of this chapter.
(b) The lot is not to be used for sales, storage, repair work or servicing of any kind.
(c) Entrance to and exit from the lot are to be located on the lot.
(d) No advertising sign or material is to be located on the lot.
(e) All parking is to be kept back of the setback building line by barrier unless
otherwise specifically authorized by the City Council.
(f) All lighting is to be arranged so that there will be no glare there from annoying
to the occupants of adjoining property in a residential.
(g) Surfacing of the parking lot is to be smoothly graded, hard surfaced and
adequately drained.
(h) Any other conditions, such as screening, as may be deemed necessary by the
City Council to protect the character of the residential district.
(i) A parking lot may not be constructed for use by single or two family dwellings.
(j) The City Council shall review parking lots in residential districts annually to
determine suitability for continued use.
Section 74-515. Yards.
Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be subject to the front yard, side yard, and
rear yard regulations for the use district in which the parking is located; except that in the
classes of B-1, B-2 business districts and industrial districts, no off-street parking or
loading shall be located within ten feet of any property line that abuts a street right-ofway
or any of the classes of residence districts and; except that in the classes of R-3 and
R-4 residence districts no parking or loading shall be located within five feet of any
property line.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 2
Page 4 of 10
Section 74-516. Combined facilities.
(a) Off-street parking facilities for a combination of mixed buildings, structures or
uses may be provided collectively in any business or industrial district in which
separate parking facilities for each separate building, structure or use would be
required, provided that the total number of spaces provided shall equal the
projected peak hour parking demand of the combined uses, subject to the
following special conditions:
(1) With a conditional use permit as issued under article IV, division 3 of
this chapter.
(2) The owner of the property affected along with the operators of all
businesses to utilize the combined parking facilities shall join in the
permit application.
(3) The proposed parking plan shall realistically project peak use of the
combined facilities based upon the proposed uses, and shall provide
adequate spaces for that peak demand.
(4) All off-street parking facilities shall be located within 200 feet of the
building or use for which the permit is issued.
(5) A properly drawn legal instrument, executed by the parties concerned
for joint use of off-street parking facilities duly approved as to form
and manner of execution by the city attorney, shall be filed with the
City Clerk.
(b) A conditional use permit for combined parking facilities shall restrict the uses of
the affected property to those designated in the permit until and unless the
permit is amended or rescinded. Such a permit may be revoked if parking
demand for the combined uses exceeds the capacity of the combined facilities;
however, the use restrictions of the permit shall remain in effect after such a
revocation until and unless they are specifically removed by council resolution
to that effect.
Section 74-517. Construction and maintenance standards applicable to all driveways.
(a) Definitions.
Driveway. For purposes of this Chapter, “driveway” is defined as the portion of
a lot that is designed to provide vehicular access between a road or alley and a
parking or loading space, including the driveway apron.
(b) A driveway permit shall be required for replacing, constructing, improving,
expanding, resurfacing, or altering driveways, driveway aprons, and parking
areas unless otherwise approved through a site plan process or other city
approval. An application for a driveway permit shall be submitted to the City’s
Planning Department. The Planning Department will route the permit to the
appropriate department(s) for review and will issue the driveway permit.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 2
Page 5 of 10
(c) In all zoning districts, parking areas and driveways shall be paved with asphalt
or concrete and designed to prevent damage to adjacent properties by surface
water runoff and to minimize the amount of paved areas on the site.
The following driveways are exempt from this requirement upon approval of the
City Engineer:
1. Driveways serving a recreational area.
2. Driveways constructed of alternative materials that function similarly
to those listed in this subpart (c) of this section.
3. Storage areas for heavy construction equipment that would damage the
pavement. Such storage areas shall have an approved maintenance and
drainage plan.
(d) The City shall have the right to review and inspect all driveway construction.
(e) Driveways shall have a maximum slope of eight percent (8%) unless otherwise
approved by the City Engineer.
(f) Porous pavers or porous paving systems may be used upon approval of the City
Engineer.
(g) Driveways and parking areas shall comply with the impervious surface and lot
coverage restrictions of the zoning district within which it will be constructed.
Section 74-518. Striping.
Except for single-family, two-family, townhouses, and quadhome dwellings, all paved
parking stalls shall be marked with white or yellow painted lines not less than four inches
wide and shall be properly maintained.
Section 74-519. Lighting.
(a) All off-street parking areas for residential uses of 12 or more spaces and all offstreet
parking for commercial, industrial, institutional, and public uses shall be
equipped with operable lighting designed to illuminate the entire surface of the
parking area.
(b) Any lighting used to illuminate the off-street parking area shall be arranged as to
reflect the light away from any adjacent properties, streets, or highways.
Section 74-520. Reserved.
Section 74-521. Reserved.
Section 74-522. Required number of off-street parking spaces.
Off-street parking areas of sufficient size to provide parking for patrons, customers,
suppliers, visitors and employees shall be provided on the premises of each use. The
minimum number of required off-street parking spaces for the following uses shall be as
follows in all zoning districts in the City, except the B-3, central business district:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 2
Page 6 of 10
(a) Automobile service station: Four parking spaces plus two parking spaces for
each service stall; such parking spaces shall be in addition to parking space
required for gas pump areas.
(b) Automobile sales, trailer sales, marine and boat sales, implement sales, garden
supply stores, building materials sale, and auto repair: Six parking spaces plus
one parking space for each 500 square feet of floor area over 1,000 square feet.
(c) Assembly or exhibition hall, auditorium, theater, or sports arena: One parking
space for each four seats, based upon design capacity.
(d) Banks: At least one parking space for each 400 square feet of floor area.
(e) Bed and breakfasts: One space per guest room and two for management.
(f) Boardinghouse and lodging house: At least three parking spaces plus one
parking space for each three persons for whom living accommodations are
provided.
(g) Bowling alleys: At least seven parking spaces for each alley, plus such
additional spaces as may be required for affiliated uses.
(h) Car wash: In addition to required stacking spaces:
(1) Automatic drive-through, service: Ten spaces or one space for each
employee on the maximum shift, whichever is greater.
(2) Self service: A minimum of two spaces.
(3) Service station with car wash: No additional to that required for the
station.
(i) Churches: One parking space for each four seats, based on the design capacity of
the main seating area.
(j) Convalescent or nursing homes: One parking space for each four beds for which
accommodations are offered.
(k) Drive-in establishment and convenience food: One parking space for each 150
square feet of gross floor area, but not less than 15 spaces.
(l) Furniture and appliance stores, stores for repair of household equipment or
furniture: At least one parking space for each 600 square feet of floor area.
(m) Golf course, golf clubhouse, country club, swimming club, tennis club, public
swimming pool: Twenty spaces plus one space for each 300 square feet of floor
area in the principal structure.
(n) Hospitals: One parking space for each three hospital beds, plus one parking
space for each employee on the major shift.
(o) Miniature golf course, archery range or golf driving range: Ten parking spaces.
(p) Motels, hotels: One space per each rental unit plus one space for each ten units
and one additional space for each employee on any shift.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 2
Page 7 of 10
(q) Municipal administration buildings, community centers, public libraries,
museums, art galleries, post offices, and other municipal service buildings: Ten
parking spaces plus one parking space for each 500 square feet of floor area in
the principal structure.
(r) Private clubs and lodges: One parking space for each 2½ seats.
(s) Professional offices, medical, dental clinics and animal hospitals: One space for
each 200 square feet of floor area but not less than three spaces per lot design.
(t) Residential uses:
(1) Single-family dwelling: Enclosed garage of at least four hundred forty
(440) square feet.
(2) Two-family and quadhomes: A minimum of two (2) spaces per
dwelling unit and an enclosed garage of at least four hundred (400)
square feet.
(3) Townhouse: A minimum of two (2) spaces per unit. At least one (1)
space per unit shall consist of an enclosed garage.
(4) Multiple dwelling: A minimum of two and one-half (2½) spaces per
unit. At least one (1) space per unit shall consist of an enclosed garage.
(u) Restaurants, cafes, private clubs serving food and/or drinks, bars, or nightclubs:
One space for each 40 square feet of gross floor area of dining and bar area and
one additional space for each 80 square feet of kitchen area.
(v) Shopping center: In a B-2 shopping center district where several business uses
are grouped together according to a general development plan, off-street
automobile parking shall be provided in a ratio of not less than four spaces per
1,000 square feet of gross leasable area, and separate off-street space shall be
provided for loading and unloading.
(x) Sporting and health clubs: One space per 100 square feet of building area, plus
six spaces per tennis/racquetball or other type of court.
(y) Supermarkets, discount houses, mail order outlets, retail stores, and other stores
with high customer volume: At least one parking space for each 250 square feet
of floor area.
(z) Other uses: Other uses not specifically mentioned in this section shall be
determined on an individual basis by the City Council. Factors to be considered
in such determination shall include (without limitation) size of building, type of
use, number of employees, expected volume and turnover of customer traffic,
and expected frequency and number of delivery or service vehicles.
Section 74-523. Parking regulations for single-family and two-family residences.
(a) No owner or tenant of a single- or two-family residential property shall allow
any motor vehicle or trailer to be parked on such property except on a driveway,
within a garage, or on the side or rear yard area of the property as specifically
permitted in subsection (c) of this section. Every motor vehicle or trailer that is
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 2
Page 8 of 10
parked outside of a garage shall display license plates with current registration
tabs. No vehicle or trailer shall be permitted to park in the sight triangle which is
required to be unobstructed by subsection 74-485(9). With regard to outdoor
parking, storage or repair of trucks and equipment, see Section 74-487.
(b) No more than four motor vehicles, trailers, or combination thereof shall be
permitted to park on the driveway or driveways of any single-family residential
property on more than two days within any one-week period, except when a
waiver is obtained as provided in this chapter. Upon application to the zoning
administrator, waiver of this restriction may be obtained for a reasonable,
necessary, and discreet time period, not exceeding two weeks for social guest
parking, and not exceeding 90 days for the demolition of an existing garage and
construction of a new one.
(c) Two motor vehicles or trailers per dwelling unit may be parked on the side or
rear yard of the property, off the driveway, at least five feet from the property
line, provided that the area around and under the motor vehicle or trailer is
maintained in a neat and orderly manner, including keeping weeds and grass in
the area mowed to a height of six inches or less.
(d) For purpose of this section, the term "motor vehicle" includes any self-propelled
vehicle which is required to be registered with the State Department of Motor
Vehicles and to display a license plate in order to be legally operated on public
streets; it does not include snowmobiles; the term "trailer" includes any vehicle
designed for transporting property or passengers on its own structure and for
being drawn by a self-propelled vehicle.
(e) The property owner's or tenants' first violation of this section shall be a
misdemeanor. The principal occupant of the property shall be responsible for
compliance with subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section. The records of the
City Water Department indicating the person responsible for payment of City
water bills shall constitute prima facie evidence of the identity of the principal
occupant. Such evidence may be rebutted by a lease or a property owner's sworn
statement which indicates the primary occupant of the property. The owner of
the property, according to the records of the tax assessor, shall be responsible for
compliance with subsection (d) of this section.
Section 74-524. Driveways and parking areas standards for single-family and two-family residences.
(a) The driveway outside the public right of way will be limited to the width of the
garage plus ten feet (10’) or a maximum of twenty feet (20’) in width if no
garage exists or the maximum width of the garage for three (3) stall garages or
larger.
(b) Driveways and parking areas shall be at least five feet (5’) from property lines,
except for the access to the street. Additional driveway and parking area
setbacks may be required from public right-of-ways and to avoid encroaching
into existing public drainage and utility easements.
(c) Parking areas shall not be constructed in the front yard, except driveways.
(d) The minimum driveway width in the public right-of-way shall be 12 feet (12’).
The maximum driveway width in the public right-of-way shall be the width of
the main garage plus four feet (4’), not to exceed twenty-four feet (24’). The
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 2
Page 9 of 10
curb returns (radii or tapers) for the access to the street (driveway apron) are not
included in the driveway width.
(e) Shared driveways are allowed, provided that property owners sharing the
driveway have easements and agreements relating to cross access and
maintenance. Shared driveways do not need to meet the five foot (5’) setback
required under Section 74-524(b) along the shared property line.
(f) Driveway aprons shall be concrete, at least six inches (6”) thick, at least three
(3’) feet wide from the back of the street curb. Where a sidewalk exists, the
driveway apron shall be constructed through the sidewalk. The sidewalk portion
of the driveway shall meet ADA cross grade standards.
(g) The driveway entrance at the gutter line shall be constructed in a manner that
does not interfere with street drainage.
(h) Driveways and parking areas shall be concrete, bituminous, brick pavers or
similar hard surface. Concrete driveways and parking areas shall be a minimum
of four inches (4”) thick installed over a prepared, approved subgrade.
Bituminous driveways and parking areas shall be a minimum of two inches (2”)
thick over , installed over a Class V base a minimum of four inches (4”) thick
upon a prepared, approved subgrade.
(i) Driveways on improved single- or two-family residential properties existing on
or before October 1, 1992, shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, brick, or
similar surface at such time as a building permit may be taken for either
remodeling or improvements costing more than $5,000.00.
(j) New driveways shall be constructed in such a way as to provide positive storm
water drainage from the garage or parking area to the street or an approved
storm water drainage area.
(k) Each single family or duplex property is entitled to only one (1) driveway from a
public right of way unless it can be demonstrated that an additional driveway
improves traffic safety/circulation for the general public.
Section 74-525. Standards for driveway and parking areas serving multi-family, commercial,
industrial and non-residential uses.
(a) Driveway location is subject to review for traffic impacts such as volume
generated, adjacency to stop signs, speed of cross traffic, noise, and the
applicant’s operating schedule.
(b) Where a lot abuts two (2) or more public right of ways, the City may require
access to be from the least traveled right of way if such least traveled right of
way does not direct traffic through a residential area.
(c) In cases where a driveway serves a property not within the City of Anoka
jurisdictional boundary, a joint powers agreement for maintenance and
improvements to the roadway must be in place before permission will be granted
to allow access to the adjacent street. The City of Anoka reserves the right to
reject or restrict any proposal to allow access from City of Anoka streets to
multifamily, commercial, industrial or non-residential uses located in adjoining
cities.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 2
Page 10 of 10
(d) The operator of a principal building or use shall maintain parking and loading
areas, driveways, and yard areas in a neat and orderly manner.
(e) Curbing.
1. All driveway areas and parking areas which are accessory to multiple
family, commercial, industrial or non-residential developments shall be
bounded by concrete curb and gutter of a minimum of B612 design.
Unless a driveway is constructed providing access from the street to an
accessory structure. Higher designs (i.e. wider gutters) may be
necessitated by design circumstances.
2. Driveway areas and parking areas which are accessory to low-use
development shall be bounded by concrete curb and gutter a minimum
of B612 design on the portions of such areas which front on a public
right of way extending to the wall. Concrete curb and gutter or curb
only may be required of any other driving or parking areas where
necessary for drainage or traffic control. “Low-use” development shall
include churches, park, private clubs and similar uses.
3. The City may exempt curbing where the City has approved future
expansion of the parking lot or to enhance traffic circulation where
there are adjoining lots.
4. Poured-in-place concrete traffic safety islands may be required to
maintain a safe and orderly flow of traffic within the parking lot.
5. Curb cuts and ramps for the handicapped shall be installed as required
by state law.
(f) Driveways and parking areas shall be concrete, bituminous, brick pavers or
similar hard surface material. Section design shall be submitted for review and
approval of the City Engineer. Driveway approach panels shall be a minimum of
eight inches (8”) thick to the right of way line.
(g) The maximum width of a driveway shall be thirty feet (30’).
(h) Driveway aprons shall be concrete, at least eight inches (8”) thick, at least three
(3) feet wide from the back of the street curb of the street. Where a sidewalk
exists, the driveway apron shall be constructed through the sidewalk. The
sidewalk shall be replaced with at least an eight inches (8”) thick concrete
portion of the driveway and shall meet ADA cross grade standards.
Sections 74-526—74-540. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 3
Page 1 of 9
ARTICLE IX. Supplemental Regulations
DIVISION 3. Telecommunication Towers
Section 74-541. Purpose and Intent.
(a) In order to accommodate the communication needs of residents and businesses
while protecting the public health and safety, and general welfare of the
community, the City Council finds the regulations of this division are necessary
to:
(1) Facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunication services to the
residents and businesses of the City;
(2) Minimize adverse visual effects of wireless telecommunication towers
through careful design and siting standards;
(3) Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from wireless
telecommunication tower failure through structural standards and
setback requirements; and
(4) Maximize the use of existing and approved towers, buildings and
structures to accommodate new wireless telecommunication antennae
to reduce the number of towers needed to serve the community.
(b) This division is intended to regulate wireless telecommunication towers and is
not intended to regulate other types of towers such as audio and television
antennae, residential satellite dishes or public safety transmitters.
Section 74-542. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this division, shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
Antenna means any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or transmitting
electromagnetic waves, including, but not limited to, directional antennae, such as panels,
microwave dishes, and satellite dishes, and omni-directional antennae, such as whip
antennae.
Co-location means the placement of wireless telecommunication antennae by two or
more service providers on a tower, building or structure.
Federal Communications Commission means the federal administrative agency, or lawful
successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications carriers, services and
providers on a national level.
Guyed tower means a tower that is supported, in whole or in part, by wires and ground
anchors.
Lattice or self-supported tower means a tower, erected on the ground, which consists of
metal crossed strips or bars to support antennae and related equipment.
Monopole tower means a single, self-supported pole-type tower, tapering from the base to
the top and supporting a fixture designed to hold one or more antennae.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 3
Page 2 of 9
Multi-user tower means a tower to which is attached the antennae of more than one
service provider or governmental entity.
Protected residential property means any property within the City that meets both of the
following requirements:
(a) The property is zoned R-1, R-2, or R-3 and the property may or may not also
have a planned unit development overlay classification; and
(b) The property is designated on the comprehensive plan land use map as lowdensity
residential, medium-density residential or high-density residential.
Public utility means persons, corporations, or governments supplying gas, electric,
transportation, water, or landline telephone service to the general public. For the purpose
of this Article, wireless telecommunication service facilities shall not be considered
public utility uses and are defined separately.
Service provider means any individual or entity which provides wireless
telecommunication services.
Single-user tower means a tower to which is attached only the antennae of a single
service provider, although the tower may be designed to accommodate the antennae of
multiple users as required in this division.
Tower means any ground or roof mounted pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof,
including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts intended primarily for the
purpose of mounting or supporting an antenna, or antenna for wireless
telecommunication purposes which is taller than 15 feet, including roof antennas.
Wireless telecommunication services means licensed commercial wireless
telecommunications services including cellular, personal communication services (PCS),
specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR),
paging, and similar services that are marketed to the general public.
Section 74-543. Effect of division on existing towers and antennae.
Antennae and towers in existence as of November 7, 1997, which do not conform or
comply with this division are subject to the following provisions:
(a) Towers may continue in use for the purpose now used and as now existing but
may not be replaced or structurally altered without complying in all respects
with this division.
(b) If such towers are hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or cause
whatsoever, the tower may be repaired and restored to its former use, location
and physical dimensions upon obtaining a building permit therefore, but without
otherwise complying with this section; however, if the cost of repairing the
tower to its former use, physical dimensions, and location would be 50 percent
or more of the cost of a new tower of like kind and quality, then the tower may
not be repaired or restored except in full compliance with this division.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 3
Page 3 of 9
Section 74-544. Application, building permits, fees and inspections.
(a) Application. Applications for approval to construct towers shall include
information as required in section 74-37. In addition to the information required
elsewhere in this division, applications for towers shall include the following
supplemental information:
(1) A report from a licensed professional engineer which:
a. Describes the tower height and design including a cross
section and elevation;
b. Documents the height above grade for all potential mounting
positions for co-located antennae and the minimum separation
distances between antennae;
c. Describes the tower's capacity, including the number and type
of antennae it can accommodate;
d. Documents what steps the applicant will take to avoid
interference with established public safety
telecommunications;
e. Includes an engineer's stamp and registration number; and
f. Includes other information necessary to evaluate the
application.
(2) A letter of intent committing the tower owner and the owner's
successors to allow the shared use of the tower if an additional user
agrees in writing to meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared
use.
(3) Applications requiring conditional use permits shall be subject to the
requirements set forth in section article IV, division 3 of this chapter,
excepting section 74-114.
(b) Building permits.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct in place, place or
re-erect, replace, or repair any tower without first making application to
the building inspections department and securing a building permit
therefore as provided in subsection (b) of this section.
(2) The applicant shall provide at the time of application sufficient
information to indicate that construction, installation, and maintenance
of the antenna and tower will not create a safety hazard or damage to
the property of other persons.
(3) Only one tower shall exist at any one time on any one parcel of
protected residential property as defined in section 74-542.
(4) Building permits are not required for:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 3
Page 4 of 9
a. Adjustment or replacement of the elements of an antenna array
affixed to a tower or antenna, provided that replacement does
not reduce the safety factor.
b. Antennae and/or towers erected temporarily for test purposes,
for emergency communication, or for broadcast remote pickup
operations. Temporary antennae shall be removed within
72 hours following installation.
(5) Before issuance of a building permit, the following information shall be
submitted by the applicant:
a. Proof that the proposed tower complies with regulations
administered by the Federal Aviation Administration; and
b. A report from a State licensed professional engineer which
demonstrates the tower's compliance with structural and
electrical standards.
(6) Any City cost of testing or verification of compliance shall be borne by
the applicant.
(c) Fee. The fee to be paid is that prescribed by the Council.
(d) Inspections. Towers may be inspected by an official of the building department
to determine compliance with original construction standards. Deviation from
original construction for which a permit is obtained constitutes a violation of this
section. Notice of violations will be sent by registered mail to the owner of the
tower and the property upon which it is located who will have 30 days from the
date notification is issued to make repairs. Upon completion of the repairs, the
owner shall notify the building inspector that the repairs have been made.
Section 74-545. Permitted and conditionally permitted towers.
(a) Permitted towers. The following towers are permitted in all zoning districts if in
compliance with the performance standards set forth in section 74-546:
(1) Towers located in the following locations:
a. Church sites, when camouflaged as steeples or bell towers;
b. Park sites, when compatible with the nature of the park; and
c. Government, school, utility and institutional sites.
(2) Wall or roof-mounted towers.
(b) Tower as conditional use. Towers, other than those listed in subsection (a) of
this section, are permitted in all zoning districts upon issuance of a conditional
use permit as follows: Commercial towers other than those listed in subsection
(a)(2) of this section.
(c) Conditional use permit standards. The following standards apply to a
conditional use permit for a tower:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 3
Page 5 of 9
(1) The site must comply with the performance standards set forth in
section 74-546.
(2) No employees of the service providers shall be located on the site on a
permanent basis. Employees may be on the site to perform periodic
maintenance.
(3) If the proposed tower is located in a residential district, documentation
must be included in the application that demonstrates that the tower
cannot reasonably be located in a commercial or industrial district.
(4) Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum amount
practicable.
(5) No outdoor storage shall be permitted on the tower site.
(d) Towers located within boundaries to blend in with surrounding environment.
Towers located within the boundaries of the Mississippi River Corridor Critical
Overlay District shall be designed and constructed to blend in with the
surrounding environment.
Section 74-546. Performance Standards.
All towers erected within the City must conform to the applicable performance standards
contained in this section.
(a) Co-location requirements. All towers erected, constructed or located with the
City shall comply with the following requirements: A proposal for a new tower
shall not be approved unless the City Council finds that the wireless
telecommunications equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be
accommodated on an existing or approved tower, building or structure within a
one mile radius except that the radius shall be one-half mile for towers between
80 and 120 feet and one quarter mile for towers under 80 feet of the proposed
tower due to one or more of the following reasons:
(1) The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the
existing or approved tower or building, as documented by a licensed
professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be
reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate planned or
equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost.
(2) The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting
the usability of other existing equipment at the tower or building as
documented by a licensed professional engineer and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
(3) Existing or approved towers or buildings within the radius cannot
accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function
reasonably as documented by a licensed professional engineer.
(4) Other unforeseen reasons that make it infeasible to locate the planned
telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or
building.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 3
Page 6 of 9
(b) Construction and maintenance of towers.
(1) Tower and antenna design requirements. Proposed or modified towers
and antennae shall meet the following design requirements:
a. Towers and antennae shall be designed to blend into the
surrounding environment through the use of color and
camouflaging architectural treatment, except in instances
where the color is dictated by federal or state authorities such
as the Federal Aviation Administration.
b. Towers shall be of a monopole design unless the City Council
determines that an alternative design would better blend in to
the surrounding environment. Lattice tower designs may be
allowed to facilitate co-location.
c. The use of guyed towers is prohibited. Towers must be selfsupporting
without the use of wires, cables, beams or other
designs.
d. The base of the tower shall occupy no more than 500 square
feet and the top of the tower shall be no larger than the base.
(2) Tower construction requirements. All antennae and towers erected,
constructed, or located within the City, and all wiring therefore, shall
comply with the following requirements:
a. All applicable provisions of this division must be met.
b. Towers shall be certified by a State licensed professional
engineer to conform to current structural standards and wind
loading requirements of the state building code and the
Electronics Industry Association.
c. With the exception of necessary electric and telephone service
and connection lines approved by the City, no part of any
antenna or tower nor any lines, cable, equipment or wires or
braces in connection with either shall at any time extend
across or over any part of the right-of-way, public street,
highway, sidewalk, or property line.
d. Towers and associated antennae shall be designed to conform
with accepted electrical engineering methods and practices
and to comply with the provisions of the National Electrical
Code.
e. All signal and remote control conductors of low energy
extending substantially horizontally above the ground between
a tower or antenna and a structure, or between towers, shall be
at least eight feet above the ground at all points, unless buried
underground.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 3
Page 7 of 9
f. Every tower affixed to the ground shall be protected to
discourage climbing of the tower by unauthorized persons.
g. All towers shall be constructed to conform with the
requirements of the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration.
h. Antennae and towers shall not be erected on any protected
residential property as defined in section 74-542 in violation
of the following restrictions:
1. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Article, the
required setback for antennae and towers not rigidly
attached to a building shall be equal to the height of
the antenna and tower. Those antennae and towers
rigidly attached to a building, and whose base is on
the ground, may exceed this required setback by the
amount equal to the distance from the point of
attachment to the ground.
2. No tower shall be in excess of a height equal to the
distance from the base of the antenna and tower to
the nearest overhead electrical power line, which
serves more than one dwelling or place of business,
less five feet.
3. Metal towers shall be constructed of, or treated with,
corrosive resistant material. Wood poles shall be
impregnated with rot resistant substances.
(c) Tower setbacks. Towers shall conform with each of the following minimum
setback requirements:
(1) Towers shall be set back from any property line a minimum distance
equal to the height of the tower.
(2) A tower's setback may be reduced or its location in relation to a public
street varied, at the sole discretion of the City Council, to allow
integration of a tower into an existing or proposed structure such as a
church steeple, light standard, power line support device or similar
structure.
(3) The minimum distance to a residential structure shall be the height of
the tower plus ten feet.
(4) The tower or associated accessory structures shall not encroach upon
any public easements.
(5) The setback shall be measured from a point on the base of the tower
located nearest the property line to the actual property line.
(d) Height. The height of towers shall be determined by measuring the vertical
distance from the tower's point of contact with the ground or rooftop to the
highest point of the tower, including all antennae or other attachments. When
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 3
Page 8 of 9
towers are mounted upon other structures, the combined height of the structure
and tower must meet the height restrictions of section 74-483.
(e) Height limitations for towers.
(1) In all protected residential property, towers, including antennae and
other attachments, shall not exceed a maximum height of 60 feet.
(2) In residential property other than protected residential property, the
maximum height of any tower, including antennae and other
attachments, shall not exceed 90 feet.
(3) In all nonresidential zoning districts, the maximum height of any tower,
including antennae and other attachments, shall not exceed 150 feet.
(4) Exceptions to the provisions of this subsection shall be as follows:
Multi-user towers may exceed the height limitations of section 74-483
by up to 20 feet.
(5) Noncompliance of characteristics of antennae and towers created by
application of this division shall not in any manner limit the legal use
of the property, nor in any manner limit the repair, maintenance, or
reconstruction of a noncomplying antenna or tower; however, in no
instance shall the degree on noncompliance be increased except as
otherwise permitted by this Code.
(f) Tower lighting. Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not
display strobe lights unless such lighting is specifically required by the Federal
Aviation Administration or other federal or state authority for a particular tower.
When incorporated into the approved design of the tower, light fixtures used to
illuminate ball fields, parking lots, or similar areas may be attached to the tower.
(g) Signs and advertising. The use of any portion of a tower for signs other than
warning or equipment information signs is prohibited.
(h) Accessory utility buildings. All utility buildings and accessory structures to a
tower shall be architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding
environment and shall meet the minimum setback requirements of the
underlying zoning district. Ground mounted equipment shall be screened from
view by suitable vegetation, except where a design of nonvegetative screening
better reflects and complements the architectural character of the surrounding
neighborhood.
(i) Abandoned or unused towers or portions of towers. Abandoned or unused
towers or portions of towers shall be removed as follows:
(1) All abandoned or unused towers and associated facilities shall be
removed within 12 months of the cessation of operations at the site
unless a time extension is approved by the zoning administrator. In the
event that a tower is not removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at a site, the tower and associated facilities may be removed
by the City and the costs of removal assessed against the property.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 3
Page 9 of 9
(2) Unused portions of towers above a manufactured connection shall be
removed within six months of the time of antenna relocation. The
replacement of portions of a tower previously removed shall require the
issuance of a new conditional use permit.
(j) Antennae mounted on roofs, walls, and existing structures. The placement of
wireless telecommunication antennae on roofs, walls, and existing towers may
be approved by the zoning administrator, provided the antennae meet the
requirements of this division, after submittal of (i) a final site and building plan
as specified in section 74-37, and (ii) a report prepared by a licensed
professional engineer indicating the existing structure or tower's suitability to
accept the antenna and the proposed method of affixing the antenna to the
structure. Complete details of all fixtures and couplings, and the precise point of
attachment shall be indicated. Accessory equipment for wall or roof mounted
antennae must be located within the principal building or, if located on the
rooftop, must be enclosed.
(k) Interference with public safety telecommunications. No new or existing
telecommunications service shall interfere with public safety
telecommunications. The City may require that all applications for new service
be accompanied by an intermodulation study which provides a technical
evaluation of existing and proposed transmissions and indicates all potential
interference problems. Before the introduction of new service or changes in
existing service, telecommunication providers shall notify the City at least ten
calendar days in advance of such changes and allow the City to monitor
interference levels during the testing process.
(l) Lights and other attachments. No antenna or tower on any protected residential
property as defined in section 74-542 shall have affixed or attached to it in any
way, except during time of repair or installation, any lights, reflectors, flashers,
or other illuminating device, except as required by the Federal Aviation Agency
or the Federal Communications Commission, nor shall any tower have
constructed thereon, or attached hereto, in any way, any platform, catwalk,
crow's nest, or like structure, except during periods of construction or repair.
(m) Security fencing. Towers shall be provided with security fencing to prevent
unauthorized entry.
Sections 74-547—74-559. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 4
Page 1 of 7
ARTICLE IX. Supplemental Regulations
DIVISION 4. Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS)
Section 74-560. Purpose and Intent.
This ordinance is established to regulate the installation and operation of Wind Energy
Conversion Systems (WECS) within the City of Anoka, not otherwise subject to siting
and oversight by the State of Minnesota under the Minnesota Power Plan Siting Act
(Minn. Stat. § 116C.51 – 116C.697).
Section 74-561. Definitions.
The definitions in Section 74-2 of this Chapter apply herein. In addition, the following
definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this division.
Commercial WECS means a WECS of 40 kilowatts or more in total name plate
generating capacity.
Fall zone means the area defined as the furthest distance from the tower base, in which a
tower will collapse in the event of a structural failure.
Feeder Line means any power line that carries electrical power from one or more wind
turbines or individual transformers associated with individual wind turbines to the point
of interconnection with the electric power grid; in the case on interconnection with the
high voltage transmission systems, the point of interconnection shall be the substation
serving the WECS.
Meteorological Tower means towers that are erected primarily to measure wind speed
and directions plus other data relevant to siting a WECS. For purposes of this ordinance,
meteorological towers does not mean towers and equipment used by airports, the
Minnesota Department of Transportation, or other similar applications to monitor
weather conditions.
Nacelle means the part of the WECS that contains the key components of the wind
turbine, including the gearbox, yaw system and the electrical generator.
Non-commercial WECS means a WECS of less than 40 kilowatts (KW) in total name
plate generating capacity.
Rotor diameter means the diameter of the circle described by the moving rotor blades.
Substations means any electrical facility designed to convert electricity produced by a
wind turbine to a voltage greater than 35,000 volts (35 kilovolts) for interconnection with
high voltage transmission lines.
Total height means the highest point, above ground level, reached by a rotor tip or any
other part of the WECS.
Tower means vertical structures that support the electrical generator, rotor blades, or
meteorological equipment.
Tower height means the total height of the WECS exclusive of the rotor blades.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 4
Page 2 of 7
Transmission line means those electrical power lines that carry voltages of at least 69,000
volts (69 kilovolts) and are primarily used to carry electric energy over medium to long
distances rather than directly interconnecting and supplying electric energy to retail
customers.
WECS – Wind Energy Conversion System means an electrical generating facility
comprised of one or more wind turbines and accessory facilities, including, but not
limited to, power lines, transformers, substations and meteorological towers that operate
by converting the kinetic energy of wind into electrical energy. The energy may be used
on-site or may be distributed into the electrical grid.
Wind turbine means any piece of electrical generating equipment that converts the kinetic
energy of blowing wind into electrical energy through the use of airfoils or similar
devices to capture the wind.
Section 74-562. Application, process, building permits, fees and inspections.
(a) Application. Applications for approval to construct a commercial WECS shall
include the following information:
(1) The name(s) of the project applicant.
(2) The name(s) of the property owner.
(3) The legal description and address of the project.
(4) A description of the project including the type, name plate generating
capacity, tower height, rotor diameter, and means of interconnecting
with the electrical grid.
(5) The proposed site layout, including the location of property lines, wind
turbines, electrical wires, interconnection points with the electrical grid,
and all related accessory structures. The site layout shall include
distances and shall be drawn to scale.
(6) An engineer’s certification.
(7) Documentation of land ownership or legal control of the property.
(8) The latitude and longitude of individual wind turbines.
(9) A USGS topographical map, or map with similar date, of the property
and surrounding area, including any other WECS within ten (10) rotor
diameters of the proposed WECS.
(10) The location of wetlands, scenic and natural areas within 1,320 feet of
the proposed WECS.
(11) An acoustical analysis.
(12) A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Permit Application, if
applicable.
(13) The location of all known Communication Towers within two (2) miles
of the proposed WECS.
(14) A decommissioning plan.
(15) A description of potential impacts on nearby WECS and wind
resources on adjacent properties.
(b) Process. WECS applications will be processed under the procedures for
applicable approvals contained within this Chapter.
(c) Building permits.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct in place, place or
re-erect, replace, or repair any tower without first making application to
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 4
Page 3 of 7
the building inspections department and securing a building permit
therefore as required in this sub-section.
(2) The applicant shall provide, at the time of application, sufficient
information to indicate that construction, installation and maintenance
of the WECS will not create a safety hazard or damage to the property
of other persons.
(3) Only one tower shall exist at any one time on any one property.
(4) Before issuance of a building permit, the following information shall be
submitted by the applicant:
a. Proof that the proposed tower complies with regulations
administered by the Federal Aviation Administration; and
b. A report from a State-licensed professional engineer that
demonstrates the WECS compliance with structural and
electrical standards.
c. A conditional use permit approved by the City.
(5) Any city cost of testing or verification of compliance shall be borne by
the applicant.
(d) Fees. The fee(s) to be paid shall be as prescribed by the City Council.
(e) Inspections. WECS may be inspected by an official of the building department
to determine compliance with original construction standards. Deviation from
the original construction for which a permit is obtained constitutes a violation of
this section. Notice of violations will be sent by registered mail to the owner of
the WECS and the property owner upon which the WECS is located who will
have thirty (30) days from the date notification is issued to make repairs. Upon
completion of the repairs, the owner/applicant shall notify the building official
that the repairs have been made.
Section 74-563. Conditionally Permitted and Prohibited WECS.
(a) Conditionally permitted WECS. Commercial WECS are permitted in all zoning
districts, except as noted in subpart (b) below, upon issuance of a conditional
use permit, and are subject to the provisions of Section 74-552.
(b) Prohibited WECS. All WECS are prohibited in the environmental overlay
districts – Mississippi National River Recreation Area (MNRRA) and the Rum
River Wild and Scenic District and are prohibited in the flood plain or shoreland
areas. Non-commercial WECS are prohibited in all areas of the City.
Section 74-564. Performance Standards.
(a) Safety Design Standards.
(1) Engineering Certification. For all WECS, the manufacture’s engineer
or another qualified engineer shall certify that the turbine, foundation
and tower design of the WECS is within accepted professional
standards, given local soil and climate conditions.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 4
Page 4 of 7
(2) Clearance. Commercial WECS: Rotor blades must maintain at least
fifteen (15) feet of clearance between their lowest point and the ground.
(3) Rotor Safety. Each commercial WECS shall be equipped with both a
manual and an automatic braking device capable of stopping the WECS
operation in high winds (40 miles or greater).
(4) Lightning Protection. Each commercial WECS shall be grounded to
protect against natural lightning strikes in conformance with the
National Electrical Code.
(5) Warnings. For all commercial WECS, a sign or signs shall be posted on
the tower, transformer and substation warning of high voltage, stating
the manufacturer’s name and listing an emergency phone number.
(b) Standards.
(1) Total Height.
a. Commercial WECS shall have a total height of no more than
one hundred fifty (150) feet.
b. WECS shall not be roof-mounted.
(2) Tower Configuration.
a. All towers that are part of a WECS, except meteorological
towers, shall be installed with a tubular, monopole type tower.
b. Meteorological towers may be guyed.
(3) Setbacks.
Commercial
WECS
Meteorological Towers
Property lines 1.1 times the
total height plus
ten feet
The lesser of the fall zone,
as certified by a
professional engineer plus
10 feet or 1.1 times the
total height
Neighboring
Dwellings
1.25 times the
total height
The lesser of the fall zone,
as certified by a
professional engineer plus
10 feet or 1.1 times the
total height
Road Rightsof-
Way
The lesser of the
fall zone, as
certified by a
professional
engineer plus 10
feet or 1.1 times
the total height
The lesser of the fall zone,
as certified by a
professional engineer plus
10 feet or 1.1 times the
total height
Other Rights- The lesser of the The lesser of the fall zone,
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 4
Page 5 of 7
Commercial
WECS
Meteorological Towers
of-Way fall zone, as
certified by a
professional
engineer, plus
ten feet or 1.1
times the total
height.
as certified by a
professional engineer plus
ten feet or 1.1 times the
total height
Other
Structures
The lesser of the
fall zone, as
certified by a
professional
engineer plus ten
feet or 1.1 times
the total height
The lesser of the fall zone,
as certified by a
professional engineer plus
ten feet or 1.1 times the
total height
Other Existing
WECS
To be
determined
through the CUP
review based on
relative size of
existing and
proposed WECS,
alignment of
WECS relative
to predominant
winds,
topography,
extent of wake
interference on
existing WECS,
and other
setbacks
required; may be
waived for
multiple turbine
projects.
(4) Color and Finish.
a. All wind turbines and towers that are part of a WECS shall be
white, grey or another non-reflective, non-obtrusive color.
b. Finishes shall be matte or non-reflective.
(5) Lighting. Lighting, including lighting intensity and frequency of strobe,
shall adhere to but not exceed requirements established by Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) permits and regulations. No additional
lighting, other than building security lighting, is permitted.
(6) WECS sites. The design of the buildings and related structures shall, to
the extent reasonably possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening
and landscaping that will blend the WECS to the natural setting and
then existing environment.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 4
Page 6 of 7
(7) Signs. The manufacturer’s or owner’s company name and/or logo may
be placed on the nacelle of the WECS. No other signage, other than as
required in this Division, shall be permitted.
(8) Feeder Lines. All communications and feeder lines, equal or less than
34.5 kilovolts in capacity, installed as part of a WECS shall be buried
where reasonably feasible. Feeder lines installed as part of a WECS
shall not be considered an essential service.
(9) Waste Disposal. All solid and hazardous wastes, including but not
limited to crates, packaging materials, damaged or worn parts, as well
as used oils and lubricants, shall be removed from the site promptly and
disposed of in accordance with all applicable local, state and federal
regulations.
(10) Maximum Vibration and Shadow Flicker.
a. No WECS shall produce vibrations through the ground that
are humanly perceptible beyond the property on which it is
located.
b. Commercial WECS shall include a shadow flicker analysis
study with the application submission.
(11) Discontinuation and Decommissioning. A WECS shall be considered a
discontinued use after one (1) year without energy production, unless a
plan is developed and submitted to the City outlining the steps and
schedule for returning the WECS to service.
a. All WECS and accessory buildings shall be removed in their
entirety including all footings and foundations within ninety
(90) days of the discontinuation of use.
b. Each Commercial WECS shall submit a Decommissioning
Plan outlining the anticipated means and cost of removing the
WECS at the end of its serviceable life or upon becoming a
discontinued use. The plan shall also identify the financial
resources that will be available to pay for the
decommissioning and removal of the WECS and accessory
facilities. The Decommissioning Plan shall be submitted as
part of the conditional use permit application.
c. The City may require financial surety in the form of a cash
escrow, irrevocable letter of credit or performance bond to
ensure that decommissioning of the Commercial WECS is
completed.
Section 74-565. Other Applicable Standards.
(a) Noise. All WECS shall comply with the MPCA and City of Anoka standards for
noise.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 4
Page 7 of 7
(b) Electrical Codes and Standards. All WECS and accessory equipment and
facilities shall comply with the National Electrical Code and other applicable
standards.
(c) Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). All WECS shall comply with FAA
standards and permit requirements.
(d) Building Code. All WECS shall comply with the Minnesota Building Code as
adopted by the State of Minnesota and the City of Anoka.
(e) Interference.
(1) The applicant shall minimize or mitigate interference with
electromagnetic communications, such as radio, telephone,
microwaves, or television signals caused by WECS.
(2) The applicant shall notify all communication tower operators within
two (2) miles of the proposed WECS location upon application to the
City for a permit to operate a WECS.
(3) No WECS shall be constructed so as to interfere with public safety
telecommunications.
Section 74-566 – 74-600. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 5
Page 1 of 7
CHAPTER 74. ZONING
ARTICLE IX. Supplemental Regulations.
DIVISION 5. Traffic Analysis
Section 74-575. Purpose and Intent.
(a) Purpose and Intent. Streets and thoroughfares are an essential component of the City’s
street network and are necessary to accommodate the community’s health, safety and
welfare and ability to grow and develop in a logical and financially responsible manner.
The purpose and intent of this Division is to ensure that:
(1) Traffic volumes and traffic operations generated by platting, re-platting,
rezoning, a change in use, or new development will not prevent the City from
implementing its then planned street system improvements.
(2) Traffic volumes and traffic operations generated by platting, re-platting,
rezoning, a change in use, or new development will not negatively impact a
community’s existing street system and traffic operations or create safety
hazards.
(3) New plats, land that is rezoned, or re-platted, a change in use, and new
development will be served and supported by an adequate network of streets and
thoroughfares. Necessary and desirable public rights-of-way for off-site,
abutting and internal thoroughfares will be provided to support new
development at the time of platting, rezoning, re-platting or development of the
land.
(4) Driveway accessibility nor on-site circulation plans for a change in use or new
development will not significantly impact or create safety of traffic operations
on adjacent public streets, or prevent the safe and convenient circulation of onsite
traffic operations.
(5) Parking demand generated by platting, rezoning, re-platting, a change in use, or
new development will be adequately addressed on-site or in off-street, satellite
parking facilities.
(6) Opportunities to reduce travel demand and/or efficiently manage travel demand
will be investigated and implemented.
Section 74-576. Definitions.
Change in Use. A change of use is a use which may create traffic patterns that substantially differ
from traffic patterns of the existing approved use of a building or land, based upon a consideration
of the following:
(a) Modifications to existing improvements or construction of new improvements.
(b) The hours, days or seasons during which a use operates.
(c) The number of employees or staff, occupants, visitors or other persons using the land,
building or structures.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 5
Page 2 of 7
(d) The number of employees or staff, occupants, visitors or other persons using the land,
building, or structures.
(e) The amount and/or nature of traffic, parking, shipping or deliveries associated with the
use on the premises.
Daily trip or trips per day. The number of trips a particular land use will generate within a 24 hour
period.
Intersection Level of Service (LOS). A measure of delay vehicles will experience at intersections.
Peak Hour trips. The number of trips typically between 7 a.m. and 9 a.m. (AM peak) and between
4 p.m. and 6 p.m. (PM peak) Monday through Friday, or as may be specifically attributable to the
building or land based upon its particular use.
Roadway LOS. A measure of the volume of traffic a roadway carries in relation to its capacity to
carry traffic.
Traffic Impact Assessment (TIA). A study that looks at current and forecast future conditions after
a development is implemented. TIA’s focus on trip generation at the site, trip distributions to/from
the site, traffic assignments to/from driveways serving the site, the street adjacent to the site,
driveways (number and locations) serving the site, traffic control mechanisms at the site
driveways, driveway and adjacent intersection levels of service (LOS), on-site circulation, and
parking generation, supply and configuration.
Traffic Impact Study (TIS). A more rigorous study that takes into account everything in the TIA
and additional conditions that are distant from the site and that occur under specific development
scenarios: Existing Conditions, Forecast No-Build Conditions, and Forecast Build Conditions.
Section 74-577. Items to address in Traffic Analysis. Based upon a review of the TIA or TIS and other applicant
supplied data, the Planning Commission and City Council will determine if the proposed rezoning,
platting, re-platting, change of use, or new development plans meets the following:
(a) The plans are consistent with the City’s then existing planned improvements and will not
prevent the City from moving forward with its plans.
(b) The plans will not create safety hazards.
(c) The plans provide for adequate accessibility between the development and the street
system and an adequate on-site circulation system.
(d) The plans provide for adequate on-site parking (or satellite parking) as determined by
applicable City Ordinance.
(e) The plans include reasonable approaches to reduce and/or manage travel demand.
Section 74-578. Traffic Impact Assessment (TIA). A Traffic Impact Assessment is required if a rezoning,
re-platting, or change of use generates between 50 and 99 peak hour trips per peak direction
(entering or leaving), above the trip generation for the use as it existed prior to the rezoning, replatting,
change of use, determined by the greater of the ten existing actual trip generation or the
latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) trip generation for the existing use,
or another method approved by the City; or upon the platting, re-platting or new development of
vacant land if the proposed use is expected to generate between 500 and 749 daily trips.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 5
Page 3 of 7
Section 74-579. Traffic Impact Statement. A Traffic Impact Statement (TIS) is required to be submitted, rather
than a TIA, if the criteria of Section 74-258 is met and the peak hour trips per peak direction
exceed 100 or the daily trips exceed 749.
Section 74-580. Elements of Traffic Analysis. Table 74-1 lists the major elements to include in each of the two
types of traffic analysis.
TABLE 74- 1
ELEMENTS TO INCLUDE IN TRAFFIC ANALYSIS
Element Included in Traffic Analysis Traffic Impact
Assessment
Traffic Impact
Study
Impact Analysis
Describe Characteristics and Features of Adjacent Street (street and
intersection geometrics; traffic control devices; turn, general traffic,
parking, and bike lanes; sight distance; pedestrian accommodations
and facilities, etc.)
? ?
Pre-Development Existing Conditions along Adjacent Street and at
Adjacent Intersections (LOS)
? ?
Opposing Driveway Locations and Conditions (LOS) ? ?
Study Area and Future Road Summary ?
Understanding of the Development Program and Operations for the
Proposed Development
? ?
Trip Generation for On-Site Uses ? ?
Trip Distribution Analysis ? ?
Background Traffic Growth ?
Traffic Assignments to Driveways and Adjacent Intersections ? ?
Site Driveway Intersection Capacity (LOS) ? ?
Future Conditions at Nearby Intersections (LOS) ?
Mitigation Identifications and Analysis ? ?
Site Analysis
Number and Location of Driveways Serving the Site ? ?
Access Design and Queuing ? ?
On-Site Circulation ? ?
Other Analysis
Planned and Programmed Roadway Improvements ?
Planned and Approved Developments in Vicinity of Site ?
Traffic Impacts of Planned/Approved Developments ?
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 5
Page 4 of 7
Traffic Analysis (LOS and Queue Analysis) at Distant Intersections
and Roadway Segments for:
Future No-Build Condition ?
Future Build Condition ?
Travel Demand Management and Transportation System
Management Techniques (as appropriate)
?
Section 74-581. Required information. The following information must be included in Traffic Impact
Assessment.
(a) Background.
(1) Name of development and developer.
(2) Development location and zoning classification.
(3) Description of study area – setting and features of the area where the
development is proposed to be implemented.
(4) Description of proposed development program and operations (design year and
opening of development, peak days of week and peak times of day, typical
vehicle occupancy, describe patrons as appropriate).
(5) Identify other factors that will bear on traffic (planned/programmed roadway
improvements, other developments proposed/approved for the area, etc.
(b) Site Plan.
(1) Identify use (residential, commercial, office, institutional, industrial, etc.).
(2) A detailed description of the proposed use.
(3) A detailed description of the site.
(4) A description of the building footprint and how it sits on the proposed site.
(5) The number and location of access driveways, clearly labeled, and assessed
relative to City Code.
(6) Parking supply, assessed relative to City Code.
(c) Traffic Assessment Results. The traffic study must include:
(1) Assessment of Existing Conditions:
- Identify and describe adjacent intersections serving the site.
- Quantify peak hour turning movements.
- LOS at adjacent intersections.
(2) Assessment of Post Development Conditions:
- Trip generation, trip distribution, traffic assignment to driveways and
adjacent intersections.
- LOS at driveways and at adjacent intersections.
(d) Summary of Findings.
(1) Observations.
(2) Conclusions.
(3) Recommendations.
Section 74-582. The following items include information to be included for specific elements of the Traffic Impact
Study.
(a) Background.
(1) Name of development and developer.
(2) Development location and zoning classification.
(3) Description of study area – setting and features of the area where the
development is proposed to be implemented.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 5
Page 5 of 7
(4) Description of proposed program and operations (design year and opening of
development, peak days of week and peak times of day, typical vehicle
occupancy, describe patrons as appropriate).
(5) Identify other factors that will bear on traffic (planned/programmed roadway
improvements, other developments proposed/approved for the area, etc.
(b) Site Plan.
(1) Identify use (residential, commercial, office, institutional, industrial, etc.).
(2) A detailed description of the proposed use.
(3) A detailed description of the site.
(4) A description of the building footprint and how it sits on the proposed site.
(5) The number and location of access driveways, clearly labeled, and assessed
relative to City Code.
(6) Parking supply, assessed relative to City Code.
(7) Describe bicycle parking supply, assess relative to City Code.
(c) Existing Traffic Conditions.
(1) Define the existing condition.
(2) Show existing two-way daily traffic and comment on roadway LOS.
(3) Identify existing driveways adjacent to or opposing proposed driveways,
describe any traffic operations issues, recommend and test mitigations to address
issues.
(4) Show existing peak hour turning movements at intersections that will be
affected by the proposed development.
(5) Conduct existing intersection capacity analysis and report existing LOS and
storage issues.
(6) Recommend and test mitigation measures to ensure either minimum LOS D
under existing conditions and adequate storage, or a LOS no worse than the
lowest LOS for the affected intersection at any time.
(d) Future No-Build Conditions.
(1) Define the No-Build condition including any significant changes in land use in
the vicinity of the proposed development and any changes in the roadway
network that will have taken place since the existing condition.
(2) Conduct analysis to forecast No-Build, two-way daily traffic and comment on
roadway LOS.
(3) Re-visit existing driveways adjacent to or opposing proposed driveways,
describe traffic operations issues relative to forecast two-way daily traffic,
recommend and test mitigations to address issues.
(4) Conduct analysis to forecast No-Build peak hour intersection turning
movements.
(5) Conduct forecast No-Build intersection capacity analysis and report LOS and
storage issues.
(6) Recommend and test mitigation measures to ensure either minimum LOS D or a
LOS no worse than the lowest LOS for the affected intersection at any time
under forecast No-Build conditions and adequate storage.
(e) Future Build Conditions.
(1) Define the Build condition.
(2) Conduct analysis to quantify the effects of the Build condition:
a. Trip generation analysis using the latest edition of Trip Generation,
Institute of Transportation Engineers. Account for pass-by and
multi-purpose trips. Provide credit for transit trips.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 5
Page 6 of 7
b. Trip distribution analysis using an approved approach (population
within Traffic Analysis Zones, households within Traffic Analysis
Zones,two-way daily traffic on roadways serving the site, etc.).
c. Assign traffic to driveways and roadways serving the site in accordance
with outcomes from the trip distribution analysis.
(3) Re-visit existing driveways adjacent to or opposing proposed driveways,
describe traffic operations issues relative to forecast two-way daily traffic,
recommend and test mitigations to address issues.
(4) Add assigned traffic to No-Build condition intersection turning movements to
derive Build condition intersection turning movements.
(5) Conduct forecast Build intersection capacity analysis and report LOS and
storage issues.
(6) Recommend and test mitigation measures to ensure either minimum LOS D or a
LOS no worse than the lowest LOS for the affected intersection at any time
under forecast No-Build conditions and adequate storage.
(7) Quantify forecast Build condition, two-way daily traffic and comment on LOS.
(f) On-site circulation.
(1) Describe location of access routes, relative to driveways and front and rear doors
of building(s).
(2) Describe locations of dumpsters and delivery/loading docks and how service
vehicles will circulate and maneuver.
(g) On-site parking.
(1) Describe proposed parking supply.
(2) Assessed proposed supply against required parking supply in City Code.
(3) Describe rationalization if there is a discrepancy between proposed and required
supplies. Quantify parking generation (demand) per the latest edition of the
ITE, ULI, or other recognized source.
(4) Recommend an approach to resolve discrepancy.
(5) Describe proposed bicycle parking supply relative to City Code and how
bicycles will circulate to bike parking racks.
(h) Travel Demand Management. Identify, as appropriate, approaches to reduce travel
demand and how they might be applied.
(1) Transit.
(2) Carpool.
(3) Employer sponsored vanpool.
(4) Employer incentives.
(5) Bike and bike facilities.
(6) Pedestrian and pedestrian facilities.
(i) Summary of Findings.
(1) Observations.
(2) Conclusions.
(3) Recommendations.
Section 74-583. Exception to the regulations within this Division.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE IX; DIVISION 5
Page 7 of 7
(a) The City recognizes that there is very little that can be done to expand capacity and
improve traffic operations beyond incremental operational changes (adjusting signals,
adding operational control devices, i.e., stop signs) in the downtown. As such, a change
of use for existing properties in the downtown area where parking is not required does
not require a traffic analysis. Staff may perform a traffic trip generation analysis to
monitor the need for improvements in the street system. New development in this area,
however, must meet the standards of this Division to the extent applicable.
Section 74-584 – 74-600. Reserved.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE X
1 of 6
CHAPTER 74. ZONING
ARTICLE X. Non-conforming Uses and Dimensionally Substandard Structures
Section 74-601. General.
(a) Purpose and Intent. The purpose and the intent of this section is to:
(1) Recognize the existence of nonconforming uses of land, nonconforming
buildings, structures and signs, and nonconforming lots of record.
(2) Discourage the enlargement, expansion, intensification or extension of any
nonconforming use of land or nonconforming building, structure or sign or any
increase in the impact of a nonconforming use of land of nonconforming
building, structure or sign on adjacent properties.
(3) Regulate the repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance and improvement of
nonconforming uses and nonconforming structures, buildings and signs to
prevent and abate nuisances and to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(4) Encourage the elimination of nonconforming uses, buildings, structures, and
signs or reduce their impact on adjacent properties.
(5) Eventually bring all nonconforming uses of land and nonconforming buildings,
structures and signs into conformity.
(b) Definitions. For purposes of this Section, the following words and phrases shall have the
meaning ascribed to them by this Section or Section 74.2 of this Chapter. Words not
defined shall have the plain meaning generally ascribed to them.
Expansion, enlargement or intensification means (1) any increase in a dimension, size,
area, volume, or height; (2) any increase in the area of use; (3) any placement of a
structure or building or part thereof where none existed before; (4) any improvement that
would allow the land to be more intensely developed; (5) any move of operations to a
new location on the property; or (6) any increase in intensity of use based on a review of
the original nature, function or purpose of the nonconforming use, the hours of operation,
traffic, parking, noise, exterior storage, signs, exterior lighting, types of operations, types
of goods or services offered, odor, area of operation, number of employees, and other
factors deemed relevant by the city.
Illegal nonconformity or nonconforming use means a land use, lot of record, structure,
building, or sign that was illegally established when it was initiated, created or
constructed and which did not conform to the applicable conditions or provisions of the
City Code for the district in which the use, lot, structure, building or sign is located.
Improvement means making the nonconforming use better, more efficient, or more
aesthetically pleasing, including any change that does not replicate what pre-existed and
does not include an expansion, enlargement or intensification.
Legal nonconformity or nonconformity use means any land use, lot of record, structure,
building or sign that is not permitted by, or is not in full compliance with, the applicable
regulations of the zoning ordinance but which complied with existing regulations at the
time the use or lot was established or the building, structure or sign was constructed.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE X
2 of 6
Nonconforming land use means an activity using land, buildings and/or structures for a
purpose that was legally allowed when established but that is not currently allowed as a
use in the zoning district in which it is located.
Nonconforming lot of record means an existing lot of record which, at the time of the
approval of the zoning ordinance is nonconforming in terms of lot area, lot width, or lot
depth, and that has not, at any time, been the site of a principal use or structure.
Nonconforming structure, building or sign means a legal nonconformity, other than a
nonconforming land use, that complied with the zoning ordinance standards when
established, but that does not currently conform to standards in the zoning ordinance for
height, setback or size.
Replacement, reconstruction or restoration means construction that matches pre-existing
conditions and otherwise complies with Section 74-697 (g) of this Chapter.
Zoning Ordinance means the City of Anoka Zoning Ordinance and any subsequent
amendments thereto.
Section 74-602. General Standards.
The following standards shall apply to nonconformities:
(a) Continued Use of a Nonconforming Land Use. A nonconforming use of land and
conforming structures used for a nonconforming use of land may be used and continued,
including through repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance or improvement, but not
including expansion, enlargement or intensification.
(b) Continued Use of a Nonconforming Structure or Building.
(1) Any nonconforming structure or building damaged by fire or other peril to an
extent of fifty percent (50%) or less of its estimated market value, as indicated
in the records of the county assessor at the time of damage, may be restored,
reconstructed, or repaired, and can be used as before, provided the work is
completed within one year after the damage occurred.
(2) Any nonconforming structure or building damaged by fire or other peril to an
extent greater than fifty percent (50%) of its estimated market value, as
indicated in the records of the county assessor at the time of damage, shall not
be restored or reconstructed and used as before such destruction unless a
building permit to restore, reconstruct or repair the structure or building has
been applied for within 180 days after the damage occurred. In this case, the
city may impose reasonable conditions upon a building permit in order to
mitigate any newly created impact on adjacent properties.
(3) The city may permit an expansion, as authorized in this Chapter, and impose
upon nonconformities reasonable regulations to prevent and abate nuisances
and to protect the public health, welfare or safety.
(4) Existing car lots at the addresses listed below, so long as they are continuously
used as car lots, shall be required to maintain only three foot positive setbacks
from the front, side and rear yards, unless adjacent to a residential property, in
which case the respective setback shall be at least ten feet or three feet if a
vision-proof fence approved by the City is installed:
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE X
3 of 6
Address PIN Number
822 E River Rd 07-31-24-43-0016
814 E River Rd 07-31-24-43-0015
2535 N Ferry St 01-31-25-14-0029
(c) Change of Use. When any legal nonconforming use of land has been changed to a
conforming use, it shall not thereafter be changed to any nonconforming use of land.
(d) Discontinuance of Nonconforming Use of Land, Structures and Buildings. If a
nonconforming use of land is discontinued or ceases for a period of more than one year,
any subsequent use or occupancy of the land or premises shall be a conforming use or
occupancy.
(e) Maintenance of Nonconforming Structures, Buildings and Signs. Maintenance of a
nonconforming structure, building or sign will be permitted when it includes necessary
nonstructural repairs and incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the
nonconforming use of a structure, building or sign.
(f) Alterations or Expansions.
Sub-parts (1-4) apply to residential uses; subpart (5) applies to non-residential uses.
(1) Alterations may be made to a nonconforming residential structure or building
when such alterations improve the livability and safety of such structure or
building, provided, however, that they do not increase the number of dwelling
units in the structure or building.
(2) Where a single family dwelling is a nonconforming use of land, the following
shall apply:
a. The addition of a bedroom that otherwise meets the zoning ordinance
regulations shall not be considered an expansion of the use and is
permitted. Such addition shall be limited to an increase in the living
area of no more than twenty percent (20%) of the existing main floor
square footage.
b. The addition of a deck, garage, patio, fence, parking area, swimming
pool or other development that improves the livability and/or safety
and the dwelling and otherwise meets the single family residential
zoning ordinance standards for height and setbacks shall be permitted.
c. A parallel extension/expansion of a pre-existing nonconforming single
family dwelling is permitted without a variance if said expansion does
not encroach further into the already established nonconforming
setback and the extension/expansion meets all other applicable
standards of the zoning ordinance.
(3) Expansion of parking lots on parcels with existing multiple family structures is
permitted in single and two-family residential zoning districts (R-1 and R-2)
provided the following are met:
a. No parking shall be permitted within ten feet (10”) of any property
line adjacent to a residential zoning district or five feet (5’) of any
property line adjacent to a commercial or industrial zoning district.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE X
4 of 6
b. A front yard setback of twenty feet (20’) is required from any right-ofway
line.
c. A setback of twenty-five feet (25’) is required when located across the
street from a residential zoning district.
d. Driveways may be permitted within five feet (5’) of any property line.
e. Existing parking areas located within the previously established
setbacks shall be allowed a parallel extension but shall not encroach
further into an established nonconforming setback.
f. Expansion of a parking lot shall not exceed an impervious surface
coverage of fifty percent (50%) for the subject property.
g. Garages are permitted on parking lots of existing multiple family
structures or buildings, provided a five-foot (5’) rear and side yard
setback is met and a twenty-five foot (25’) front yard setback is met.
A site plan review and approval is required prior to construction of
such garage(s).
(4) Any modification to an existing nonconforming residential building or structure
to provide an accessibility improvement shall be permitted upon approval of
the zoning administrator or designee and the building official.
(5) Expansion of a nonconforming non-residential use, structure, or building may
be permitted if it can be demonstrated that the proposed expansion prevents or
abates a public nuisance and/or protects the public health, safety, and welfare.
Such expansion shall require review by the Planning Commission and approval
by the City Council. Reasonable requirements may be imposed on the
expansion as a condition of approval.
(g) Replacement, reconstruction, restoration or improvements to nonconforming structures
or buildings. If replacement, reconstruction, restoration or improvement is allowed, it
may occur without any land use approvals from the City, except a building permit,
subject to the following:
(1) The resulting use does not create any new adverse impacts on adjacent
property.
(2) Internal improvements and improved materials used to replace roof surfaces,
siding, windows, doors and similar components are permitted.
(3) Work that would not meet sub-parts (1) and (2) above, or any other
improvement to a nonconforming use of land, structures, buildings, or signs
may not be undertaken unless a variance is issued in accordance with the
zoning ordinance. The city may impose conditions in its approval to protect
public health, safety or welfare and to mitigate any newly created impacts on
adjacent property.
(4) A building permit must be obtained prior to commencing such work.
(h) Change in Tenancy. A change in tenancy, ownership or management will not affect the
status of the nonconformity if the nonconformity continues in the same manner and of
no greater intensity as that occurring prior to the change.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE X
5 of 6
(i) Nonconforming Signs. Nonconforming signs pertaining to or advertising products sold
on the premises of a nonconforming structure, building or use, or a nonconforming sign
that does not meet height, setback, area or other applicable standards, may be continued
only when the nonconforming use is permitted to continue. Such nonconforming signs
shall not be relocated or increased in number, area, height or illumination intensity.
(j) Buildings Under Construction and Building Permits Granted Prior to Adoption or
Subsequent Amendment of Zoning Ordinance. Any proposed structure or building
which will, under the Zoning Ordinance, become nonconforming, but for which a
building permit has been lawfully granted prior to the effective date of the zoning
ordinance, may be completed in accordance with the approved plans provided:
(1) Construction must commence within 180 days of issuance of the building
permit.
(2) Construction continues to completion within one year.
(3) Such structure or building and use shall thereafter be a legal nonconforming
structure, building or use.
(k) Nonconforming Lots of Record. Except for land in the Rum River Wild and Scenic
River District, the Mississippi River Critical Area Corridor, a floodplain management
district, or a shoreland management district, the following shall apply to nonconforming
lots of record:
(1) Any existing lot of record that is nonconforming and that is not improved with
a principal use is entitled to be developed with a principal use provided the
zoning ordinance standards for setbacks can be met. This provision shall apply
even though the lot of record does not meet the current applicable zoning
requirements for lot area, lot depth and/or lot width.
(2) A nonconforming lot of record is not entitled to be developed with a principal
use if the nonconforming lot of record has been in common ownership with an
abutting parcel of land or if it has been part of a larger parcel that became
nonconforming after adoption of the zoning ordinance.
(3) If two or more contiguous lots in any district are under the same ownership and
any individual lot does not meet the lot area and lot width requirements of the
zoning ordinance, the lot is not considered a separate parcel or lot for the
purpose of sale or development and the lot must be combined with the one or
more contiguous lots so they equal one or more lots, each meeting the lot area
and lot width requirements of the zoning ordinance to the extent possible. This
section shall not apply to the construction of a single family dwelling on a
nonconforming single lot of record.
(4) In any district in which single family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding
limitations imposed by other provisions of the zoning ordinance, a single
family dwelling and customary accessory buildings or structures, may be
erected on any single lot of record. This provision shall apply even though the
lot fails to meet the zoning ordinance requirements for lot area, lot width, or lot
depth that are generally applicable in the zoning district, provided that other
requirements not involving lot dimensions or lot area conform to the
regulations for the zoning district in which the lot is located.
CITY OF ANOKA
CITY CODOE
CHAPTER 74; ARTICLE X
6 of 6
(l) Burden of Proof. A person who wishes to take advantage of the rights granted to a legal
nonconformity has the burden of proving the status as a legal nonconformity by clear
and convincing evidence.
(m) Nonconformities in Shoreland Areas. Nonconformities in shoreland areas shall be
regulated by Minn. Stat. 462.357, Section 3, Subd. 1(e), parts (d) to (j) as amended.
(n) Creation of Nonconformities by Public Action. When lot area, width or setbacks are
reduced as a result of conveyance to a federal, state, or local government for a public
purpose and the remaining area is at least fifty percent (50%) of the otherwise applicable
standards, then that lot and any structures existing at the time of public action shall be
deemed to be in compliance with the minimum lot area, lot width and setbacks of the
zoning ordinance.
(o) Appeal of Estimated Value of Damage.
(1) If the City determines that more than fifty percent (50%) of the building or
structure has been destroyed, the property owner may, at his/her sole expense,
hire an independent appraiser to determine the market value and present the
appraisal to the City Council for reconsideration.
(2) If the City Council maintains its determination after receiving the appraisal, the
property owner shall have the right to appeal the City’s market value
determination to District Court. Such appeal must be brought within thirty (30)
days of the City Council’s determination.
(p) Violations. A violation of this Section is subject to the penalties and provisions of
Section 74-31 of the Chapter.