
Apple Valley Code of Ordinances


CITY OF APPLE VALLEY, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2018 S-15 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 1043, passed 4-12-18











Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com




TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Chapter



   10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




   10.01   Title of code




   10.02   Rules of interpretation



   10.03   Captions



   10.04   Definitions



   10.05   Severable provisions



   10.06   Reference to other sections



   10.07   Reference to offices



   10.08   Errors and omissions



   10.09   Official time



   10.10   Reasonable time



   10.11   Ordinances repealed



   10.12   Effective date of ordinances



   10.13   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.14   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.15   Section histories; statutory references



   10.16   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities



   10.17   Copies of code



   10.18   Issuance of citations



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Apple Valley
shall be designated as the Code of Apple Valley, Minnesota, and may be so
cited.



§ 10.02  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Generally.  Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or
implication required, the same rules of construction, definition and
application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing
the interpretation of state law.



   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation.  The construction of all
ordinances of this municipality shall be by the following rules, unless the
construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of
the context of the same ordinance:




      (1)   ANDorOR.  Either conjunction shall include the other as
if written “and/or,” whenever the context requires.




      (2)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute, code provisions or
ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as
well may do as the principal, the requisition shall be satisfied by the
performance of the act by an authorized agent or deputy.



      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting
the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter
genders; words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the
plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense
shall include the future, if applicable.



      (4)   General term.  A general term following specific
enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless
expressly so limited.



§ 10.03  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.04  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule.  Words and phrases shall be construed according
to rules of grammar and according to their common and approved usage; but
technical words and phrases and such other as have acquired a special
meaning, or are defined in this code, are construed according to such special
meaning or their definition.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY.  The City of Apple
Valley, Minnesota.



      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This  municipal
code as modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters
or sections.



      COUNTY.  Dakota County, Minnesota.



      MAY. “May” is permissive.



      MONTH.  A calendar month.



      OATH.  Oath includes “affirmation” in all cases where by law
an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in like cases, “swear”
includes “affirm” and “sworn,” “affirmed.”



      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT.  An
officer, office, employee, commission or department of this municipality
unless the context clearly requires otherwise.



      PERSON.  Extends to and includes an individual, corporation,
partnership, or other unincorporated associations.  Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated association shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



      SHALL.  “Shall” is mandatory.



      SIGNATURE.  The signature of a person (a) must be in the
handwriting of the person or, (b) if the person is unable to write, (i) the
person’s mark or name written by another at the request and in the presence
of the person or, (ii) by a rubber stamp facsimile of the person’s actual
signature, mark, or a signature of the person’s name or mark made by
another and adopted for all purposes of signature by the person with a motor
disability and affixed in the person’s presence.



      STATE.  The State of Minnesota.



      SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by
a heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of
the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter
of the heading.  Not all chapters have subchapters.



      WRITING or WRITTEN.  Includes any mode of representing words and
letters.



      YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



§ 10.05  SEVERABLE PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of all laws shall be severable.  If any provision of a
law is found to be invalid and void, the remaining provisions shall remain
valid unless the court finds the valid provisions so essentially and
inseparably connected with, and so dependent upon, the void provisions that
the court cannot presume the city would have enacted the remaining valid
provisions without the void one.



§ 10.06  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one chapter reference is made to another chapter hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the chapter referred to as
subsequently amended or revised, unless the subject matter is changed or
materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this municipality exercising the powers,
duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.08  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.09  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this municipality for the transaction of
all municipal business.



§ 10.10  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last.  If the last day is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded
and the last day shall be the next day of the week.



§ 10.11  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code.



§ 10.12  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances shall take effect from and after the due publication
thereof, unless otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.13  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the city amends any chapter or subchapter of this code, the
chapter or subchapter shall be specifically repealed and a new chapter or
subchapter, containing the desired amendment, shall be substituted in its
place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which adds a new chapter or subchapter to the
code shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this code, the
proper number of the chapter or subchapter.



§ 10.15  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending
ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section.



   Example:  (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord.
passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. passed 1-1-85)



   (B)   (1)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.



   Example:  (M.S. § 609.034)  (Ord. 10,  passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord.
passed 1-1-85)



      (2)   A statutory cite set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the chapter indicates that the reader
should refer to that statute for further information.



   Example:



§ 39.01  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



   This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning the inspection of    public records, see
M.S. §§ 138.163et seq.



§ 10.16  PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.



   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date
of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those
laws.  This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued,
penalties incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this
code.  The liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments,
penalties or forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had
not been enacted.  In particular, any agreement granting permission to
utilize highway right-of-ways, contracts entered into or franchises granted,
the acceptance, establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of
corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had
not been enacted.



§ 10.17  COPIES OF CODE.



   Copies of this code shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk for
public inspection and sale for a reasonable charge.



§ 10.18  ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by statute, only a peace officer
and part-time peace officer may:



      (1)   Ask a person receiving a citation to give a written
promise to appear in court; or



      (2)   Take a person into custody as permitted by M.S. §
629.34.



   (B)   The following city officials may issue citations in lieu of
arrest or continued detention for violation of the city code.  Areas of
jurisdiction will be contained in city policy as set forth, in resolution
form, by the City Council:



      (1)   Peace officers and part-time peace officers;



      (2)   Reserve officers;



      (3)   City Planner;



      (4)   Community Development Director;



      (5)   Project Engineer;



      (6)   Fire inspection officers;



      (7)   Community service officers; and



      (8)   City Building Official and inspectors.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this code for which
another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine not exceeding the maximum fine for a misdemeanor set forth
in M.S. Chapter 609, imprisonment for a term not exceeding the maximum
sentence for a misdemeanor set forth in M.S. Chapter 609, or both.  A
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a
violation occurs or continues.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this code which is a petty offense, defined by this code to be a petty
misdemeanor, shall upon conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding the
maximum fine for a petty misdemeanor set forth in M.S. Chapter 609.



   (C)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform
any official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or
employee to the penalty imposed for a violation unless a penalty is
specifically provided for the failure.



(Am. Ord. 885, passed 4-8-10)



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning misdemeanor and petty misdemeanor penalties,
see M.S. § 609.02(3) and (4)(a)



   For provisions concerning ordinance violations and penalties, see M.S.
§§ 412.231 and 609.034



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



Chapter



   30.   CITY COUNCIL



   31.   CITY OFFICIALS



   32.   COMMISSIONS, BOARDS AND DEPARTMENTS



   33.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



   34.   RESERVED



   35.   CITY POLICIES



CHAPTER 30:  CITY COUNCIL



Section



   30.01   Meeting place and time



   30.02   Special meetings; notice



   30.03   Emergency meetings



   30.04   Agenda mailing



   30.05   Compensation



   30.06   Council candidacy filing fee



§ 30.01  MEETING PLACE AND TIME.



   (A)   All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be held
at the Apple Valley City Hall, unless the Council shall designate another
meeting place. 



(Res. 1988-232)



   (B)   Regular meetings of the Council are those where official
motions occur and shall be held on dates established by the Council by
resolution. 



(Res. 1988-232, passed 12-29-98)



   (C)   If the Council decides to hold a regular meeting at a time or
place different from the time or place stated in the adopted resolution of
regular meetings, it shall give the same notice of the meeting that is
provided for a special meeting.



§ 30.02  SPECIAL MEETINGS; NOTICE.



   (A)   Special meetings shall be held as approved by the Council and
are defined as any meeting of the Council, other than a regular meeting,
where official action of the Council may occur. 



(‘81 Code, § 2-22)



   (B)   Informal meetings may be held as desired and are defined as
any meeting of the Council called for the purpose of discussing city
business.  No motions of the Council shall be permitted at these meetings. 



(‘81 Code, § 2-23)



   (C)   Special or informal meetings may be set by motion of the
Council at a regular or special meeting or may be called by the Mayor or by
any two members of the Council, in writing, filed with the City Clerk.  The
City Clerk shall mail, or cause to be delivered, notice of the date, time,
place, and purpose of the meeting to all members and each person who has
filed a written request for notice of such meetings. This notice shall be
posted at City Hall and mailed or delivered at least three days before the
date of the meeting.



(Res. 1988-232, passed 12-29-98)



§ 30.03  EMERGENCY MEETINGS.



   An emergency meeting is a special meeting called because of
circumstances that, in the judgment of the Council, require immediate
consideration.  Prior to an emergency meeting, the City Clerk shall, by
telephone or otherwise, notify the members of the Council, the official city
newspaper, and each news medium which has filed a written request for notice
as soon as reasonably practicable after notice has been given to the members
of the Council.  The notice shall include the subject of the meeting. 
Posted or published notice of an emergency meeting is not required.



(Res. 1988-232, passed 12-29-98)



§ 30.04  AGENDA MAILING.



   Tentative agendas for all regular meetings and meeting notices shall be
mailed, to the news media and persons who have filed a written request for
notice, at least three days before such meetings.



(Res. 1988-232, passed 12-29-98)



§ 30.05  COMPENSATION.



   Pursuant to M.S. § 415.11, as amended, the salary of the Mayor shall
be $1,007 per month and the salary of each individual Council Member shall be
$721 per month effective January 1, 2017, and the salary of the Mayor shall
be $1,032 per month and the salary of each individual Council Member shall be
$739 per month effective January 1, 2018.



(‘81 Code, § 2-27)  (Ord. 204, passed 7-27-78; Am. Ord. 412, passed
1-28-88; Am. Ord. 526, passed 12-19-91; Am. Ord. 685, passed 10-12-00; Am.
Ord. 761, passed 10-14-04; Am. Ord. 797, passed 9-28-06; Am. Ord. 844, passed
8-28-08; Am. Ord. 871, passed 12-10-09; Am. Ord. 904, passed 10-28-10; Am.
Ord. 953, passed 11-26-13; Am. Ord. 1005, passed 2-25-16)



§ 30.06  COUNCIL CANDIDACY FILING FEE.



   At the time of filing an affidavit for candidacy for municipal office
in accordance with Minnesota state law, a filing fee of $40 shall be
submitted therewith.



(Ord. 1003, passed 12-22-15)



CHAPTER 31:  CITY OFFICIALS



Section



   31.01   Registration of voters



   31.02   City Administrator position established



   31.03   Clerk and Treasurer established; delegation of duties



   31.04   Mayor; term of office



§ 31.01  REGISTRATION OF VOTERS.



   The city elects to come under the provisions of M.S. Chapter 201,
requiring the registration of voters, as specifically authorized in M.S. §
201.061, subd. 2, as amended.



(‘81 Code, § 2-1)  (Ord. 12, passed 11-20-63)



§ 31.02  CITY ADMINISTRATOR POSITION ESTABLISHED.



   The position of City Administrator is established to be responsible to
the City Council for the proper administration of all city affairs.  The
administrator shall be appointed by the City Council.



(Res. adopted 6-25-69)



§ 31.03  CLERK AND TREASURER ESTABLISHED; DELEGATION OF DUTIES.



   (A)   Pursuant to M.S. § 412.591(2), the offices of City Clerk and
City Treasurer are established.



   (B)   Pursuant to M.S. § 412.151(2), the bookkeeping duties of the
City Clerk are delegated to the City Treasurer.  The City Treasurer, at the
expense of the city, shall furnish a fidelity bond conditioned for the
faithful exercise of his or her duties.



   (C)   Annually, the Council shall provide for an audit of the
city’s financial affairs in accordance with the minimum procedures
prescribed by the state auditor.



(‘81 Code, § 2-2)  (Ord. 60, passed 4-30-69; Am. Ord. 333, passed 1-10-85)



§ 31.04  MAYOR; TERM OF OFFICE.



   The term of office of the Mayor of the city is hereby established to be
four years commencing with the ensuing term after the effective date of this
section.



(‘81 Code, § 2-3)  (Ord. 566, passed 1-13-94)



CHAPTER 32:  COMMISSIONS, BOARDS AND DEPARTMENTS



Section



Commissions and Boards



   32.01   Establishment



   32.02   Membership, terms, and compensation



   32.03   Organization, meetings, and reports



   32.04   Existing commissions or boards



Fire Department



   32.15   Organization



COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS



§ 32.01  ESTABLISHMENT.



   The Council may create commissions and boards to assist and advise the
Council with respect to the administration of any city functions or activity
or to investigate any subject of interest to the city asdefined by the
Council.  The creation of any commission or board not established by this
Code shall be by resolution of the Council and the resolution shall set forth
the purpose and duties of the commission or board.  No commission or board
shall have any decision-making power; a commission or board created hereunder
is an advisory body to Council.



(Ord. 880, passed 2-11-10)



§ 32.02  MEMBERSHIP, TERMS, AND COMPENSATION.



   (A)   Unless otherwise established by specific language in this code
related to a specific commission or board, the terms of this section shall
apply.



   (B)   Number.  A commission or board shall consist of not more than
seven members.  All members of the commission or board shall be residents of
the city, and the members shall be appointed by the Council.



   (C)   Terms.  Members of the commission or board and their
successors shall serve terms of three years, except that of the first seven
members appointed following creation of the commission or board, three shall
be appointed for three-year terms, two for two-year terms and two for a
one-year term.  A member's term shall expire on March 1 of the year of
expiration of his/her term or until the successor is appointed, whichever is
later.



   (D)   Removal.  Members may be removed by the Council without cause.



   (E)   Vacancies.  Vacancies during the term shall be filled by the
Council for the unexpired portion of the term.



   (F)   Oath.  Every appointed member, before entering upon the
discharge of his or her duties, shall take an oath that he or she will
faithfully discharge the duties of the commission or board to which he or she
is appointed.



   (G)   Compensation.  All members shall serve without compensation;
however, they shall be reimbursed for all expenses and costs necessarily
incurred in connection with their duties.



(Ord. 880, passed 2-11-10)



§ 32.03  ORGANIZATION, MEETINGS, AND REPORTS.



   (A)   Organization.  Each commission or board shall elect a
presiding officer and a secretary from among its appointed members for a term
of one year; and the commission or board may create and fill other offices if
the Council empowers by resolution the commission or board to do so. 



   (B)   Meetings.  The Council shall set forth by resolution the
frequency with which the commission or board will meet.



   (C)   Reports.  On or before April 1 of each year, the commission
or board shall submit to the Council a report of its work during the
preceding year.  Expenditures of the commission or board shall be within
amounts appropriated for the purpose by the Council.



(Ord. 880, passed 2-11-10)



§ 32.04  EXISTING COMMISSIONS OR BOARDS.



   Commissions or boards existing upon adoption of this subchapter shall
all have staggered terms for appointees.  Beginning with the next
appointment of members for any commission or board without staggered terms,
three of the new appointees shall be appointed for three-year terms, two for
two-year terms and two for a one-year term.  Thereafter, each appointment to
a commission or board shall be for a three-year term as set forth hereinabove.



(Ord. 880, passed 2-11-10)



FIRE DEPARTMENT



§ 32.15  ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   As originally established by Ordinance No. 33 on the November
14, 1966, the volunteer Fire Department of this city is hereby continued and
shall operate, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.  The Department
shall adopt rules and regulations to govern its affairs, provided they do not
conflict with the city code.



(‘81 Code, § 10-11)



   (B)   The members of the Fire Department may organize themselves
into a Fire Fighters’ Relief Association in accordance with state law.



(‘81 Code, § 10-5)



(Ord. 331, passed 12-27-84; Am. Ord. 713, passed 5-9-02; Am. Ord. 931, passed
4-26-12)



 



CHAPTER 33:  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



Section



   33.01   Purpose



   33.02   Interpretation and effect



   33.03   Definitions



   33.04   Establishment of emergency management organization



   33.05   Powers and duties of Director



   33.06   Local emergencies



   33.07   Emergency regulations



   33.08   Participation in labor disputes or politics



 



   33.99   Penalty



§ 33.01  PURPOSE.



   Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of
unprecedented size and destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado,
blizzard, destructive winds or other natural causes, from sabotage or hostile
action, or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure; and in
order to insure that preparations of this city will be adequate to deal with
such disasters, and generally, to provide for the common defense and to
protect the public peace, health, and safety, and to preserve the lives and
property of the people of this city, it is hereby found and declared to be
necessary:



   (A)   To establish a city emergency management organization
responsible for city planning and preparation for emergency government
operations in time of disasters;



   (B)   To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during
emergencies and disasters;



   (C)   To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this city
and other political subdivisions of this state and of other states with
respect to the carrying out of emergency-preparedness functions; and



   (D)   To comply with the provisions of M.S. § 12.25, which require
that each political subdivision of the state shall establish a local
organization for emergency management.



§ 33.02  INTERPRETATION AND EFFECT.



   All functions and activities relating to emergency management are
hereby declared to be governmental functions.  The provisions of this
section shall not affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which
he or she would otherwise be entitled under this chapter, the workers’
compensation law, or any pension law, nor the right of any such person to
receive any benefits or compensation under any act of Congress.



§ 33.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DISASTER.  A situation which creates an immediate and serious
impairment to the health and safety of any person, or a situation which has
resulted in or is likely to result in catastrophic loss to property, and for
which traditional sources of relief and assistance within the affected area
are unable to repair or prevent the injury or loss.



   EMERGENCY.  An unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for
immediate action to prevent from developing or occurring.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.  The preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage
resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, tornado, and other acts of
nature, or from sabotage, hostile action, or from industrial hazardous
material mishaps.  These functions include, without limitation, fire
fighting services, police services, emergency medical services, engineering,
warning services, communications, radiological, and chemical, evacuation,
congregate care, emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned
functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility
services and other functions related to civil protection, together with all
other activities necessary or incidental for carrying out the foregoing
functions.  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT includes those activities sometimes
referred to as “civil defense” functions.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES.  The total personnel resources engaged in
city-level emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter or any rule or order thereunder.  This includes personnel
from city departments, authorized volunteers, and private organizations and
agencies.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.  The staff responsible for
coordinating city-level planning and preparation for disaster response. 
This organization provides city liaison and coordination with federal, state,
and local jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities and
assures implementation of federal and state program requirements.



§ 33.04  ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.



   There is hereby created within the city government an emergency
management organization which shall be under the supervision and control of
the City Emergency Management Director, called the Director.  The Director
shall be appointed by the Mayor.  The Director shall have direct
responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the
emergency preparedness organization.



§ 33.05  POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.



   (A)   The Director shall represent the city on any regional or state
conference for emergency management.  The Director shall develop proposed
mutual aid agreements with other political subdivisions of the state for
reciprocal emergency management aid and assistance in an emergency too great
to be dealt with unassisted, and shall present these agreements to the
Council for its action. These arrangements shall be consistent with the State
Emergency Plan.



   (B)   The Director shall make studies and surveys of the human
resources, industries, resources, and facilities of the city as deemed
necessary to determine their adequacy for emergency management and to plan
for their most efficient use in time of an emergency or disaster.  The
Director shall establish the economic stabilization systems and measures,
service staffs, boards, and sub-boards required, in accordance with state and
federal plans and directions.



   (C)   The Director shall prepare a Comprehensive Emergency Plan for
the emergency preparedness of the city and shall present such Plan to the
Council for its approval.  When the Council has approved the Plan, it shall
be the duty of all city agencies and all emergency preparedness forces of the
city to perform the duties and functions assigned by the Plan as approved. 
The Plan may be modified in like manner from time to time.  The Director
shall coordinate the emergency management activities of the city to the end
that they shall be consistent and fully integrated with the Emergency Plans
of the federal government and the state and correlated with emergency plans
of the county and other political subdivisions within the state.



   (D)   In accordance with the State and City Emergency Plans, the
Director shall institute training programs and public information programs
and conduct practice warning alerts and emergency exercises as may be
necessary to assure prompt and effective operation of the City Emergency Plan
when a disaster occurs.



   (E)   The Director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment,
supplies, and facilities of existing departments and agencies of the city to
the maximum extent practicable.  The officers and personnel of all city
departments and agencies shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate
with and extend services and facilities to the city’s emergency management
organization and to the Governor upon request.  The head of each department
or agency in cooperation with the Director shall be responsible for the
planning and programming of such emergency activities as will involve the
utilization of the facilities of the department or agency.



   (F)   The Director shall, in cooperation with those city departments
and agencies affected, assist in the organizing, recruiting, and training of
emergency management personnel, which may be required on a volunteer basis to
carry out the emergency plans of the city and state.  To the extent that
emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or
agency for emergencies, they shall be assigned to the departments or agencies
and shall be under the administration and control of the department or agency.



   (G)   Consistent with the state emergency services law, the Director
shall coordinate the activity of municipal emergency management organizations
within the city and assist in establishing and conducting training programs
as required to assure emergency operational capability in the several
services as provided by M.S. § 12.25.



   (H)   The Director shall carry out all orders, rules, and
regulations issued by the Governor with reference to emergency management.



   (I)   At least once a year, the Director shall prepare and submit
reports on emergency preparedness activities.



§ 33.06  LOCAL EMERGENCIES.



   (A)   A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or his or
her legal successor.  It shall not be continued for a period in excess of
three days except by or with the consent of the Council.  Any order or
proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local emergency shall be
given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed in the office of the
City Clerk.



   (B)   A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary
portions of the response and recovery aspects of applicable local or inter-
jurisdictional disaster plans, and may authorize aid and assistance
thereunder.



   (C)   No jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local
emergency unless expressly authorized by the agreement under which the agency
functions.  However, an inter-jurisdictional disaster agency shall provide
aid and services in accordance with the agreement under which it functions.



§ 33.07  EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Whenever necessary to meet a declared emergency or to prepare
for such an emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by
the Governor or the Council, the Council may by resolution promulgate
regulations consistent with applicable federal or state law or regulations
respecting:  the conduct of persons and the use of property during
emergencies; the repair, maintenance, and safeguarding of essential public
services; emergency health, fire, and safety regulations; drills or practice
periods required for preliminary training; and all other matters which are
required to protect public safety, health, and welfare in declared
emergencies.



   (B)   Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing;
shall be dated; shall refer to the particular emergency to which it pertains,
if so limited; and shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.  A copy
shall be kept posted and available for public inspection during business
hours.  Notice of the existence of these regulations and their availability
for inspection at the City Clerk’s Office shall be conspicuously posted at
the front of the City Hall or other headquarters of the city or at such other
places in the affected area as the Council shall designate in the
resolution.  By resolution, the Council may modify or rescind a regulation.



   (C)   The Council may rescind any regulation by resolution at any
time.  If not sooner rescinded, every regulation shall expire at the end of
30 days after its effective date or at the end of the emergency to which it
relates, whichever comes first.  Any resolution, rule, or regulation
inconsistent with an emergency regulation promulgated by the Council shall be
suspended during the period of time and to the extent conflict exists.



   (D)   During a declared emergency, the city is, under the provisions
of M.S. § 12.31 and notwithstanding any statutory or Charter provision to
the contrary, empowered, through its Council, acting within or without the
corporate limits of the city, to enter into contracts and incur obligations
necessary to combat such disaster by protecting the health and safety of
persons and property and providing emergency assistance to the victims of a
disaster.  The city may exercise these powers in the light of the exigencies
of the disaster without compliance with the time-consuming procedures and
formalities prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of public work,
entering rental equipment agreements, purchase of supplies and materials,
limitations upon tax levies, and the appropriation and expenditure of public
funds, including, but not limited to, publication of resolutions, publication
of calls for bids, provisions of personnel laws and rules, provisions
relating to low bids, and requirement for bids.



Penalty, see § 33.99



§ 33.08  PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTES OR POLITICS.



   The emergency management organization shall not participate in any form
of political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for
political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor dispute.



§ 33.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any regulation
adopted thereunder relating to acts, omissions, or conduct other than
official acts of city employees or officers is guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be punished as provided in § 10.99.



CHAPTER 34:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 35:  CITY POLICIES



Section



Unclaimed Personal Property



   35.01   Sale of property



   35.02   Reclaimed property; proceeds



   35.03   Disposition of proceeds and unsold property



   35.04   Dangerous or perishable property



   35.05   Abandoned motor vehicles and junk vehicles



Fees, Licenses and Permits



   35.25   Applicability



   35.26   Duration



   35.27   Fees



   35.28   Escrow accounts



UNCLAIMED PERSONAL PROPERTY



§ 35.01  SALE OF PROPERTY.



   Any property, other than motor vehicles, lawfully coming into the
possession of the city in the course of its operations and remaining
unclaimed by the owner may be disposed of by the city as follows:  Upon
being held by the city and unclaimed by the owner thereof for a period of at
least 60 days, the property may be retained by the city for a public purpose
or may be sold by the city at a public auction or sale to the highest
bidder.  Notice of the sale shall be published in the designated legal
newspaper of the city at least ten days prior to the date of the sale and
shall contain a description of the property to be sold and specifying the
time and place of the sale.  Firearms, which lawfully came into the
possession of the city, may not be sold, but may be retained by the city for
police purposes or may be destroyed.



(‘81 Code, § 9-2)  (Ord. 49, passed 2-7-68; Am. Ord. 837, passed 5-22-08)



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning unclaimed property, see M.S. Chapter 345 and
§ 471.195



§ 35.02  RECLAIMED PROPERTY; PROCEEDS.



   The lawful owner of any property held by the city, may reclaim the
property upon satisfactory proof of ownership thereof prior to its sale.  If
the property has been sold, the former owner shall be entitled to the payment
of the sale price upon application and satisfactory proof of ownership to the
City Clerk within six months of the sale.  Upon application and satisfactory
proof of ownership, the owner shall be entitled to receive the actual sale
price of the property, except that there shall be deducted from the sale
price any expenses incurred by the city in connection with the storage and
sale of the property.



(‘81 Code, § 9-3)  (Ord. 49, passed 2-7-68)



§ 35.03  DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS AND UNSOLD PROPERTY.



   (A)   The proceeds of the public auction sale shall be applied in
payment of the expenses of the sale and all other costs incurred in storing
the property.  The balance of the proceeds remaining from the sale shall be
paid into the general fund of the city, subject to the claim of the owner as
above provided.



   (B)   Any property offered for sale, but not sold shall be deemed to
be of no value and shall be disposed of in a manner as the Council directs.



(‘81 Code, § 9-4)  (Ord. 49, passed 2-7-68)



§ 35.04  DANGEROUS OR PERISHABLE PROPERTY.



   The Council may, without notice, and in a manner as it determines to be
in the public interest, provide for the immediate disposition of any property
coming into the city’s possession which the Council determines to be
dangerous or perishable.  A record of all pertinent facts of the receipt and
disposal of the property shall be prepared and filed in the office of the
City Clerk.



(‘81 Code, § 9-5)  (Ord. 49, passed 2-7-68)



§ 35.05  ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES AND JUNK VEHICLES.



   Abandoned motor vehicles and junk vehicles shall be disposed of by the
city in accordance with M.S. Chapter 168B.



FEES, LICENSES AND PERMITS



§ 35.25  APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to the issuance,
regulation and supervision of various licenses, permits, services and
functions rendered by the city except as may otherwise be specifically
provided in this code relating to a particular activity.



(‘81 Code, § 1-21)  (Ord. 304, passed 10-13-83)



§ 35.26  DURATION.



   (A)   Termination.  All licenses or permits issued on an annual
basis shall terminate on December 31 of each year after issuance thereof
except as may otherwise be specifically provided in this code relating to a
particular license or permit.



   (B)   Renewals.  Where a licensee or permit holder makes
application for renewal of a license or permit and pays the required fee to
the city on or before December 31 of the current year, the license or permit
holder is authorized to operate under the license or permit until such time
as the City Council either renews or denies the application.



   (C)   Penalty for late application.



      (1)   When a licensee or permit holder fails to make
application for a renewal or to pay the required fee on or before December 31
or on the date for which the renewal application is required to be filed as
may be specifically provided for each license or permit, the renewal
application will not be accepted or considered until and unless the license
or permit holder submits payment of a late fee of 130% of the amount of the
license or permit fee for the licensing period, not to exceed $30 more than
the license or permit fee. If the licensee or permit holder fails to file the
application for renewal, along with the license or permit fee and late fee on
or before the license or permit expiration date, the license or permit shall
be deemed expired.



      (2)   When a person fails to make application before opening a
business of a type which is required to have a license or permit or before
taking over an existing business, he or she shall not be issued a license or
permit except upon payment of a fee of 130% of the amount of the license or
permit fee for the licensing period not to exceed $30 more than the license
or permit fee.



(‘81 Code, § 1-22)  (Ord. 304, passed 10-13-83; Am. Ord. 985, passed
3-26-15; Am. Ord. 1009, passed 5-12-16)



§ 35.27  FEES.



   (A)   Except as otherwise stated in this code, the city’s fee(s)
for or in connection with:  any license; permit; service(s) and function
rendered; the costs incurred in reviewing, investigating, and administering
an application for an amendment to an official control or an application for
a permit or other approval required under an official control or any other
costs established and authorized pursuant to M.S. Chapter 462; and any other
fee as the city is authorized  by state law to impose shall be set forth in
a rate/fee schedule duly adopted by Council resolution.  All application and
investigation fees for any license or permit, in addition to any annual
license fee of $100 or less when no application or investigation fee is paid,
shall be non-refundable.



   (B)   Any reference to a city fee in this code that cites to this
chapter or Chapter 35 Appendix shall hereafter be established and governed by
the rate/fee schedule duly adopted by Council resolution.



(‘81 Code, § 1-23)  (Ord. 304, passed 10-13-83; Am. Ord. 9-7, passed
12-21-10; Am. Ord. 1001, passed 11-24-15)



§ 35.28  ESCROW ACCOUNTS.



   (A)   When the complexity or size of a project, subdivision,
rezoning, conditional use permit, or plat,  necessitates the outside review
or involvement of consultants to the city, cash escrow may be required.



   (B)   An escrow agreement will be prepared stating the amount
required to be deposited, the manner in which funds will be disbursed, the
manner in which exhausted funds will be replenished and the manner in which
unexpended funds will be refunded.  The initial deposit of funds shall be
based on the type or magnitude of the project as follows:



      (1)   Privately installed municipal improvements.  The cash
escrow shall represent 17% of the City Engineer’s estimate of project cost.



      (2)   Privately installed or privately owned improvements. 
The cash escrow shall represent 6¾% of the City Engineer’s estimate of
project cost.



      (3)   Legal work.  The cash escrow shall represent at least
the equivalent of three hours of legal work, at the then current hourly rate
charged by the city’s attorneys.



(‘81 Code, § 1-24)  (Ord. 475, passed 3-8-90; Am. Ord. 534, passed
2-13-92)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



Chapter



   50.   GARBAGE



   51.   WATER AND SEWERS



   52   STORM SEWERS



CHAPTER 50:  GARBAGE



Section



   50.01   Definitions



   50.02   Containers; storage and location



   50.03   Required collection



   50.04   Licensed collectors; duties and obligations



   50.05   Disposal of animal carcasses



   50.06   Unlawful deposit of refuse and yard waste



   50.07   Refuse accumulation; nuisance



   50.08   Waste disposal site; permit required



§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ASSOCIATION.  All cooperative organizations of residential dwelling
owners formed for the purpose of joint management of property or services.



   COLLECTION.  The aggregation of mixed municipal solid waste from the
place at which it is generated and includes all activities up to the time the
waste is delivered to a waste facility.



   CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS.  Waste building materials, packaging and rubble
resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition of buildings
and roads.



   COUNCIL.  The City Council of the City of Apple Valley.



   DAILY RESIDENTIAL HAULING ZONE.  A residential area in which garbage,
other refuse,



recyclables and yard waste are collected on the same day each week and for
which the boundaries and day of collection are defined as follows:



      (1)   Monday residential hauling zone - bounded by the
following roads:  north of 160th Street W., south of the northern city
limits, west of eastern city limits, and east of Pilot Knob Road;



      (2)   Tuesday residential hauling zone - bounded by the
following roads:  north of 160th Street W., south of County Road 42, west of
Pilot Knob Road, and east of the western city limits;



      (3)   Wednesday residential hauling zone - bounded by the
following roads:  north of County Road 38, south of the 35E and the northern
city limits, west of Pilot Knob Road, and east of County Road 11 and the
western city limits;



      (4)   Thursday residential hauling zone - bounded by the
following roads:  north of County Road 42, south of County Road 38, west of
Galaxie Avenue, and east of the western city limits; and



      (5)   Friday residential hauling zone - bounded by the
following roads:  north of County Road 42, south of County Road 38, west of
Pilot Knob Road, and east of Galaxie Avenue.



   GARBAGE.  Every accumulation of animal, vegetable or other matter that
attends the preparation, consumption, display, dealing in a storage of meat,
fish, fowl, birds, fruit or vegetables, including the cans, containers or
wrappers wasted along with the materials.



   INDIVIDUAL RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION. Collection from any building
consisting of one or more dwelling units wherein each unit has an individual
kitchen and wherein each unit receives separate collection by licensed
collectors.



   MANAGEMENT ENTITY.  Person, persons, partnerships or corporations
responsible for the management of a residential dwelling or a multiple
dwelling complex.



   MULTIPLE DWELLING.  Any building used for residential purposes
consisting of more than one dwelling unit with individual kitchen facilities
for each.



   RECYCLABLES.  Materials which can be separated from the mixed
municipal solid waste stream for collection and preparation for reuse in
their original form, or for other uses in manufacturing processes that do not
cause the destruction of the recyclable materials in a manner that precludes
further uses.



   REFUSE.  All solid waste products or those having the character of
solids rather than liquids; in that they will not flow readily without
additional liquid and which are composed wholly or partly of such materials
as garbage, swill, sweepings, cleanings, trash, rubbish, litter, industrial
solid waste or domestic solid waste; organic wastes or residue of animals
sold as meat; fruit or other vegetable or animal matter from kitchen, dining
room, market, food establishment of any place dealing in or handling meat,
grain or vegetables; or offal, animal excreta or the carcasses of animals.



   SINGLE FAMILY-DWELLING.  Any building used for residential purposes
that consists of one dwelling unit.



   SPECIAL PICK-UP.  Any collection of materials other than refuse and
recyclables, but which includes white goods (such as large appliances),
furniture, oversized materials, construction debris and other materials
collected, processed and disposed of as separate waste streams.



   SWILL.  That particular garbage which is wholly or nearly edible and
usable as a food and has food value for animals or fowl, accumulating from
animal, vegetable or other matter wasted from clubs, hotels, hospitals,
restaurants and public eating places.



   TARGETED RECYCLABLES.  Metal beverage containers, glass containers,
newsprint or other materials that may be designated by the Council via
resolution.



   VOLUME BASED FEES.  Pricing structure offered by licensed collectors
to their customers which ties the cost of refuse collection to the volume of
materials offered to the collector for collection.



   WASTE MATTER.  Waste matter composed of soil, earth, sand, clay,
gravel, loam, stone, brick, plaster, crockery, glass, glassware, ashes,
cinders, shells, metal and all other noncombustible material which has been
or is to be discarded.



   YARD WASTE.  Organic material consisting of grass clippings, leaves
and other forms of organic garden waste, but excluding bushes, fibrous brush,
woody materials or other materials that are not readily compostable within a
calendar year.



(‘81 Code, § 11-1)  (Ord. 440, passed 3-23-89; Am. Ord. 500, passed
12-13-90; Am. Ord. 539, passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 634, passed 10-9-97; Am. Ord.
863, passed 6-11-09)



§ 50.02  CONTAINERS; STORAGE AND LOCATION.



   (A)   Specifications for keeping refuse in containers.  The
occupant of any private dwelling, the keeper or manager of any hotel, motel,
restaurant, eating house or boarding house, or any building where meals are
served, the owner of any flat or apartment house, trailer camp or auto court,
and any other person having refuse or yard waste as herein defined, shall
provide and keep on the premises sufficient containers for the storage of all
refuse or yard waste accumulated on the premises between collections.  Each
container shall be watertight and shall be impervious to insects, rodents,
vermin and absorption of moisture.  All refuse and yard waste on any
premises shall be stored in the required containers, except as the same may
be consumed or disposed of on the premises as permitted.



(‘81 Code, § 11-2)



   (B)   Storage of containers. 



      (1)   When not placed for collection as specified in division
(C) below, the containers, as relates to single-family dwellings, may be
stored in the rear of the premises, may be stored in the sideyard setback if
screened from the street and adjoining properties, or may be stored within
any structure located on the premises.  Containers stored outside shall be
maintained in such a manner as not to permit entry of or harborage for
animals, insects, or other vermin.



      (2)   All compost material must be confined to a container. 
Containers, used for the purpose of composting yard and compostable household
waste, shall be located in the rear yard between the rear property line and
the rear of the main structure and be no closer than five feet to any
property line or 20 feet to a side lot line if adjacent to any public street
right- of-way.



(‘81 Code, § 11-3)  (Am. Ord. 519, passed 9-12-91)



   (C)   Placing containers for collection of contents.  During all
days when collection is scheduled to occur, containers shall be accessible to
the collector which means that the containers, as relates to residential and
multiple dwellings having individual residential collection service, shall be
placed at the curb or other location on the property for which collection is
provided as agreed to by the customer and the licensed hauler.  All refuse,
including garbage, recycling, and yard waste placed at the curb for
collection shall be permitted at the curb or other collection point no
earlier than 6:00 p.m. of the night preceding collection day.  At all other
times, refuse, recycling and yard waste containers shall be stored in
accordance with storage requirements stated herein.



(‘81 Code, § 11-4)  (Ord. 440, passed 3-23-89; Am. Ord. 558, passed
7-22-93; Am. Ord. 751, passed 6-10-04; Am. Ord. 863, passed 6-11-09)



§ 50.03  REQUIRED COLLECTION.



   (A)   Every residential dwelling as defined in § 50.01 and
commercial/industrial establishment in the city must be under a contract for
the collection of garbage and refuse with a licensed collector by July 1,
1992.  A multiple-dwelling, as defined in § 50.01, is considered to be
under a garbage collection contract if the owner, association or management
entity has a contract with a licensed garbage collector.



   (B)   Any residential or multiple dwelling and commercial/industrial
establishment may be exempt from the requirements of division (A) provided
that a dwelling or commercial/industrial establishment hauls garbage or
refuse from its own residence or business property and disposes of such in an
environmentally sound manner by meeting the following conditions:



      (1)   Garbage, refuse and recyclables are hauled in a timely
manner such that they do not accumulate and become a nuisance as defined
under § 50.01;



      (2)   Garbage, refuse and recyclables are hauled in containers
equipped with tight-fitting covers which are also watertight on all sides and
the bottom;



      (3)   Garbage, refuse and recyclables are hauled in a manner
that prevents leakage or any possibility of a loss of cargo;



      (4)   Garbage and refuse are dumped, disposed or otherwise
unloaded only at a designated sanitary landfill, municipal solid waste
composting facility, resource recovery facility or other facility authorized
by Dakota County;



      (5)   Recyclables are dumped, disposed or otherwise unloaded
only at a recycling facility, an organized recycling collection drive, or
through licensed collectors;



      (6)   Yard waste is privately composted, or is only dumped,
disposed or otherwise unloaded at a compost facility or through licensed
collectors; and



      (7)   All garbage and refuse is collected, processed and
disposed of according to state, county and local laws.  Separate waste
disposal methods must be utilized for items including but not limited to auto
hulks, large auto parts, used appliances, ash, sludges, household hazardous
wastes, tires, lead acid batteries, used oil, yard waste and tree and
agricultural wastes.



(‘81 Code, § 11-5)  (Ord. 538, passed 5-28-92)



§ 50.04  LICENSED COLLECTORS; DUTIES AND OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   Licensing of collectors.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to collect refuse,
recyclables or yard waste without a license from the city and an account
relationship with the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises.  Any person
desiring a license to collect refuse, recyclables or yard waste shall make
application for the same to the City Clerk upon a form prescribed by the
Council.  The application shall set forth:



         (a)   The name and address of the applicant;



         (b)   A list of the equipment which applicant proposes
to use in the collection;



         (c)   A current collection fee schedule for all classes
of account;



         (d)   In the case of license renewals, an accounting of
the number of customers within the city currently being served by the
applicant;



         (e)   The place or places to which the refuse,
recyclables or yard waste is to be hauled;



         (f)   The manner in which the refuse, recyclables and
yard waste is to be disposed of;



         (g)   The portion of the city in which collections are
to be made; and



         (h)   Information about the location and method of
storage of collected recyclable materials, including evidence of compliance
with all state, county and local laws and regulations.



      (2)   Before any license may be issued, the applicant shall,
if the application is approved by the Council, deposit with the City Clerk
proof of insurance as follows:



         (a)   Workers’ compensation insurance and employer’s
liability insurance as required by law;



         (b)   Comprehensive general and automobile liability
insurance, including coverage for non-owned and hired vehicles, which names
the city as an additional insured and which provides coverage in the amount
of $300,000 for any single claim and $1,000,000 for multiple claims from any
single occurrence.



      (3)   A license fee as specified in the appendix to Chapter
35, based on the number of vehicles to be used by the applicant in
applicant’s operations under the license, shall accompany the application
and, upon granting of the license, the fee shall be deposited in the general
fund.



      (4)   Licenses shall be issued on a calendar year basis and
shall be renewable annually at the discretion of the Council; provided
however, for applications approved after July 1 in any calendar year,
applicant shall pay a license fee of half of the amount hereinbefore stated
for the balance of the initial calendar year.



      (5)   The Council reserves the right to revoke or not renew
the license for violations of this chapter. The revocation or non-renewal
shall be preceded by a mailed written notice of violation informing the
licensee of the complaint(s) against them.  Notice hereunder shall be deemed
sufficient if it is sent to the address of the licensee shown on the most
recent license application on file with the City Clerk.  The notice shall
provide the licensee the opportunity to be heard before the action is taken.



(‘81 Code, § 11-6)



   (B)   Duties and obligations of the licensed collector.



      (1)   A licensed refuse, recyclable and yard waste collector
must comply with the following operational requirements:



         (a)   The licensee shall operate in a manner consistent
with information provided on its license application submittal and shall
provide notice to the city within ten days of any changes in the information,
forms or certificates filed as a part of the license application process;



         (b)   The licensee shall comply with all state, county
and local laws and regulations;



         (c)   No individual residential collection of refuse,
recyclables or yard waste shall be made, except between the hours of 6:30
a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.  Individual residential
collection operations during these hours may also be conducted on Saturdays,
to accommodate recognized national holidays or a special pick-up as herein
defined.  Customers shall be reasonably notified of the specific day for the
collection of their refuse, recyclables and yard waste, and the licensee
shall collect the materials within those time periods;



         (d)   Operation of vehicles in driveways:



            1.   Operation in driveways prohibited.  Each
licensed refuse, recyclable and yard waste collector shall be prohibited from
operating its vehicles in the private driveways of residential and multiple
dwellings having individual residential collection service; and



            2.   Exception.  The provisions of the division
above shall not apply to licensed collectors servicing multiple dwellings
within which each dwelling unit has individualized collection service or
single-family dwellings that have a driveway in excess of 100 feet.  No
licensed collector who is exempt hereunder shall operate any vehicle in
reverse unless reverse operation of the vehicle is necessary for safe egress
from the driveway.  Licensed refuse collectors are required to submit to the
City Clerk addresses of their accounts wherein an exemption is applicable
hereunder;



         (e)   Each licensed refuse, recyclable and yard waste
collector shall insure that the contents of all material storage containers
shall be transferred to the collection vehicle without spillage, or, if any
spilling occurs, it shall be forthwith cleaned up completely.  Upon
completion, the containers shall be completely emptied and returned to the
area adjacent to the customer's premises, as required in § 50.02 for
collection, and placed in the rack, or stand, if any, and the lids of the
containers shall be replaced;



         (f)   Each licensed refuse, recyclable and yard waste
collector shall only use vehicles and equipment so constructed that the
contents will not leak or spill.  The vehicles and equipment shall also be
kept clean and as free from offensive odors as possible, and shall not stand
in any street, alley or public place longer than is reasonably necessary to
collect refuse, recyclables and yard waste;



         (g)   Each licensed refuse, recyclable and yard waste
collector shall provide its individual residential collection customers with
weekly collection of garbage and other refuse, and yard waste, and
recyclables, subject to the daily residential hauling zone restrictions set
forth herein.  The individual residential collection of targeted recyclables
shall be on the same day as the collection of the customer’s garbage and
other refuse, but may occur at a different time within that day.  The
targeted recyclables collection shall be from a location consistent with §
50.02(C).  The licensee is deemed the owner of the recyclables and upon
collection, the licensee may market the recyclables.  Nothing herein shall
be construed to prevent a licensee from offering household recyclable
collection for other recyclable materials, in addition to the targeted
recyclables. Notwithstanding the weekly collection requirement set forth
above, a licensed hauler may collect recyclables for individual residential
collection customers on a bi-weekly basis provided the licensee complies with
the following conditions:



            1.   The collection of recyclables shall comply
with the daily residential hauling zone restrictions;



            2.   The licensee shall provide single-sort
recycling whereby the customer may commingle all recyclables in a single
container; and



            3.   The licensee shall provide to the customer a
close fitting covered container of not less than 30 gallon capacity and, at a
customer’s request, the licensee shall provide a larger capacity close
fitting covered container to the customer at no additional cost to the
customer.



         (h)   Each licensed refuse, recyclable and yard waste
collector shall provide for a separate collection of yard waste from
customers who receive individual residential collection service.  This yard
waste collection shall be offered on a weekly basis for a minimum of eight
weeks in the spring, commencing on April 1, and eight weeks in the fall,
commencing on September 15, or as otherwise directed by the Council via
resolution.  The yard waste collection shall be from a location consistent
with § 50.02(C).  The yard waste containers on collection day shall be at
the location as provided in this chapter.  The licensed collector shall have
the discretion of setting specific dates and times for the collection, but
shall give reasonable notice and instructions to the customer, and shall
ensure that refuse and yard waste materials are not mixed at the time of
collection and final disposal.  The collected yard waste shall only be
disposed of at a composting facility authorized or approved by Dakota County
or other appropriate governmental unit;



         (i)   Each licensee shall submit a monthly report to the
city that identifies separately the weight, in tons, of refuse, recyclables,
yard waste and special pick-up materials that were collected by the licensee
from Apple Valley sources.  The report must be provided on or before the
fifteenth day of the month following the month being reported, and shall be
on a form provided by the city.  The report shall also identify the weight
of each type of collected recyclable derived via actual weighing of each
individual material or through the application of recyclable waste stream
percentages acceptable to Dakota County.  The report shall include a
summary, including receipts, of all revenues derived by the collector for
each targeted recyclable material market during the month.  The report shall
distinguish residential collection tonnage from commercial/ industrial
tonnage and shall also include a brief description of the methodology used in
computing the reported weights.  The city reserves the right to request
additional relevant information from the licensee as deemed necessary in
order to plan for and evaluate its waste disposal system;



         (j)   Each licensed refuse, recyclable and yard waste
collector shall provide customers which receive individual residential
collection with the option of paying volume based fees for the  collection;



         (k)   Each licensed refuse, recyclable and yard waste
collector shall notify, in writing, any collection customer whose
container(s) are in poor repair, are corroded or otherwise defective so as to
permit insects, vermin or rodents to enter, or does not meet all of the other
requirements of § 50.02(A) and (B).  The collector shall affix a copy of
the notice to the container, and the notice shall state the deficiency and
shall require repair or replacement. Upon the next collection, if the
deficiency has not been corrected, the collector shall notify the City
Clerk.  The City Clerk shall cause the container to be inspected, and if it
is found deficient, the inspector shall condemn the same.  The collector
shall not collect the contents of any container marked as condemned;



         (l)   Each licensed collector shall annually notify
customers with whom they have an account relationship of the proper placement
of refuse, recyclables and yard waste for collection, as specified in §
50.02(C).  The notice shall also be given to all new customers of the
licensed collector upon establishing an account relationship with the
customer.  It is unlawful for any licensed collector to direct, suggest or
imply to any customer that containers may be placed for collection in any
location in violation of § 50.02(C).



         (m)   Occupants of residential dwellings managed by
associations or other management entities shall have the same opportunity to
recycle as do occupants of other residential dwellings.  It is unlawful
after January 1, 1991, for any residential dwelling association or other
residential dwelling management entity to negotiate, execute or maintain a
contract for residential garbage or other refuse collection unless it
includes, as a part of that contract or as a part of a separate contract,
weekly collection of recyclables on the same day as its refuse collection; and



         (n)   Occupants of a multiple dwelling complex managed
by an association or other management entity shall have the same opportunity
to recycle as do occupants of other residential dwellings. It is unlawful
after January 1, 1991, for any multiple dwelling association or management
entity to negotiate, execute or maintain a contract for collection of garbage
or other refuse unless it includes, as a part of the contract or as a part of
a separate contract, a minimum of weekly collection of recyclables.



         (o)   It is unlawful for any garbage, refuse, yard waste
or recyclables collector vehicle to collect any garbage, refuse, yard waste
or recyclables within any daily residential hauling zone on any day other
than as permitted for the daily residential hauling zone, except to collect a
missed pickup, special pickup or when an observed holiday falls within that
week.  It is unlawful for any garbage, refuse, yard waste or recyclables
collector vehicle to operate on any street other than a arterial or collector
street within in any daily residential hauling zone on any day other than as
permitted for the daily residential hauling zone except to collect a missed
pickup, special pickup or when an observed holiday falls within that week.



(‘81 Code, § 11-7)



(Ord. 440, passed 3-23-89; Am. Ord. 500, passed 12-13-90; Am. Ord. 538,
passed 5-28-92; Am. Ord. 539, passed 6-9-92; Am. Ord. 751, passed 6-10-04;
Am. Ord. 863, passed 6-11-09)  Penalty, See § 10.99



§ 50.05  DISPOSAL OF ANIMAL CARCASSES.



   Any person owning or having control of any animal that has died or been
killed shall immediately bury the carcass thereof at least three feet deep in
the ground.  No person shall sell or offer to sell or give away a carcass
when the animal died or was killed on account of disease.  It is permitted
to engage a licensed or established rendering company to make disposal of any
dead animal.



(‘81 Code, § 11-8)  (Ord. 440, passed 3-23-89; Am. Ord. 538, passed
5-28-92)



§ 50.06  UNLAWFUL DEPOSIT OF REFUSE AND YARD WASTE.



   No person shall deposit refuse or yard waste in or upon any public
street, public waters or the ice thereon, shoreland areas adjacent to public
ponds or lakes, public lands, public storm sewer systems, or in or upon any
private land without the consent of the owner.



§ 50.07  REFUSE ACCUMULATION; NUISANCE.



   Any accumulation of refuse, recyclables or yard waste on any premises
not stored in containers which comply with this chapter or any accumulation
of refuse, recyclables or yard waste on any premises which has remained
thereon for more than two weeks, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and the
city, through its authorized employees, shall have the right to remove the
materials from the premises, and to abate other nuisances mentioned in this
chapter, to bill the owner or occupant of the premises for the cost of the
removal and abatement and upon failure of the bill to be paid within 30 days,
shall have the right to add the amount of the bill to the real estate taxes
on the premises in the same manner as other unpaid charges for municipal
utilities and services.



(‘81 Code, § 11-11)  (Ord. 440, passed 3-23-89; Am. Ord. 538, passed
5-28-92)



Cross-reference:



   Immediate abatement, see § 94.18



§ 50.08  WASTE DISPOSAL SITE; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to locate, operate or maintain a public or private
solid waste disposal site wherein refuse or materials of any kind are dumped,
deposited or stored without first obtaining a permit from the Council.



(‘81 Code, § 11-12)  (Ord. 440, passed 3-23-89; Am. Ord. 538, passed
5-28-92)



CHAPTER 51:  WATER AND SEWERS



Section



General Provisions



   51.01   Control by Council



   51.02   Utilities Division



   51.03   Compliance



   51.04   Waste control regulations adopted by reference



   51.05   Water system; water meters required; regulations and
prohibitions



   51.06   Storm water sewer system



   51.07   Sanitary sewer system



   51.08   Sanitary sewer regulations



   51.09   Leak in service line



   51.10   Fire hydrants and other utility appurtenances



Connections and Repairs



   51.20   Application and permits



   51.21   Installation of connections



   51.22   Required equipment



   51.23   Liability for repairs; owner responsibility; failure



Rates and Charges



   51.35   Costs and charges; disconnection for delinquency



   51.36   Prescribing rates; billing dates



   51.37   Meter readings



   51.38   Rates for faulty meters



   51.39   Disconnection of services



   51.40   Industrial sewer strength charges



   51.41   Private water and sanitary sewer systems



Individual Sewage Treatment Systems



   51.55   Findings and purpose



   51.56   Adoption of Water Pollution Control Act and Minnesota rules



   51.57   Definitions



   51.58   License required; permit and plan



   51.59   Inspections



   51.60   Repair of noncomplying or failing systems



   51.61   Minimum soil treatment area



   51.62   Application of other rules and regulations



   51.63   Required septic tank sizing and tank regulations



   51.64   Variance to technical standards



   51.65   Permit suspension or revocation



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 51.01  CONTROL BY COUNCIL.



   (A)   The Council shall have charge and management of the water and
sewer systems, subject to delegation of its authority to other city employees
as the Council shall provide. 



(‘81 Code, § 21-1)



   (B)   The Council may impose emergency regulations pertaining to the
conservation of water. 



(‘81 Code, § 21-2)



(Ord. 152, passed 11-13-74)



§ 51.02  UTILITIES DIVISION.



   There is hereby established the Utilities Division of the Public Works
Department.  The water and sewer systems as they are now constituted or
shall be hereafter enlarged or extended shall be operated and maintained
under the provisions of this chapter subject to the authority of the Council
at any time to amend, alter, change and repeal the same.



(‘81 Code, § 21-3)



§ 51.03  COMPLIANCE.



   Every person accepting water or sewer service and every owner of
property where service is accepted shall be deemed to consent to all rules,
regulations and rates as established by this chapter and as may hereafter be
set forth and adopted by the Council.



(‘81 Code, § 21-5)  (Ord. 152, passed 11-13-74)



§ 51.04  WASTE CONTROL REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The sewage and waste control rules and regulations for the metropolitan
disposal system as prepared by the Metropolitan Council are hereby adopted
and shall be in full force and effect in this city, insofar as applicable to
connections to and the use of the metropolitan disposal system.  One copy of
the above rules shall be on file in the City Clerk’s office for inspection
and use of the public and shall be marked by the City Clerk, “Official
Copy, City of Apple Valley.”



(‘81 Code, § 21-8)  (Ord. 178, passed 6-30-76)



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning metropolitan waste control, see M.S. §
473.501 et seq.



§ 51.05  WATER SYSTEM; WATER METERS REQUIRED; REGULATIONS AND PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   Utility established.  A municipal water system shall be
operated as a public utility pursuant to M.S. § 444.075.



   (B)   Operation and enforcement. The city shall determine the
operation and enforcement of the municipal water system as established herein.



   (C)   Water connection and availability charges.



      (1)   No connection to city water facilities shall be
permitted until the water connection and availability charges are fully paid.
The water connection and availability charges shall consist of the lateral
charge, lateral benefit from trunk charge, trunk charge, supply and storage
charge, water meter charge, service connection inspection charge, water
permit charge, plumbing permit charge, and all state surcharges. The water
connection and availability charges shall be set at rates duly adopted by
City Council resolution. No lateral charge shall be required to be paid as a
part of the water connection and availability charges for any property
against which a special assessment for the construction of the lateral was
previously levied thereon, unless an agreement between the city and the
property owner to defer the collection of the lateral charge has been made
prior to the effective date of this provision.



      (2)   All water connection and availability charges paid as
required herein shall be credited to the Water and Sewer Fund.



   (D)   Required meter.



      (1)   Before any water conveyed through the municipal water
system may be used or utilized on the premises of any person, there shall be
installed a water meter that will accurately measure the water consumed on
the premises.



      (2)   All water meters shall be furnished by the city and
installed in accordance with all city and state regulations.



(‘81 Code, § 21-14)



   (E)   Regulations.



      (1)   All applications for installation, maintenance and
repair of water meters shall be made to the Utilities Division.



      (2)   No person other than a city employee or city authorized
agent or its designee, shall maintain or repair any water meter used within
the city limits.  Every water meter connected to the water system shall be
sealed, and no person shall break or remove the seal; provided a plumber
licensed to do business in the state may break the seal to remove the meter
for necessary repairs.  In all cases where a seal is broken or a meter is
removed by a licensed plumber, the plumber shall notify the Utilities
Division of the fact within 24 hours after the seal is broken or the meter is
removed.  Whenever any seal attached to a water meter by or under the
direction of the Utilities Supervisor is found broken, the broken condition
of the seal shall be prima facie evidence that the seal was broken contrary
to the terms and provisions of and in violation of this code.



      (3)   All water meters connected to the municipal water system
shall be accessible to the Utilities Superintendent or designee at any
reasonable hour of any business day, and the refusal of admission by any
owner or occupant of any premises wherein a water meter is installed after
the owner or occupant has been notified that admission is desired for the
purpose of inspecting a water meter installed in the premises shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.



      (4)   Meters shall be repaired from time to time as is
necessary to insure accurate measuring of the flow of water, except that
whenever a meter has been damaged due to negligence on the part of persons
other than the employees of the city, the owner, occupant or user of the
premises or other persons desiring the use of the water shall reimburse the
city for the expense of repairing any meter.



(‘81 Code, § 21-15)



   (F)   Unlawful tampering.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
tamper with, alter, by-pass or in any manner whatsoever interfere with the
proper use and functioning of any water meter within the city.  (‘81 Code,
§ 21-16)



   (G)   Water use restrictions.  Pursuant to the authority of the
Minnesota Statutes governing water demand reduction measures, and in order to
conserve water, every water user is required to comply with the following
restrictions:



      (1)   Hours/limitations.  It shall be unlawful to water for
irrigation purposes between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. between May
1 and September 30 each calendar year.  Irrigation means any in-ground
irrigation system, mechanical sprinkler attached to a hose or an unattended
hose.



      (2)   Expanded restrictions.  In the event of a system
failure or water demand that exceeds the average annual daily demand by a
ratio of 2.6, expanded water restrictions may be implemented.



      (3)   Private wells.  Private well owners are subject to the
same water use restrictions as users of the municipal water supply.



      (4)   Ponds and lakes.  Property owners withdrawing water
from ponds and lakes for irrigation purposes are subject to the same water
use restrictions as users of the municipal water supply.



      (5)   Exceptions.  Water use restrictions shall not apply to
the following: 



         (a)   The immediate area of a yard that contains new sod
laid or trees planted during the current calendar year;



         (b)   Agricultural or horticultural operations which are
defined as any commercial operation which grows or sells plants for
commercial purposes and the water use is limited to the irrigation of the
commercial plants; and



         (c)   Golf course and city park critical maintenance
operations which are defined as the use of water immediately following the
application of fertilizer to turf and the use of water to syringe a golf
course, but excluding routine turf irrigation.



(Ord. 152, passed 11-13-74; Am. Ord. 835, passed 2-28-08)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 51.06  STORM WATER SEWER SYSTEM.



   (A)   Utility established.  A municipal storm water sewer system
shall be operated as a public utility, pursuant to M.S. § 444.075. 



(‘81 Code, § 21-31)



   (B)   Operation and enforcement.  The city shall determine the
operation and enforcement of the storm water sewer utility as established
herein. 



(‘81 Code, § 21-32)



   (C)   Storm water connection and availability charges.  No
connection to city storm water sewer facilities  shall be permitted until
the storm sewer connection and availability charges are fully paid. The storm
water sewer connection and availability charges shall consist of the lateral
charge and the trunk charge at rates duly adopted by resolution of the City
Council upon advice of the City Engineer.  No lateral charge shall be
required to be paid as a part of the storm water sewer connection and
availability charges for any property against which a special assessment for
the construction of the lateral was previously levied thereon, unless an
agreement between the city and the property owner to defer the collection of
the lateral charge has been made prior to the effective date of this
provision.  All storm water sewer connection and availability charges paid
as required herein shall be credited to the Storm Water Drainage Utility
Fund.  (‘81 Code, § 21-35)



(Ord. 408, passed 12-22-87; Am. Ord. 835, passed 2-28-08)



§ 51.07  SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.



   (A)   Utility established.



      (1)   A municipal sanitary sewer system shall be operated as a
public utility pursuant to M.S. § 444.075.



   (B)   Operation and enforcement.  The city shall determine the
operation and enforcement of the sanitary sewer system as established herein.



   (C)   Sanitary sewer connection and availability charges. 



      (1)   No connection to city sanitary sewer facilities shall be
permitted until the sanitary sewer and connection availability charges are
fully paid.  The sanitary sewer connection and availability charges shall
consist of the lateral charge, lateral benefit from trunk charge, trunk
charge, metro and city sanitary sewer availability charge, service connection
inspection charge, sewer permit charge, plumbing permit charge, and all state
surcharges.  The sanitary sewer connection and availability charges shall be
set at rates duly adopted by City Council resolution.  No lateral charge
shall be required to be paid as a part of the sanitary sewer connection and
availability charges for any property against which a special assessment for
the construction of the lateral was previously levied thereon, unless an
agreement between the city and the property owner to defer the collection of
the lateral charge has been made prior to the effective date of this
provision.



      (2)   All sanitary sewer connection and availability charges
paid as required herein shall be credited to the Water and Sewer Fund.



(Am. Ord. 835, passed 2-28-08)



§ 51.08  SANITARY SEWER REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CLEAR WATER. Storm water, natural precipitation, melting snow,
ground water, or any water flow from a roof or ground surface, subsurface
drainage, down spout, eave trough, rainspout, yard drain, sump pump,
foundation drain, yard fountain, pond, outdoor swimming pool, cistern
overflow, or any other means to transmit natural precipitation and surface
waters that is not required to be treated by state or federal law and often
referred to as inflow and infiltration (I&I) when it enters the sanitary
sewer system.



      FATS, OILS, AND GREASE (FOG). Any sewage or wastewater containing
fat, wax, tallow, grease, or oil of animal or vegetable origin that is likely
to solidify, become viscous, or become water insoluble.



      INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any liquid or wastewater that is a byproduct of
or from industrial or commercial processes.



      SANITARY SEWER LATERAL. The sanitary sewer pipe that conveys
wastewater from a building or structure to the city's sanitary sewer system
sewer main.



      SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM. The City of Apple Valley sanitary sewer
system which includes all street lateral pipes or mains in the public
rights-of-way or public easements,  main and intersecting sewer lines,
facilities  and structures by which sewage or industrial wastes are
collected, transported, treated and disposed. The City of Apple Valley
sanitary sewer system does not include any plumbing lines or fixtures inside
or a part of a building or premises served, or service sewers from a building
to the street lateral.



      SEWAGE or WASTEWATER. Waste products carried by water through a
sanitary sewer line or system from residences, public and private buildings
or property, industrial, commercial, institutional or any other buildings or
premises, including the excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human
beings or animals, together with such groundwater infiltration and surface
water as may be present.



      SEWERAGE SERVICE. The use of and benefit from the city's sanitary
sewer system, including the collection, transportation, pumping, treatment
and final disposal of sewage.



      STREET LATERAL. The sanitary sewer pipe that conveys wastewater
from the sanitary sewer lateral at the property lot line to the city's
sanitary sewer system sewer main.



      WASTEWATER. Shall have the same meaning as SEWAGE .



   (B)   Discharge and disposal.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or user of
any premises to direct into or allow any discharge or disposal into the
sanitary sewer system in violation of the provisions of this section and the
following:



         (a)   All discharges into the sanitary sewer system
shall comply with the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services Waste
Discharge Rules 401.00 to 412.00 (Limitations on Discharges 2013), as may be
amended from time to time.



         (b)   It is unlawful to discharge or dispose any of the
following described wastes into the sanitary sewer system:



            1.   Fats, oils, or grease (FOG) directly or with
water or other waste when more than 100 milligrams of FOG is present per
liter of water or waste.



            2.   Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.



            3.   Garbage, except organic refuse such as has
been properly shredded with a garbage disposal.



            4.   Ashes, cinders, shavings, feathers, tar or
other liquid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow
in the sewer system or other interference with the proper operation of the
system.



            5.   Noxious or malodorous substances capable of
creating a public nuisance.



            6.   Clear water, subject to the additional
requirements set forth herein.



         (c)   Direct disposal of fats, oil and grease into the
sanitary sewer system is strictly prohibited and any property use requiring
the disposal of used fats, oil and grease shall:



            1.   Keep, maintain and use a receptacle or dump
station for the disposal of fats, oils and grease; and



            2.   Establish a program for the regular removal
of accumulated fats, oil and grease from FOG receptacle or dump station.



         (d)   Fats, oil, and grease interceptors and grease
traps shall be installed and used when liquid wastes contains FOG in excess
of 100 milligrams per liter of wastewater or contribute to FOG buildup,
blockages, and overflows in the sanitary sewer system.



         (e)   Sand and flammable interceptors shall be installed
and used when any sand and flammable wastes may be disposed into the sanitary
sewer system;



         (f)   Interceptors shall be designed by a licensed and
qualified engineer in compliance with the Minnesota State Plumbing Code and
approved by the city before installation.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, when the Public Works
Director or Utilities Superintendent determines that certain groundwater or
surface water is contaminated and should not be discharged into the storm
water system, said groundwater or surface water may be discharged or disposed
into the sanitary sewer system, provided such discharge is subject to all
applicable provisions and rules related to the Metropolitan Council special
discharge permit requirements. 



   (C)   Interceptor regulations, and inspection and maintenance. All
interceptors for FOG, sand and flammable wastes and grease traps as required
herein are subject to the following:



      (1)   Where installed, all FOG, sand and flammable
interceptors and grease traps shall be maintained and the sanitary sewer
lateral shall be kept clear by the owner, at owner's expense, and kept in
continuously efficient operation at all times.  At such time that excessive
FOG, sand or flammables enter the sanitary sewer system which have
contributed to buildup, blockage or  exceed design standards, the city shall
require the owner to develop a management plan which at a minimum will
identify periodic inspection and maintenance intervals at least annually of
the interceptor and sanitary sewer lateral or private sewer service. If it is
determined that annual maintenance intervals are not sufficient to eliminate
buildup, blockage or overflows in the sanitary sewer system, the city may
require the owner to establish a more frequent maintenance timeline.



      (2)   All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the Public Works Director or designee and meet MCES Waste
Discharge Rules 401.00 - 406.00 (2013) as amended, and Minnesota State
Building Code, Chapter 4715, and shall be located so as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.



      (3)   Outdoor interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature.



      (4)   Indoor interceptors shall be of substantial
construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which
when bolted in place shall be gas-tight and watertight.



      (5)   Interceptors shall not be required for private
residential properties.



   (D)   Clear water discharge prevention and prohibition.



      (1)   No clear water shall be discharged, directly or
indirectly, into the city's sanitary sewer system.



      (2)   All sump pump systems within the city shall meet the
following requirements:



         (a)   No sump pump system shall discharge any clear
water into the city's sanitary sewer system;



         (b)   The sump pump system design shall provide and
operate year-round discharge of water through a permanently installed
discharge line from the interior of the structure to the exterior of the
structure from which the clear water is discharged either onto the property
which the sump pump system serves or directly into the city's storm sewer
system by direct connection thereto or into the abutting city street for
discharge into the street drainage, provided approval is first obtained
through a license agreement from the Public Works Director or designee;



         (c)   The sump pump system's permanent discharge line
shall be made of material that complies with the Minnesota Plumbing Code and
shall not have any connection fittings as to permit alterative flow path
subsequent to installation;



         (d)   If the sump pump system discharge line is
connected directly to the city's storm sewer system upon approval by the
city, then the discharge line shall have a check valve which shall be located
within the property's boundaries and not within the public right-of-way; and



         (e)   The owner of the property from which a sump pump
system discharge line is connected directly to the city's storm sewer system
shall be responsible for the upkeep, maintenance, and locating of the sump
pump discharge line located within the public right-of-way.



      (3)   Inspections.



         (a)   Inspections required.



            1.   Any property within the city that is
connected to the city's sanitary sewer system shall be subject to a
compliance inspection to determine whether the property's discharge of its
clear water is in compliance with this section and is not discharged into the
city's sanitary sewer system. The property owner or occupant shall permit the
city's designated inspector on the property and within any structure thereon
to complete the inspection. The compliance inspection shall occur within 30
days of written notice from the city that a compliance inspection is required
on the property. The compliance inspection shall occur at a reasonable time
and in the manner as determined by the Public Works Director.



            2.   In lieu of a compliance inspection by the
City Inspector, the property owner or occupant may have the property
inspected, at the sole expense of the owner or occupant, by a licensed
plumber who shall inspect the property and file a certificate of compliance,
on a form provided by the city, within 30 days of the city's notice of the
required inspection. The licensed plumber who conducts the compliance
inspection shall certify on the certificate of compliance that the property's
discharge of clear water is in compliance or noncompliance with the
provisions of this section.



            3.   In the event that the inspector cannot
complete the compliance inspection because the sewer  sump pump basket and
discharge piping is not readily accessible as required by the Minnesota State
Plumbing Code, the owner or occupant shall take all necessary steps to make
the sewer sump pump basket and discharge piping readily accessible for the
re-inspection to be completed within 30 days of the date the inspector was at
the property to conduct the initial inspection. If the owner or occupant
fails to make the sewer line sump pump basket and discharge piping 
accessible for inspection, such failure shall constitute a failure to comply
with inspection requirements and subject to the monthly surcharge set forth
herein.



         (b)   Failure to comply with inspection requirements. If
the property owner or occupant fails to permit or have completed a compliance
inspection, the city may apply to the district court for an appropriate
administrative search warrant authorizing the city to enter the property to
conduct the inspection. 



         (c)   Re-inspections. In the event that the discharge of
clear water on the property is not in compliance with this section, a second
compliance inspection shall be completed within 60 days of the notice of
noncompliance to determine if the necessary corrections have been made and
compliance with this section has been met. The second compliance inspection
shall be subject to the requirements set forth above. Thereafter, the
property may be subject to re-inspections on an annual basis to confirm
continued compliance. Properties that are in compliance shall also be subject
to re-inspections to confirm continued compliance.



         (d)   Corrections.  Upon notice that the discharge of
clear water on the property is not in compliance with this section, the owner
or occupant of the property shall immediately cease from discharging clear
water in violation of this section and shall make the necessary repairs and
corrections to discharge the clear water in accordance with this section.
Discharge of clear water in compliance with this section shall be completed
within 60 days of the date of notice of noncompliance.



         (e)   Inspections with building permits.  If a City
Inspector is on a property for the purpose of a building permit inspection,
the City Inspector has the authority to inspect the property for compliance
with this section without further notice to the property owner or occupant.



         (f)   Inspections with water meter repair or
replacement. If the city's designated personnel are on the property for the
purpose of a water meter repair or replacement, the city representative has
the authority to inspect the property for compliance with this section
without further notice to the property owner or occupant.



         (g)   Surcharges.



            1.   A monthly surcharge in an amount duly adopted
by City Council shall be assessed against the property on which clear water
is discharged in violation of this section. The monthly surcharge will be
charged on the property's municipal utility billing statement. A monthly
surcharge will be assessed and charged as follows:



               A.   An inspection as required herein has
not been allowed by the property owner or occupant or a certificate of
compliance has not been filed with the city within 30 days after the city's
notice of inspection;



               B.   The property owner or occupant fails to
make the sewer line sump pump basket and discharge piping readily available
for the inspection;



               C.   The necessary corrections have not been
made within the time specified; and



               D.   The property owner or occupant
reconnects a clear water discharge line to the city's sanitary sewer system
after it has been previously disconnected at the city's or a court's
direction.



            2.   A surcharge will be assessed for every month
during which the property is not in compliance or the property owner has not
made the sewer line sump pump basket and discharge piping readily available
for the inspection, whether the noncompliance has existed for the entire
month or a portion thereof. The monthly surcharge for a re-connection will be
charged for each month beginning with the month in which the inspection was
completed or a certificate of compliance was filed confirming the previous
disconnection through the end of the month in which the reconnection is
subsequently disconnected.



         (h)   Temporary waiver. The city may grant a temporary
waiver from the provisions of this section where strict enforcement would
cause a threat of damage or harm to other property, the environment, or
public safety because of circumstances unique to the individual property or
due to weather conditions. A written request for a temporary waiver must be
first submitted to the Public Works Director specifying the reasons for the
temporary waiver. If a temporary waiver is granted, the property owner shall
pay an additional fee for wastewater sewerage service charges based on the
number of gallons discharged into the city's sanitary sewer system as
estimated by the Public Works Director. The Public Works Director may set
conditions to the temporary waiver.  The Public Works Director may terminate
the temporary waiver upon a failure to comply with any conditions imposed on
the temporary waiver. The Public Works Director must give a five-day written
notice of the termination to the property owner and occupant setting forth
the reasons for the termination. After expiration or termination of a
temporary waiver, the property owner shall comply with the provisions of this
section.



(‘81 Code, § 21-25)  (Ord. 152, passed 11-13-74; Am. Ord. 956, passed
12-26-13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.09  LEAK IN SERVICE LINE.



   Any owner, occupant or user of a premises who shall discover a leak in
a service line to the premises shall notify the Utilities Superintendent
within 24 hours.  Any water wasted due to failure of the person to comply
with this regulation shall be estimated by the Utilities Superintendent or
designee and be charged for against the person at the established rate.



(‘81 Code, § 21-26)  (Ord. 152, passed 11-13-74; Am. Ord. 835, passed
2-28-08)



§ 51.10  FIRE HYDRANTS AND OTHER UTILITY APPURTENANCES.



   (A)   Private water hydrants.



      (1)   Purpose. This provision ensures compliance with the
Minnesota State Fire Code, which requires inspections of water hydrants and
that all water hydrants are maintained in working order and kept in good
repair for proper and operational use when public safety and fire protection
is necessary.



      (2)   Scope of application. This provision shall apply to all
water hydrants that are:



         (a)   Not city-owned;



         (b)   Not located within utility easements or water
utilities intended to be under easement;



         (c)   Not located within city rights-of-way, or state or
county rights-of-way under maintenance agreements with the city; or



         (d)   Covered by a maintenance agreement with a private
owner.



      (3)   Inspections.



         (a)   All private water hydrants within the city shall
be subject to an annual inspection and an inspection after each operation to
ensure the hydrant is in good repair and in operational condition.
Inspections may be conducted by the owner through a person or company
licensed in the State of Minnesota to complete fire protection inspections
(“qualified person”) or by the city pursuant to the owner’s request and
consent.



         (b)   If the inspection is to be conducted by the city,
the property owner shall complete and submit to the city’s Public Works
Department a signed consent form as prescribed by the city.



         (c)   If the inspection is conducted by a qualified
person, the property owner shall be responsible for submitting to the
city’s Public Works Department a certificate of compliance that is
completed and signed by the qualified person. The certificate of compliance
shall be on a form provided by the city.



      (4)   Maintenance and repair.



         (a)   If upon inspection it is determined a water
hydrant is not in good repair, does not operate as designed, or is otherwise
in need of maintenance or repair, the property owner shall, in a timely
manner, have the necessary maintenance, repair or replacement completed by a
qualified person or elect to have the city perform the work.



         (b)   If the maintenance, repair or replacement is to be
conducted by the city, the property owner shall complete and submit to the
city’s Public Works Department a signed consent form as prescribed by the
city.



         (c)   If the city provides material(s), part(s), and
labor to maintain, repair or replace the water hydrant, then the property
owner shall pay and be fully responsible for the cost of all material(s) and
part(s), plus labor at such rate as determined by City Council resolution.
All material, parts, and labor costs shall be included on the property
owner’s municipal utility billing statement as governed by this chapter.



         (d)   If the maintenance, repair or replacement is
conducted by a qualified person, the property owner shall be responsible for
submitting to the city’s Public Works Department a certificate of
compliance that is completed and signed by the qualified person. The
certificate of compliance shall be on a form provided by the city.



      (5)   Penalties and special assessment. All of the charges
imposed by the city for any work completed as set forth in this section shall
be deemed delinquent if unpaid at the close of business on the due date shown
on the municipal utility billing statement. A penalty shall be charged on all
delinquent balances at the rate set forth for delinquent municipal utility
billing accounts as governed in this chapter. The penalty charges shall be
added to and become part of the delinquent balances. Any delinquent account
balance which is more than 45 days past due may be assessed against the
property as set forth elsewhere in this chapter and as a service charge under
M.S. Chapter 429.



   (B)   Unlawful use or tampering. It shall be unlawful for any person
other than an employee of the Public Works Department, the Fire Department,
or Police Department who is engaged in authorized municipal work, to open,
tamper with or otherwise use any fire hydrant, valve or other appurtenances
to the water, sanitary sewer or storm sewer system without first obtaining
authority to do so from the City Administrator, Public Works Director, or
Utilities Superintendent or designee.



(‘81 Code, § 21-24)  (Ord. 152, passed 11-13-74; Am. Ord. 835, passed
2-28-08; Am. Ord. 956, 12-26-13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CONNECTIONS AND REPAIRS



§ 51.20  APPLICATION AND PERMITS.



   (A)   No person shall make any type of connection to, repair of or
alteration in the water system, sanitary sewer system, or storm water sewer
system, except after making an application on a form provided by the city and
after receiving a permit issued by the city.  The application shall include
the legal description of the property to be served, name of owner, the uses
for which connection is requested, name of street upon which the property
fronts and official street number assigned to the premises as shown by
records of the Building Department, and the size of the service line to be
used.



   (B)   After the construction, enlargement, alteration or repair of
the system is complete the Utilities Division shall be notified.  It shall
be unlawful to cover any connecting line until an inspection has been
completed and the connection and the work incident thereto has been approved
by the Utilities Division.



(‘81 Code, § 21-7)  (Ord. 152, passed 11-13-74)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.21  INSTALLATION OF CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   All connections to the water system, sanitary sewer system or
storm sewer system shall be performed by a plumber licensed by the State of
Minnesota or a certified pipelayer licensed by the State of Minnesota who is
restricted to outside water and sewer piping; except that nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to prohibit an individual owner from obtaining a
permit and installing a connection by the owner’s own labor, provided
however, that the construction is conducted under the regulations of this
chapter and state plumbing code.



   (B)   Every connection to the water and sanitary sewer system shall
be made in accordance with the city and state plumbing code.



   (C)   All installation work or repairs of connections to the
municipal water and sewer systems, including grades, bends and backfilling
shall be performed under the direction and supervision of the Utilities
Superintendent or designee.  No work shall be covered or backfilled until
directed by the Utilities Superintendent or designee.  All work and
excavations shall be protected by barricades and warning markers and lights
reasonable and suitable to the purpose. 



(‘81 Code, § 21-9)  (Ord. 152, passed 11-13-74; Am. Ord. 835, passed
2-28-08)



§ 51.22  REQUIRED EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   There shall be installed in every connection to the city water
system one stop and waste valve which shall be installed at a point between
the curb stop and the meter so that the water may be turned off and the meter
and house plumbing entirely drained.  There shall be installed another stop
and waste cock and check valve in the pipe on the house side of the meter.



   (B)   There shall be installed a meter yoke or couplings of the type
approved by the city for convenient installation or removal of the meter. 
All service pipes connected to the city system shall be TYPE K copper, a
minimum one-inch inside diameter or its approved equal and in the
right-of-way shall be laid at a depth not less than eight feet below the
established grade, or as low as the street mains.



(‘81 Code, § 21-10)  (Ord. 152, passed 11-13-74; Am. Ord. 835, passed
2-28-08)



§ 51.23  LIABILITY FOR REPAIRS; OWNER RESPONSIBILITY; FAILURE.



   (A)   Water and sewer utilities located in the public
right-of-way.  After the initial connection has been made to the water
service lead or the sewer lead, the applicant, owner, occupant or user of the
premises served shall be liable for all repairs required to any water service
line or any sanitary or storm sewer line necessary for connection of the
premises to the curb stop or sewer lead.  It shall be the responsibility of
the owner, occupant or user to obtain the necessary authorization required,
if any, to complete the utility repairs.  It shall be the responsibility of
the applicant, owner, occupant or user to maintain the curb stop box or sewer
clean out at a height as will insure that it remains at the finished grade of
the property.



   (B)   Water and sewer utilities located outside the public
right-of-way.  After the initial connection has been made to the water
service lead or the sewer lead, the applicant, owner, occupant or user of the
premises served shall be liable for all repairs required to any water service
line or any sanitary or storm sewer line necessary for connection of the
premises to the street main, including any repairs necessary to the curb stop
and box or sewer clean out and any necessary street repairs.  It shall be
the responsibility of the owner, occupant or user to obtain the necessary
authorization required, if any, to complete the utility repairs.  It shall
be the responsibility of the applicant, owner, occupant or user to maintain
the curb stop box or sewer clean out, if any, at a height as will insure that
it remains at the finished grade of the property.



(‘81 Code, § 21-11) (Am. Ord. 835, passed 2-28-08)



RATES AND CHARGES



§ 51.35  COSTS AND CHARGES; DISCONNECTION FOR DELINQUENCY.



   (A)   Any connection, availability and use charges for water,
sanitary sewer and storm water sewer services under this chapter shall be
charged against the property for which the services are sought, provided or
accepted.  Notwithstanding that the property may be non-owner occupied, the
property owner shall be liable for all charges required under this chapter.



   (B)   When connection is requested, a meter is required for every
connection.  The property owner shall be required to pay a charge equal to
the sum of the actual cost of the meter to the city, plus applicable tax,
plus a percentage for the overhead of storage as set forth in the appendix to
Chapter 35.



   (C)   Whenever any payment for any water or sewer charges is
delinquent, the city may discontinue service to the property until the
delinquent charges are paid in full.  The service shall not be reconnected
until all delinquent charges have been paid in full.



(‘81 Code, § 21-17)  (Ord. 152, passed 11-13-74; Am. Ord. 317, passed
4-12-84; Am. Ord. 528, passed 12-19-91; Am. Ord. 835, passed 2-28-08)



§ 51.36  PRESCRIBING RATES; BILLING DATES.



   The Council, by resolution, shall have the authority to prescribe the
rates to be charged for water and sewer service usage to the customer and may
prescribe the date of billing, a discount for payment within a prescribed
period and/or penalty for failure to pay within the period and further rules
and regulations relative to the use and operation of the system as it may
deem necessary from time to time.



(‘81 Code, § 21-18)  (Ord. 152, passed 11-13-74)



§ 51.37  METER READINGS.



   (A)   The Council may provide a system of water meter reading by
post card, meter reader or any other method deemed suitable to the purpose by
the Council.  The Council may also establish billing areas or districts and
provide for the reading of meters as the Council determines suitable and
necessary.



   (B)   Whenever a customer questions the accuracy of the meter and
desires that the meter be tested, the user shall pay a deposit to the city in
the amount specified in the appendix to Chapter 35.  If the meter tests
accurate within the range of the American Water Works Association (AWWA)
specifications, the deposit shall be retained by the city to cover part of
the expense of making the test.  In case the meter does not test accurate
within the above-mentioned range, the deposit shall be restored to the
customer and an adjustment will be made for the period of time the meter is
assumed to be inaccurate, not to exceed two billing periods.



(‘81 Code, § 21-21)  (Ord. 152, passed 11-13-74; Am. Ord. 317, passed
4-12-84; Am. Ord. 835, passed 2-28-08)



§ 51.38  RATES FOR FAULTY METERS.



   If a meter fails to register or accurately measure the water, the
charge for water consumed shall be paid for at the established rate based
upon past average billings as determined by the Utilities Superintendent or
designee.



(‘81 Code, § 21-20)  (Ord. 152, passed 11-13-74; Am. Ord. 835, passed
2-28-08)



§ 51.39  DISCONNECTION OF SERVICES.



   (A)   (1)   The Council reserves the right to discontinue service
to any customer of the water or sewer systems without notice when necessary
for repairs, additional connections or reconnection.  The Council reserves
the right to discontinue service to any customer of the water or sewer
systems for nonpayment of charges or violation of any rules or regulations in
connection with the use or operation of the city systems.  A notice of
disconnection will be mailed to the owners and occupants of a served property
known to the city ten days prior to the disconnection of any service approved
by the Utilities Superintendent, except in emergency situations.



      (2)   If, within the ten-day period, the customer shall demand
a hearing, the Council shall hold a hearing, with services to the customer to
be continued after payment of a deposit as specified in the appendix to
Chapter 35 to apply on the utility charges and pending further orders from
the Council.



      (3)   For purposes of this section only, the term
“customer” shall mean any person, including the owner, lessee and
occupant, who receives and accepts water and sewer services regardless of
that person’s interest in the property to which the services are provided.



   (B)   In the event a water or sewer bill is unpaid at the end of the
quarter or other billing period after which the billing is sent out, the bill
shall be considered delinquent and the service may be discontinued as
provided herein and the Council may cause the charges noted in the billing to
become a lien against the property served by certifying to the County Auditor
the amount of the delinquent bill in accordance with the statutes of the
state.



(‘81 Code, § 21-19)  (Ord. 152, passed 11-13-74; Am. Ord. 317, passed
4-12-84; Am. Ord. 528, passed 12-19-91; Am. Ord. 835, passed 2-28-08)



§ 51.40  INDUSTRIAL SEWER STRENGTH CHARGES.



   (A)   Recitals. 



      (1)   The Metropolitan Waste Control Commission, a
metropolitan commission organized and existing under the laws of the state
(the “commission”), in order to receive and retain grants in compliance
with the federal Water Pollution Control Act, amendments of 1972, and
regulations thereunder (the “act”), has determined to impose an
industrial user sewer strength charge upon users of the metropolitan disposal
system, as defined in M.S. § 473.121, subd. 24, as amended, to recover
operation and maintenance costs of treatment works attributable to the
strength of the discharge of industrial waste, the sewer strength charge
being in addition to the charge based upon the volume of discharge. 



      (2)   In order for the city to pay costs based upon strength
of industrial discharge and allocated to it each year by the Commission, it
is hereby found, determined and declared to be necessary to establish sewer
strength charges and a formula for the computation thereof for all industrial
users receiving waste treatment services within or served by the city.



      (3)   Furthermore, M.S. § 444.075, subd. 3, as amended,
empowers the city to make the sewer charge a charge against the owner,
lessee, occupant or all of them and certify unpaid charges to the county
auditor as a tax lien against the property served.



   (B)   Establishment of strength charges.  For the purpose of paying
the costs allocated to the city each year by the Commission that are based
upon the strength of discharge of all industrial users receiving waste
treatment services within or served by the city, there is hereby approved,
adopted and established, in addition to the sewer charge based upon the
volume of discharge, a sewer charge upon each person receiving waste
treatment services within or served by the city, based upon strength of
industrial waste discharged into the sewer system of the city, the
“strength charge.”



   (C)   Establishment of strength charge formula. For the purpose of
computation of the strength charge established by division (B) above, there
is hereby established, approved and adopted in compliance with the act the
same strength charge formula designated in Resolution No. 76-172 adopted by
the governing body of the Commission on June 15, 1976, the formula being
based upon pollution qualities and difficulty of disposal of the sewage
produced through an evaluation of pollution qualities and quantities in
excess of an annual average base and the proportionate costs of operation and
maintenance of waste treatment services provided by the Commission.



   (D)   Strength charge payment.  It is hereby approved, adopted and
established that the strength charge established by division (B) above shall
be paid by each industrial user receiving waste treatment services and
subject thereto before the twentieth day next succeeding the date of billing
thereof to the user by or on behalf of the city, and the payment thereof
shall be deemed to be delinquent if not so paid to the billing entity before
the date.  Furthermore, it is hereby established, approved and adopted that
if the payment is not paid before the date an industrial user shall pay
interest compounded monthly at the rate of .66% of 1% per month on the unpaid
balance due.



   (E)   Establishment of tax lien.  As provided by M.S. § 444.075,
subd. 3, as amended, it is hereby approved, adopted and established that if
payment of the strength charge established by division (B) above hereof is
not paid before the sixtieth day next succeeding the date of billing thereof
to the industrial user by or on behalf of the city, the delinquent sewer
strength charge, plus accrued interest established pursuant to division (D)
above, shall be deemed to be a charge against the owner, lessee and occupant
of the property served, and the city or its agent shall certify such unpaid
delinquent balance to the county auditor with taxes against the property
served for collection as other taxes are collected; provided, however, the
certification shall not preclude the city or its agent from recovery of the
delinquent sewer strength charge and interest thereon under any other
available remedy.



(‘81 Code, § 21-23)  (Ord. 202, passed 6-15-78)



§ 51.41  PRIVATE WATER AND SANITARY SEWER SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Determination for private system.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to install a private
water system or sanitary sewer system in the city, except in cases where the
public water or sewer system is not accessible to the premises where the
private systems are requested.  To determine whether or not public water or
sewer systems are available for connection, each person desiring to install a
private water or sewer system must first make application for connection to
the municipal water and sanitary sewer systems. 



      (2)   Upon determination of the City Council that it is not
feasible to connect the applicant’s property to the municipal water or
sanitary sewer systems, the applicant shall be granted a permit to install a
private water system or individual sewage treatment system.



(‘81 Code, § 21-12)



   (B)   Private water not permitted in city systems. Whenever any
premises are connected to the city water system, there shall be maintained a
complete physical separation between the city water system and any private
water supply system so that it is impossible, intentionally or
unintentionally, to allow any water produced by a private system to be
introduced in the supply line of the city water system.



(‘81 Code, § 21-13)  (Ord. 152, passed 11-13-74)  Penalty, see § 10.99



INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEMS



§ 51.55  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.



   The City Council finds that the location, design, installation, use or
maintenance of subsurface sewage treatment systems (SSTS) may adversely
affect the health, safety and welfare of the Apple Valley residents and the
general public by the potential discharge of inadequately treated sewage into
ground waters, ground surfaces or surface waters.  In the interest of
protecting the health, safety and welfare of the public, the city has
established the regulations herein.



(Ord. 641, passed 2-26-98; Am. Ord. 905, passed 11-23-10)



§ 51.56  ADOPTION OF WATER POLLUTION CONTROL ACT AND MINNESOTA RULES.



   M.S. §§ 115.55 and 115.56, comprising a part of the Minnesota
Pollution Control Act, as amended through 2009 and any amendments thereto
established and adopted hereafter from time to time, and Minnesota Rules,
Chapters 7080, 7081 and 7082, comprising a part of the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency Subsurface Sewage Treatment Systems Rules, as of 2008 and any
amendments thereto established and adopted hereafter from time to time, are
hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference, except as otherwise
provided herein. A copy of the provisions adopted herein shall be on file at
the City Inspection Department. The provisions adopted herein shall be
referred to hereinafter as “state requirements.”



(Ord. 641, passed 2-26-98; Am. Ord. 835, passed 2-28-08; Am. Ord. 905, passed
11-23-10)



§ 51.57  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter, the terms and phrases herein shall have
the definitions given in M.S. § 115.55 and Minnesota Rules, Chapters 7080,
7081 and 7082.



(Ord. 641, passed 2-26-98; Am. Ord. 905, passed 11-23-10)



§ 51.58  LICENSE REQUIRED; PERMIT AND PLAN.



   (A)   License required.  No person shall design, install, maintain,
pump, repair, replace, extend, or provide service to, or inspect a SSTS which
is located within the city without a license first issued pursuant to M.S. §
115.56.



   (B)   Permit and plan.



      (1)   Permit required.  No person shall newly construct,
replace, extend or repair a SSTS without first obtaining a permit therefor
from the city.  Any new construction or replacement or repair of a SSTS or
an upgrade required due to a bedroom addition shall be in compliance with the
state requirements adopted herein. No Type IV, Type V or MSTS system or any
SSTS system constructed in accordance with approved alternative standards
shall serve or be utilized on a property unless an operating permit from the
city is in effect.



      (2)   Permit application.  The application for a permit
hereunder shall be in writing and submitted to the city's Chief Building
Official on a form as the city shall provide, including the following
information:



         (a)   A certified written site evaluation report in
accordance with Minnesota Rules, Chapters 7080 and 7081 and this chapter; and



         (b)   A certified design report, including drawings,
calculations and summary of all of the SSTS components.



         (c)   For any lot created after January 23, 1996, a
certified lot survey depicting the location of two soil treatment and
dispersal areas on the lot that support the proposed SSTS.



         (d)   For any newly constructed or replacement SSTS, a
management plan that shall set forth the frequency of maintenance tasks
including solids removal, not to exceed every three years, monitoring of
maintenance and operation, requirement of owner to notify the city when the
SSTS is not in compliance or is abandoned, and requirement of owner to file
with the Building Inspections Department all maintenance records or reports. 



      (3)   Issuance of permit.  No permit shall be issued under
this section unless the application establishes that the SSTS will be in
compliance with the state requirements adopted herein.  The permit
application, along with all exhibits thereto, shall be reviewed and certified
by a licensed compliance inspector authorized by the city that the proposed
system to be constructed or the replaced, repaired or upgraded system will
meet the applicable state requirements.  The construction, replacement,
repair or upgrade of a SSTS may be initiated only upon the issuance of the
permit. No newly constructed, repaired, replaced or upgraded SSTS may be used
until a certificate of compliance is issued by a compliance inspector in
accordance with this chapter.



      (4)   Bedroom addition building permit or variance.  The city
shall not issue a building permit for an addition of a bedroom on property
served by SSTS except upon receipt of a certificate of compliance.  The city
may temporarily waive the certificate of compliance requirement for a
building permit or variance for an application made during the period of
November 1 through April 30, provided that an inspection of the system is
performed by the following June 1 and a certificate of compliance is
submitted to the city by the following July 1.



      (5)   Expiration of permit.  A permit issued hereunder shall
be valid for a period of 180 days.  If no substantial work has commenced
within that period, the permit shall expire.



      (6)   Appeals of decisions.  An applicant may appeal any
requirement, decision or determination by the city in connection with any
provision of this subchapter pursuant to the procedures set forth in §
155.396.



      (7)   Permit fees.  Any SSTS permit fee shall be as stated in
the Appendix to Chapter 35.



      (8)   Certified site evaluation report.  It shall be the
responsibility of any site evaluator to utilize the proper professional
tools, professional methods and judgments, and number of soil observations as
required by the state requirements to verify that the site complies with
Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080 for an individual SSTS or 7081 for a mid-sized
SSTS standards and requirements for the primary (initial) and reserve
(replacement) areas.  The primary area shall consist of a minimum of 4,000
square feet per site, unless otherwise directed by the city.  The size of
the reserve area shall be similar in size as the primary area.  The site
evaluator shall use the Dakota County Soil Survey and Munsell Soil Color
Charts in accordance with Minnesota Rules, Chapters 7080 and 7081, standards
and requirements.  A minimum of four soil observations and two percolation
tests must be completed for each the primary area and the reserve area.



      (9)   As-built record. For each newly constructed or replaced,
extended, upgraded or repaired SSTS, an "as-built" record shall be properly
completed and filed with the city no later than ten days after completion of
the new construction, replacement, upgrade or repair of the SSTS.  An
"as-built" record does not have to be filed with the city if the newly
constructed or replaced, upgraded or repaired SSTS completely complies with
the SSTS permit and plan under this subchapter.



      (10)   Management plan.  The owner and occupant of any
property on which a SSTS is located shall comply with the management plan
submitted with and approved by the city in the permit application process for
the SSTS on the property.



      (11)   Abandonment of SSTS.  The owner and occupant of any
property on which an SSTS is located shall notify the city of any SSTS on the
property that is no longer in use and shall close the SSTS in accordance with
the state requirements within 90 days of the last day of use.



      (12)   Holding tanks.  Holding tanks may be used for the
following applications only after it can be shown conclusively by the
property owner that a SSTS permitted under this chapter cannot be feasibly
installed and is permitted under the issued permit:



         (a)   As a replacement for an existing failing SSTS;



         (b)   For a SSTS that poses an imminent threat to public
health or safety; or



         (c)   For use with buildings with limited water use.



(Ord. 641, passed 2-26-98; Am. Ord. 905, passed 11-23-10)



§ 51.59  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Compliance inspections required.



      (1)   An inspection to determine whether a SSTS is in
compliance with the state requirements adopted herein shall be conducted
whenever a SSTS permit is required under this subchapter. Any compliance
inspection performed hereunder shall be conducted by a licensed inspector,
whose license is independent of the permit applicant, the owner and/or
installer of the SSTS to be inspected.  The manner and timing of the
compliance inspection shall be as required by the licensed inspector for
purposes of new construction or replacement or upgrade of an SSTS.



      (2)   In the event a licensed inspector cannot perform an
inspection at the SSTS site, the licensed inspector may conduct the
compliance inspection through the use of video, electronic, photographic or
other reliable evidence of compliance provided by the licensed installer, as
approved by the licensed inspector.



   (B)   Certificate of compliance and notice of noncompliance.



      (1)   The licensed inspector shall submit a certificate of
compliance or notice of noncompliance to the city and the owner of the SSTS
within 15 business days after the compliance inspection.  The certificate of
compliance or notice of noncompliance must include a certified statement from
the licensed inspector that identifies the type of system inspected and
indicates whether the SSTS is in compliance with the state requirements
adopted herein.  In the event the SSTS is not in compliance, the inspector
shall specify the basis for noncompliance and whether the SSTS must be
upgraded, replaced or its use discontinued.  If the SSTS presents an
imminent threat to public health or safety, the notice of noncompliance must
contain a statement to this effect.



      (2)   If a notice of noncompliance is submitted to the city, a
second compliance inspection shall be completed upon the upgrade,
replacement, repair or discontinued use as required in the notice of
noncompliance.



   (C)   Bedroom addition building permit or variance.  No building
permit for the addition of a bedroom on property served by a SSTS shall be
issued unless a compliance inspection is performed and a certificate of
compliance is submitted to the city.



   (D)   Periodically saturated soil discrepancies or disputes.  If a
documented discrepancy arises as to the depth of the periodically saturated
soil between licensed system professionals/ business or a licensed business
and the city Building Official for purposes of SSTS design or compliance,
then the parties, including the property owner, shall participate in a
dispute resolution method as set forth in Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7082.



(Ord. 641, passed 2-26-98; Am. Ord. 905, passed 11-23-10)



§ 51.60  REPAIR OF NONCOMPLYING OR FAILING SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Repair required.  The owner or occupant of any property on
which a noncomplying or failing SSTS  is located shall upgrade, repair,
replace or discontinue the use of the SSTS in accordance with the
requirements of Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080 or 7081 as applicable and the
notice of noncompliance. Any noncomplying or failing SSTS from which
discharge or sewage can be contained within the property the SSTS serves and
is not an imminent threat to public health or safety shall be corrected
within 300 days, ten months, of the date of service of the notice of
noncompliance.



   (B)   Correction of system.  Any noncomplying or failing SSTS from
which discharged sewage cannot be contained within the property the SSTS
serves or that poses an imminent threat to the public health and safety,
shall be corrected within 30 days of service of the notice of noncompliance
unless weather conditions prevent correction within 30 days in which case the
owner or occupant shall implement temporary corrective measures (such as
regular pumping of the SSTS) and complete permanent corrective measures as
soon as physically feasible, but in no case later than 300 days, ten months
immediately following the date of service of the notice of non-compliance,
whichever is longer.



   (C)   Second inspection. Upon the repair, upgrade, replacement or
discontinuance of the use of the SSTS as directed in the notice of
non-compliance, a second compliance inspection must be completed within 30
days of the repair, upgrade, replacement or discontinuance and a certificate
of compliance must be filed with the city within ten days of the
inspection.  If the owner or occupant fails to comply with this section, the
use of the SSTS must be discontinued immediately.



(Ord. 641, passed 2-26-98; Am. Ord. 835, passed 2-28-08; Am. Ord. 905, passed
11-23-10)



§ 51.61  MINIMUM SOIL TREATMENT AREA.



   Any property or lot platted after January 23, 1996, and served by a
SSTS shall have a minimum of one additional soil treatment area which can
support a standard soil treatment system.



(Ord. 641, passed 2-26-98; Am. Ord. 905, passed 11-23-10)



§ 51.62  APPLICATION OF OTHER RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   In addition to all provisions of this subchapter, all federal, state
and local statutes, rules and regulations governing the discharge or disposal
of sewage or the construction, repair or replacement of individual sewage
treatment system shall apply with which all persons shall comply within the
city.  Any conflict between the provisions of this subchapter and any other
state or local statute, regulation or ordinance, shall be resolved in favor
of the more restrictive provision.



(Ord. 641, passed 2-26-98; Am. Ord. 905, passed 11-23-10)



§ 51.63  REQUIRED SEPTIC TANK SIZING AND TANK REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Any septic tank for a new or replacement septic tank for any
SSTS shall be sized 50% greater than the minimum size requirement provided in
Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080 or 7081 as applicable.  In the event that a
basement toilet which exists or could exist, would require a pump, the septic
tank capacity shall be sized for both the potential basement toilet and the
basement raw sewage pump in accordance with Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7080 or
7081 as applicable.



   (B)   Determination of hydraulic loading rate and SSTS sizing. Table
IX from Minnesota Rules 7080.2150, subp. 3(E) entitled Loading Rates for
Determining Bottom Absorption Area for Trenches and Seepage Beds for Effluent
Treatment Level C and Absorption Ratios for Determining Mound Absorption
Areas Using Detail Soil Descriptions and Table IXa from Minnesota Rules
7080.2150, subp. 3(E) entitled Loading Rates for Determining Bottom
Absorption Area for Trenches and Seepage Beds for Effluent Treatment Level C
and Absorption Ratios for Determining Mound Absorption Areas Using
Percolation Tests and herein adopted by reference shall both be used to size
SSTS infiltration areas using the larger sizing factor of the two for SSTS
design.



   (C)   All owners of new or replacement SSTS that are considered to
be Class V injection wells as defined in the Code of Federal Regulations,
title 40, part 144, are required to submit SSTS inventory information to the
United States Environmental Protection Agency and the MPCA.  Owners are also
required to identify all Class V injection wells in property transfer
disclosures.



(Ord. 641, passed 2-26-98; Am. Ord. 905, passed 11-23-10)



§ 51.64  VARIANCE TO TECHNICAL STANDARDS.



   (A)   A property owner may request a variance from the provisions in
this chapter upon filing an application for variance in accordance herein
with the city Building Official. The variance application must provide the
following:



      (1)   The specific provision in the rule or rules from which
the variance is requested;



      (2)   The reasons why compliance with the rule(s) cannot be
met;



      (3)   A detail description of the circumstances that prevent
compliance with the rule and why the circumstances make compliance
unreasonable, impractical or not feasible;



      (4)   The alternative measures that will be taken to ensure a
comparable degree of compliance with the intention of the applicable chapter;



      (5)   The length of time for which the variance is requested;
and



      (6)   Other relevant information requested by the Chief
Building Official as necessary to properly evaluate the variance request.



   (B)   The Chief Building Official may grant a variance only upon a
finding that by reason of exceptional circumstances, which were not due to or
created by the applicant, the strict enforcement or strict conformity with
this chapter would be unreasonable, impractical, or not feasible under the
circumstances.  The Chief Building Official may permit a variance so long as
it is in harmony with the general purpose of this chapter and Minnesota
Rules, Chapters 7080 and 7081 and the intent of applicable state requirements.



(Ord. 905, passed 11-23-10)



§ 51.65  PERMIT SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   Upon any violation of any term or condition of a permit issued under
this chapter or any violation of any state requirement adopted herein in
connection with the construction, replacement, expansion or repair of a SSTS,
the Chief Building Official may suspend or revoke the permit and all work or
operation thereunder shall cease. The owner and licensed permit holder shall
bring the SSTS into compliance with this chapter as directed by the Chief
Building Official. If compliance is not met within the timeframe set by the
Chief Building Official, the permit shall be deemed automatically revoked.



(Ord. 905, passed 11-23-10)



CHAPTER 52:  STORM SEWERS




Section




   52.01   Authority and purpose



   52.02   Establishment of districts



§ 52.01  AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE.




   Pursuant to M.S. §§  444.16 through 444.21, the city is authorized
to establish, by ordinance, storm sewer improvement taxing districts within
which the city may acquire, construct, reconstruct, extend, maintain, and
otherwise improve storm sewer systems and related facilities and on which the
city may levy a tax on all taxable property therein to finance the cost of
such improvements, including maintenance and the payment of principal and
interest on obligations issued in making such improvements. Such improvements
may include, but are not limited to, pipes, catch basins, holding ponds,
aeration equipment, infiltration beds, retaining walls, chemical treatment,
vegetative materials, and other devices, programs, or maintenance to regulate
and control the volume, rate, and quality of storm water runoff.





(Ord. 720, passed 7-25-02)




§ 52.02  ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.



   Storm Sewer Improvement Taxing Districts are hereby established for
specific geographic areas which the city has determined are in need of and
would benefit from certain storm sewer improvements and ongoing maintenance
activities as follows:



   (A)   Storm Sewer Improvement Taxing District Number 1 which lies
within the following described boundary: That part of the West Half (W 1/2)
of the Northeast Quarter (NE 1/4) of Section 34, Township 115 North, Range 20
West, Dakota County, Minnesota; lying southerly of the following described
line: Commencing on the southeast corner of saidWest Half of the Northeast
Quarter, thence north 0 degrees 13 minutes 43 seconds east, along the east
line of said West Half of the Northeast Quarter, a distance of 951.67 feet to
the point of beginning of the line to be described; thence south 89 degrees
49 minutes 18 seconds west a distance of 270.27 feet; thence westerly 165.30
feet along a tangential curve to the right, having a radius of 418.00 feet
and a central angle of 22 degrees 39 minutes 29 seconds; thence westerly
230.18 feet along a reverse curve to the left, having a radius of 582.00 feet
and a central angle of 22 degrees 39 minutes 36 seconds; thence south 89
degrees 49 minutes 10 seconds west, tangent to said curve, a distance of
75.00 feet; thence westerly 241.93 feet along a tangential curve to the left,
having a radius of 582.00 feet and a central angle of 23 degrees 49 minutes
00 seconds; thence westerly 139.84 feet along a reverse curve to the right,
having a radius of 418.00 feet and a central angle of 19 degrees 10 minutes
05 seconds; thence north 4 degrees 49 minutes 45 seconds west, not tangent to
said curve, a distance of 2.00 feet; thence westerly along a non-tangential
curve to the right, having a radius of 416.00 feet, a central angle of 4
degrees 39 minutes 04 seconds, a chord distance of 33.76 feet and a chord
bearing of south 87 degrees 29 minutes 46 seconds west; thence south 89
degrees 49 minutes 18 seconds west, tangent to said curve, a distance of
193.21 feet to the west line of said West Half of the Northeast Quarter and
there said line terminates. This area is to be platted as "The Legacy of
Apple Valley".



(Ord. 720, passed 7-25-02)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



Chapter



   70.   TRAFFIC RULES



   71.   PARKING REGULATIONS



   72.   USE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY



CHAPTER 70:  TRAFFIC RULES



Section



General Provisions



   70.01   State regulations adopted by reference



   70.02   Definition



   70.03   Direction of traffic; authority



   70.04   Size, weight and load roadway restrictions



   70.05   Exhibition driving prohibited



Traffic Signal Preemption System



   70.15   Purpose



   70.16   Definitions



   70.17   Conditions for using TSPS



   70.18   Procedures for operation



   70.19   Maintenance procedures



   70.20   TSPS training



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 70.01  STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The regulatory provisions of M.S. Chapters 168, 169, 169A and 171, as
amended, are hereby adopted by reference and are hereby incorporated in and
made a part of this code as completely as if set out in full herein,
regulating the use of highways, streets and alleys within the city.  It is
unlawful and a violation of this code for any person to violate any provision
of M.S. Chapters 168, 169, 169A or 171.



(‘81 Code, § 19-1)  (Ord. 197, passed 3-9-78; Am. Ord. 886, passed 4-8-10)



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning authority to adopt statutes, see M.S. §
471.62



§ 70.02  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this title, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OWNER.  The person who holds legal title or is the registered owner or
lessee of the motor vehicle on the date of any alleged violation, as
evidenced by the official records of the state or any agency thereof, or who
has purchased, but has not registered the vehicle. 



(‘81 Code, § 19-3)  (Ord. 197, passed 3-9-78)



§ 70.03  DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC; AUTHORITY.



   The following persons are authorized to direct motor vehicle traffic
within the city in the following situations.



   (A)   Police Department.  All sworn police officers of the Apple
Valley Police Department may direct traffic in any situation regardless of
whether the sworn personnel are scheduled for duty at that time. 
Additionally, a community service officer employed by the Police Department
and members of the Police Department Explorers group, who are 18 years of age
or older, may direct traffic when so directed by the Police Chief or designee.



   (B)   Fire Department.  Any active member of the Apple Valley Fire
Department may direct traffic under the following circumstances:



      (1)   In connection with a fire to which the Fire Department
has responded;



      (2)   In connection with a motor vehicle accident or medical
emergency;



      (3)   In connection with inoperation of a semaphore traffic
control device; or



      (4)   Any other situation in which assistance of the fire
fighters is deemed necessary by the Police Chief or designee.



   (C)   Public Works Department.  Any employee of the Apple Valley
Public Works Department, who is acting within the scope of employment with
the city and is 18 years of age or older, may direct traffic when necessary
to perform the duties and tasks of the Public Works Department.



   (D)   Other personnel.  Any other persons permitted by law to
direct traffic.



(‘81 Code, § 19-4)  (Ord. 590, passed 12-20-94)



§ 70.04  SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD ROADWAY RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Adopted by reference. The regulatory provisions of M.S. §§
169.80 through 169.89, as amended, are hereby adopted by reference as roadway
restriction ordinances, regulating the size, weight and load restrictions of
all vehicles upon the roadways within the city, and are hereby incorporated
and made a part of this code as completely as if set out in full herein.



   (B)   Size, weight and load restrictions. It shall be unlawful for
any person to drive or move, or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to
be driven or moved, on a roadway within the city, a vehicle or vehicles of a
size, weight or load exceeding the limitations provided in M.S. §§ 169.80
through 169.89.



   (C)   Seasonal load restrictions. 



      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter or
the state statutory seasonal weight restrictions, the City Council, by a duly
adopted resolution, may impose prohibitions and restrictions as to the weight
of vehicles on the city’s streets between the dates set by the Commissioner
of Department of Transportation each year if roadway conditions so warrant.



      (2)   No person shall drive or move, nor shall the owner cause
or knowingly permit to be driven or moved, on a roadway within the city, a
vehicle or vehicles of a weight exceeding the posted seasonal limitations as
set forth by City Council resolution hereunder.



(Am. Ord. 943, passed 3-28-13)



§ 70.05  EXHIBITION DRIVING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall accelerate, decelerate, turn or otherwise operate a
motor vehicle upon any public or private way within the city limits with an
unnecessary exhibition of speed or in a manner which causes unnecessary
engine noise or backfire, squealing of tires, skidding, sliding, swaying,
throwing of sand or gravel or in a manner simulating a race.  The squealing
or screeching sounds emitted by tires, the throwing of sand or gravel by the
tires, or the unreasonable fish-tailing of the vehicle is prima facie
evidence of a violation of this section.  A violation of this section is a
petty misdemeanor.



(‘81 Code, § 19-27)  (Ord. 303, passed 10-13-83; Am. Ord. 886, passed
4-8-10) 



Cross-reference:



   Speed limits in mobile home parks, see § 151.25



TRAFFIC SIGNAL PREEMPTION SYSTEM



§ 70.15  PURPOSE.



   The purpose for using the traffic signal preemption system (TSPS) in
Apple Valley is to allow emergency vehicles to perform emergency services in
a safer and more timely manner by temporarily controlling motorized vehicle
traffic flow at signalized intersections.  The Council deems it advisable to
formulate policies and procedures for the use of the TSPS which are to be
followed by drivers of all emergency vehicles equipped with TSPS emitters so
that both pedestrians and drivers of motorized vehicles have adequate warning
that emergency vehicles are changing normal traffic control timing at
signalized intersections.



(‘81 Code, § 19-90)  (Ord. 401, passed 8-27-87)



§ 70.16  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   EMERGENCY VEHICLE.  A vehicle equipped and identified according to law
and operated by the Apple Valley Police and/or Fire Departments or any other
vehicle so recognized by written agreement with the City Council.



   TRAFFIC SIGNAL PREEMPTION SYSTEM (TSPS).  A traffic control system
designed for use by emergency vehicles to improve traffic movement by
temporarily controlling signalized intersections.  The TSPS is comprised of
the following four separate components: an emitter, a detector, an indicator
and a phase selector. 



      (1)   EMITTER.  A high intensity light source that is
attached to the emergency vehicle and functions like a strobe light,
pulsating at a frequency in excess of ten “beats” per second.  As an
emergency vehicle approaches the intersection, this pulsating light is
received by a detector that is located at or near the traffic signal. 



      (2)   DETECTOR.  Relays the coded message to the phase
selector, located in the traffic light control box, which then either holds
the existing green light in favor of the approaching emergency vehicle or
accelerates the normal cycle of a signal change to provide green by the time
the vehicle reaches the intersection.



      (3)   INDICATOR.  A light source located near the detector
which is directed toward the oncoming emergency vehicle to indicate to the
driver whether or not the traffic signal has been preempted in their favor.



(‘81 Code, § 19-91)  (Ord. 401, passed 8-27-87)



      (4)   EMERGENCY RESPONSES. A call for service that requires
the operator of the emergency vehicle to respond to an observed or reported
incident involving personal injury, medical emergency, property loss or crime
in progress.



§ 70.17  CONDITIONS FOR USING TSPS.



   (A)   Fire Department.  City-owned Fire Department vehicles shall
use TSPS while on emergency responses only.  Unless otherwise provided for
herein, all other use by the Department is prohibited.  Conditions for the
use of TSPS hereby become a part of the Fire Department standard operating
procedures.



   (B)   Police Department.  City-owned Police Department vehicles
shall use TSPS while on emergency responses only or when authorized by the
Chief of Police in advance for facilitating traffic flow.  Unless otherwise
provided for herein, all other use by the Department is prohibited. 
Conditions for the use of TSPS hereby become a part of the Police Department
standard operating procedures.



   (C)   City or county maintenance personnel. Dakota County or Apple
Valley maintenance personnel, or their contractors under written agreement,
may activate TSPS only when testing or repairing the system.  Sirens and
flashing red lights need not be used, except when the test vehicle must
exceed the posted speed limits.  In such instances, the test must be
pre-approved and coordinated through the Chief of Police.



   (D)   Emergency vehicles not owned or operated by the city.  The
use of TSPS within the city by emergency vehicles of other jurisdictions or
governmental agencies shall be approved by resolution by the City Council. 
Upon formal approval by the City Council, the user of TSPS shall follow all
procedures prescribed by the city in utilizing TSPS.



   (E)   Violations.  It shall be unlawful for any person to install a
TSPS emitter in a vehicle or activate TSPS in Apple Valley by any means
whatsoever unless authorized under this subchapter.



(‘81 Code, § 19-92)  (Ord. 401, passed 8-27-87) 



§ 70.18  PROCEDURES FOR OPERATION.



   (A)   When TSPS is being used by an emergency vehicle responding to
an emergency situation, standard light and siren operation should be followed
in accordance with department policy.



   (B)   When TSPS is being used in an emergency situation where the
use of sirens is not appropriate, standard emergency light operations should
still be used.  Increased caution and reduced speeds, particularly at
intersections, are then required.



   (C)   Emergency personnel must be aware that TSPS may fail to
provide right-of-way at all signalized intersections due to the following:



      (1)   The intersection may not be TSPS equipped;



      (2)   One or more TSPS components may be inoperative;



      (3)   The speed of the emergency vehicle may cause the
emergency vehicle to arrive at the intersection too soon for TSPS to cycle
the signal to green;



      (4)   Another emergency vehicle using TSPS may be coming from
a cross-flow direction and may already have seized command of the
intersection signal;



      (5)   Severe weather conditions may disrupt the detection of
the emitted signal, thereby preventing TSPS from recognizing the signal
preemption request;



      (6)   Other conditions may exist which prevent TSPS from
operating as designed.



   (D)   Upon reaching the emergency destination, TSPS emitter shall be
turned off immediately to insure that it does not inadvertently seize control
of surrounding signalized intersections.



   (E)   Whenever TSPS appears not to be functioning properly, it is
the driver’s responsibility to immediately report the defect and the
location of the defective signal to Apple Valley Police Dispatch.



(‘81 Code, § 19-93)  (Ord. 401, passed 8-27-87)



§ 70.19  MAINTENANCE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   It shall be the city’s policy to routinely test TSPS to
insure proper functioning of the system. During the tests, each intersection
which is TSPS equipped shall be checked from all approaches.  Test results
will be recorded on a standardized form indicating the intersection tested,
date of test, person conducting test, and evaluation result.  A copy of each
test form shall be sent to the Chief of Police.



   (B)   When a traffic signal is found to malfunction during a test,
the person conducting the test shall immediately notify Apple Valley Police
Dispatch of the defect and the location of the defective signal.



(‘81 Code, § 19-94)  (Ord. 401, passed 8-27-87)



§ 70.20  TSPS TRAINING.



   An explanation of the policies and procedures governing the use of TSPS
in Apple Valley shall be included in the basic and in-service training
courses for both the Apple Valley Police and Fire Departments.  Appropriate
training shall also be mandated for those non-city entities authorized to
utilize TSPS within Apple Valley.



(‘81 Code, § 19-95)  (Ord. 401, passed 8-27-87)



CHAPTER 71:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   71.01   Statement of policy



   71.02   Administrative action; control



   71.03   Definitions



Parking Prohibitions



   71.15   Compliance to authority’s orders



   71.16   Display of vehicle for sale



   71.17   Late-night parking



   71.18   Parking in snow conditions



   71.19   General prohibitions



   71.20   Leaving keys in parked vehicles



   71.21   Required vehicle position



Cross-reference:



   Utilities and supplies furnished by park operator, see § 151.20(D)



   Vehicle storage, see § 151.24



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 71.01  STATEMENT OF POLICY.



   The City Council finds that in order to preserve and protect the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city, it is desirable to
reduce traffic congestion and facilitate easier and less dangerous passage of
motor vehicles on city streets; to increase access for the fire department
and other emergency services to property abutting a street; to facilitate
snow removal as well as street repair and cleaning; to decrease the potential
for motor vehicle larcenies; to preserve the safety of pedestrians; to
improve visibility of nighttime police observation of property abutting
streets and guard against unlawful entries; to aid the determination of
abandoned vehicles; and to prevent conditions which are likely to create
hazardous road conditions or impede or likely to impede the free movement of
police, fire, health or other emergency traffic or citizens motor travel.



(‘81 Code, § 19-18)  (Ord. 197, passed 3-9-78; Am. Ord. 233, passed
1-10-80; Am. Ord. 520, passed 9-12-91)



§ 71.02  ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION; CONTROL.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to provide the
authorization and means for the city’s managerial staff to evaluate and
respond to requests or situations requiring the restriction or allowance of
vehicular parking without formal City Council action for each situation. 
The adoption and enforcement of parking controls and regulations are site
sensitive and specific to the location  and concerns to be addressed.



   (B)   Council action.  Except as otherwise provided in this
section, no device, sign or signal shall be erected or maintained for parking
control unless the City Council shall first have approved and directed the
same by resolution.



   (C)   Administrative action.



      (1)   When determined to be in the best interest for the
health, safety and welfare of the residents, property owners, business or
commuting public, the Chief of Police is empowered with the authority of the
City Council to restrict or allow parking, and the enforcement thereof, on
public thoroughfares and private property by means of installing or ordering
the installation of signage, barricades or other physical means as necessary
to convey the intent for proper enforcement in accordance with the state
statutes, city code or other local ordinances.



      (2)   When parking is restricted pursuant to subsection (1)
above or it is determined to allow parking, the City Council shall be so
informed of the specific area affected and the type of control at the next
regularly scheduled meeting from the date of the installation or sooner. 
The City Council retains the rights to rescind, modify or reaffirm the
controls as it deems necessary.



(‘81 Code, § 19-19)  (Ord. 520, passed 9-12-91; Am. Ord. 525, passed
12-5-91)



§ 71.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DRIVEWAY.  A paved area on private property that intersects with the
roadway of a public street and is intended to provide vehicle access from the
public roadway to private property.



   JUNK VEHICLE.  Any vehicle that:



      (1)   Is three years or older;



      (2)   Is extensively damaged, with the damage including such
things as broken or missing wheels, motor, drive train, or transmission,
doors, or windows;



      (3)   Is apparently inoperable;



      (4)   Does not have a valid, current registration; and



      (5)   Has an approximate fair market value equal only to the
approximate value of the scrap in it.



   MOTORCYCLE.  Any motor vehicle licensed for on-street operation,
having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on
not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, including motor
scooters and bicycles with motor attached, other than those vehicles defined
as motorized bicycles in M.S. § 169.01, but excluding a tractor.



   NON-PASSENGER VEHICLE.  Any motor vehicle measuring eight feet or more
in overall height or 22 feet or more in overall length including any
ancillary racks, cranes, storage compartments and the like; or any vehicle
with a manufacturer's nominal rating carrying capacity of one ton or more, or
any vehicles or trailers not customary or incidental to the use or occupancy
of residential properties, such as, but not limited to: dump trucks; step
vans; cargo trucks; tow trucks; semi trailer tractors; fire trucks; boom
trucks; tank trucks; hearses; and the like.  Recreational vehicles and
equipment are specifically excluded from this definition.



   PASSENGER VEHICLE.  Any motor vehicle licensed for on-street use
measuring less than eight feet in overall height and less than 22 feet in
overall length designed and commonly used for personal or work-related
day-to-day transportation purposes carrying not more than 15 persons,
including the driver.  A PASSENGER VEHICLE includes automobiles, SUVs, vans,
and pick-up trucks with a manufacturer's nominal rating carrying capacity of
one ton or less and commonly known as a pick-up truck and a van designed with
no barrier separation between the operator area and the remainder of the
cargo carrying area with a manufacturer's nominal rating carrying capacity of
one ton or less.  PASSENGER VEHICLE(S) shall not include buses, motorcycles,
motorized bicycles, motorized foot scooters, motor scooters, non-passenger
vehicles as defined in this section, school buses, trailers as defined in
this section, recreational equipment or recreational vehicles as defined in
this section.  A handicap-equipped van used for personal purposes shall be
deemed a PASSENGER VEHICLE regardless of height.



   PAVED SURFACE.  Any area covered by impervious materials consisting of
concrete, bituminous, or brick pavers.



   RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT, PRIVATE OUTDOOR.  Equipment designed for
outdoor use and used solely for the private enjoyment of the resident. 
Includes swing sets, trampolines, playhouses and similar equipment provided
that it is designed for outdoor use.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.  Any self-propelled motor vehicle licensed for
on-street use, non-motorized vehicle, or those vehicles towed by a motor
vehicle, which may include but not be limited to: travel trailers, including
those with telescope or fold down; chassis-mounted campers; motor homes; tent
trailers; sleeping campers; converted buses that provide temporary human
living quarters; jet skis; waverunners; snow mobiles; boats; ATVs; motocross
bikes; and the like.  Any RECREATIONAL VEHICLE stored and/or parked on a
trailer is considered one RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  Class I RECREATIONAL
VEHICLES measure less than eight feet in height overall and 22 feet in length
overall.  Class II RECREATIONAL VEHICLES measure eight feet or greater in
height overall and/or 22 feet or greater in length overall, but shall not be
any longer than 40 feet overall. 



   TRAILER.  Any vehicle or device licensed for on-street use designed
for carrying property on its own structure, and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle.  A Class I TRAILER measures less than eight feet in overall height
and less than 22 feet in overall length, measured from the hitch to the rear
tail lights.  A Class II TRAILER measures eight feet or greater in height
overall and/or 22 feet or greater in length overall, but shall not be any
longer than 40 feet overall.  Any recreational vehicle stored and/or parked
on a trailer is considered one recreational vehicle.



(Am. Ord. 834, passed 2-28-08) 



PARKING PROHIBITIONS



§ 71.15  COMPLIANCE TO AUTHORITY’S ORDERS.



   No person shall stop or park a vehicle on a street when directed to
proceed by any person authorized to direct traffic under this code.  A
violation of this section is a petty misdemeanor.



(‘81 Code, § 19-21)  (Ord. 197, passed 3-9-78; Am. Ord. 211, passed
10-26-78; Am. Ord. 233, passed 1-10-80; Am. Ord. 886, passed 4-8-10)



§ 71.16  DISPLAY OF VEHICLE FOR SALE.



   No vehicle shall be parked upon any street for the purpose of
displaying it for sale.  A violation of this section is a petty misdemeanor.



(‘81 Code, § 19-22)  (Ord. 197, passed 3-9-78; Am. Ord. 233, passed
1-10-80; Am. Ord. 886, passed 4-8-10)



§ 71.17  LATE-NIGHT PARKING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of a motor
vehicle to stop, stand or park a motor vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
traffic-control device or any person authorized under this code to direct
traffic, on any public street or public roadway within the city for a period
of longer than five minutes during the hours from 3:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.,
except:



      (1)   Persons rendering emergency medical assistance;



      (2)   In areas of construction where off-street parking is not
available; or



      (3)   Occupants of a residence may park passenger or
recreational vehicles only in front of that residence where there is not
space available to park passenger or recreational vehicles in the driveway of
that residence.  The driveway space shall be used to park the maximum number
of vehicles permitted by ordinances without permitting the vehicle to extend
into any public sidewalk or street area.  This provision shall not permit
on-street parking in violation of any other provision of this chapter or any
other ordinance, statute or regulation.  This exception shall not apply to
and there shall be no late-night on-street parking of trailers; or



      (4)   A motor vehicle or road construction machinery or
equipment used for and in connection with construction, repair or maintenance
work of the public right-of-way, provided:



         (a)   The work is pursuant to a city public improvement
project of the right-of-way upon which the motor vehicle or
equipment/machinery is parked; and



         (b)   The motor vehicle or the piece of
equipment/machinery is specifically permitted by the city to be parked within
the right-of-way.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, the term “motor vehicle”
shall have the meaning given in M.S. § 168.002.



   (C)    A violation of this section is a petty misdemeanor.



(‘81 Code, § 19-23)  (Ord. 197, passed 3-9-78; Am. Ord. 233, passed
1-10-80; Am. Ord. 243, passed 6-9-80; Am. Ord. 622, passed 12-12-96; Am. Ord.
834, passed 2-28-08; Am. Ord. 886, passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. 914, passed
4-14-11; Am. Ord. 942, passed 3-28-13; Am. Ord. 1022, passed 12-8-16)



§ 71.18  PARKING IN SNOW CONDITIONS.



   No owner or driver of a motor vehicle shall park the motor vehicle or
permit any motor vehicle to remain on any street in the city during any time
that snow plowing or snow removal operations are in progress. A violation of
this section is a petty misdemeanor.



(‘81 Code, § 19-24)  (Ord. 197, passed 3-9-78; Am. Ord. 233, passed
1-10-80; Am. Ord. 279, passed 11-23-92; Am. Ord. 886, passed 4-8-10)



§ 71.19  GENERAL PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a motor
vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the specific directions of a traffic-control device or a
person authorized under this code to direct traffic, in any of the following
places:



      (1)   On a sidewalk or trailway or in the area between the
sidewalk and roadway;



      (2)   In front of the access to a public or private driveway
or trailway;



      (3)   Within an intersection;



      (4)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant or mailbox;



      (5)   On any crosswalk;



      (6)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;



      (7)   On any surface which does not comply with the zoning
regulations of this code;



      (8)   At any place where official signs prohibit or restrict
stopping, parking or both; or



      (9)   Within the vehicular travel portion of any public or
private street or roadway; or



      (10)   Upon or on a public street or public property for more
than a period of 48 hours, unless:



         (a)   A permit therefor is first issued by the city; or



         (b)   The driveway space of a residence, of which the
owner of the motor vehicle is an occupant or visitor, does not have space
available to park a motor vehicle with the maximum number of vehicles
possible (without permitting the vehicle to extend into the sidewalk area)
occupying the driveway; or



         (c)   The off street parking area is under construction,
repair, or reconstruction.



   (B)   Parking in all residential districts shall be subject to the
following requirements:



      (1)   Required off-street parking in the residential districts
shall be on the same lot as the principal building unless otherwise approved
by the City Council;



      (2)   No commercial motor vehicle in excess of one ton
capacity and no commercial trailer shall be parked or stored in a residential
district except when loading, unloading or rendering a service.  One
commercial vehicle, not over one ton capacity, may be parked at the residence
of the owner or operator of the vehicle.  Under no circumstances shall
parking facilities accessory to residential structures be used for open air
storage of commercial vehicles and, in addition;



      (3)   The City Council may direct the removal or otherwise
limit the parking of any large vehicles upon or adjacent to any residential
use where it is determined that the parking has a detrimental effect upon
residential use.  The large vehicles shall include, but not be limited to,
buses, motor homes, cruisers or large trucks; and



      (4)   No person shall cause, undertake, permit or allow the
outside parking and storage of vehicles on residentially zoned property
unless it complies with the following requirements:



         (a)   For purposes of this section, a “vehicle” is
defined as any passenger car or truck;



         (b)   No more than four vehicles per lawful dwelling
unit may be parked or stored anywhere outside on R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or R-5
zoned property;



         (c)   The City Council may approve an annual “on site
parking permit” for exterior parking of more than four vehicles, but not to
exceed six vehicles, on an R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or R-5 zoned site provided it
meets the following standards:



            1.   The applicant’s property shall conform to
the parking standards set forth in § 155.378 hereof;



            2.   An affidavit shall be filed with the city,
stating that all abutting property owners have



been notified and given an opportunity to respond, in writing, if they have
specific concerns regarding the request; and



            3.   The owner shall pay an administrative fee as
established by the City Council by ordinance.



   (C)   Required off-street parking space in commercial or industrial
districts, including those within a planned development district, shall not
be utilized for open storage of goods, overnight parking of vehicles, storage
of vehicles or for vehicles which are inoperable, or for lease, rent or sale,
except where otherwise permitted.



   (D)   Violation. A violation of division (A) of this section is a
petty misdemeanor.



(‘81 Code, § 19-26)  (Ord. 281, passed 12-9-82; Am. Ord. 416, passed
5-5-88; Am. Ord. 473, passed 2-22-90; Am. Ord. 738, passed 11-13-03; Am. Ord.
767, passed 1-27-05; Am. Ord. 834, passed 2-28-08; Am. Ord. 886, passed
4-8-10)



§ 71.20  LEAVING KEYS IN PARKED VEHICLES.



   (A)   Prohibited.  No person shall leave a motor vehicle unattended
on any street, new or used car lot, or unattended parking lot, without first
turning off the engine, locking the ignition and removing the key from the
motor vehicle except a vehicle which has its windows closed and its door
locked or which is engaged in loading and unloading.



   (B)   Removal of keys by police officer.  Whenever any city police
officer or community service officer finds any motor vehicle in violation of
this section, the police officer or community service officer is authorized
to remove the keys therefrom and to deliver the same to the officer in charge
at the central police station.



   (C)   Violation. A violation of this section is a petty misdemeanor.



(‘81 Code, § 19-25)  (Ord. 241, passed 6-9-80; Am. Ord. 281, passed
12-9-82; Am. Ord. 886, passed 4-8-10)



§ 71.21  REQUIRED VEHICLE POSITION.



   Every vehicle parked upon any street with a curb shall be parked
parallel to and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of
the right-hand curb.  On streets without a curb, a vehicle shall be parked
to the right of the main traveled portion thereof and parallel thereto and in
a manner as not to interfere with the free flow of traffic. A violation of
this section is a petty misdemeanor.



(‘81 Code, § 19-20)  (Ord. 197, passed 3-9-78; Am. Ord. 233, passed
1-10-80; Am. Ord. 886, passed 4-8-10)



CHAPTER 72:  USE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY



Section



   72.01   Purpose



   72.02   Definitions



   72.03   Areas of operation



   72.04   Rules of operation



   72.05   Vehicle equipment



Cross-reference:



   Keller Lake and Lac Lavon Regulations, see §§ 95.15 through 95.19



§ 72.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide reasonable regulations for
the use of snowmobiles and all-terrain motor vehicles on public and private
property in the city.  It is intended to protect life, property and to
prevent public nuisances.  If any provision in this chapter contradicts the
regulations set forth in M.S. Chapters 168 (motor vehicle registration), 169
(motor vehicle operation), 171 (driver license regulations) or 84 (snowmobile
and all- terrain vehicle regulations), the state regulations shall control.



(‘81 Code, § 19-40)  (Ord. 300, passed 6-23-83)



§ 72.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE or ATV.  Self- propelled trail bikes, mini bikes,
amphibious vehicles and similar devices other than snowmobiles, whether or
not eligible to be licensed for use upon streets and highways, used at least
partially for travel on natural terrain.



   NATURAL TERRAIN.  Areas other than roadways or driveways (private or
public), parking lots and other areas of which the surface has been
intentionally modified for motor vehicle operation thereon.



   OPERATE.  To drive or be in physical control of a snowmobile, ATV or
recreational vehicle.



   OPERATOR.  Every person who operates or is in physical control of a
snowmobile, ATV or recreational motor vehicle.



   OWNER.  A person, other than a lien holder, having property interest
in or title to a snowmobile, ATV or recreational vehicle and entitled to the
use or possession thereof.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  In addition to snowmobiles and all-terrain
vehicles, as defined herein, a recreational vehicle is any self-propelled
vehicle designed for, used or capable of use for sport, amusement or
recreation other than motor homes, pickup campers or the like, whether or not
eligible to be licensed for use upon streets and highways, including, but not
limited to: motorcycles, motor scooters, dirt bikes, three- and four-wheel
trail bikes, go-karts, off-the-road four-wheel drive vehicles, hovercraft or
dune buggies: but excluding: motor vehicles designed and used for commercial,
industrial or agricultural purposes.



   SNOWMOBILE.  A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or
ice, steered by skis or runners and licensed in compliance with state
statutes.



(‘81 Code, § 19-41)  (Ord. 182, passed 11-10-76; Am. Ord. 300, passed
6-23-83)



§ 72.03  AREAS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   The operation of snowmobiles is prohibited in the city, except
on trails specifically marked as “snowmobile trails” within the
boundaries of Lebanon Hills Regional Park.



   (B)   The operation of an ATV or recreational vehicle other than a
snowmobile is prohibited in the city, except in the following areas:



      (1)   On trails specifically marked as “ATV trails” or
“recreational vehicle trails”;



      (2)   On private property when in possession of written
permission of the land owner or tenant having control of the property. 
Written permission shall contain the name and address of the owner and a
telephone number where the owner may be contacted to verify permission.  The
permission need not be carried when on a marked, approved trail; or



      (3)   On state and county highways except as otherwise
permitted in this chapter.



   (C)   Operation of snowmobiles and ATV’s on public sidewalks and
boulevard areas is specifically prohibited, except as provided in § 72.04.



   (D)   This section shall not apply to city agents, employees or
police officers acting in their official capacity.



(‘81 Code, § 19-42)  (Ord. 182, passed 11-10-76; Am. Ord. 300, passed
6-23-83; Am. Ord. 524, passed 12-5-91; Am. Ord. 636, passed 10-23-97) 



§ 72.04  RULES OF OPERATION.



   The following rules and regulations shall apply to the operation of
snowmobiles, ATV’s and recreational vehicles, hereafter referred to as
vehicles, in the permitted areas of operation as set forth herein, and any
violation of the rules and regulations is unlawful:



   (A)   Hours of operation.  Hours for use are 7:00 a.m. through
10:00 p.m. on Sundays through Thursdays.  On Fridays, Saturdays and days
preceding legal holidays, the hours shall be between 7:00 a.m. and 12:00
midnight.



   (B)   Safe operation, speed limit.  No person shall operate any
vehicle carelessly or heedlessly in disregard of the rights or safety of
others or in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person
or property.  No vehicle shall be operated within 300 feet of any residence
or building, except when unloading or loading the vehicle on the owner’s
property.  It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle:



      (1)   On any street or alley, except to cross;



      (2)   In a manner so as to create a loud, unnecessary or
unusual noise which disturbs, annoys or interferes with the peace and quiet
of other persons;



      (3)   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper
under all existing circumstances, but in any case not exceeding 35 miles per
hour;



      (4)   Under the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance;



      (5)   Within 100 feet of any children at play, people who are
fishing, pedestrians, skating rink or sliding area where the operation would
conflict with use or endanger others, except as hereinbefore specifically
authorized; or



      (6)   For the purpose of driving, chasing, running over or
killing any animal.



   (C)   Crossing of roads.  A vehicle may make direct crossings of
streets or highways, except freeways, provided:



      (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90
degrees to the direction of the street or highway and at a place where no
obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing;



      (2)   The vehicle is brought to a complete stop before
crossing the shoulder or main traveled way;



      (3)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming
traffic;



      (4)   In crossing a divided street or highway, the crossing is
made only at an intersection of the street or highway with another public
street or highway; or



      (5)   If the crossing is made between the hours of one-half
hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise or in conditions of reduced
visibility, both front and rear lights are on.



   (D)   Age of operator.



      (1)   No person under 18 years of age shall operate a vehicle
in violation of M.S. Chapter 84.



      (2)   No owner of any the vehicle shall permit its operation
in violation of the above age restrictions.



   (E)   Loading and unloading areas.  The vehicles shall not be
loaded or unloaded on public streets or highways, except in those areas
specifically designated as parking areas, and trailers or carriers designed
to haul the vehicles shall not be parked on public streets or highways,
except as otherwise permitted by law.



   (F)   State laws adopted by reference.  State statutes concerning
equipment for snowmobiles, recreational vehicles and ATV’s, and the
operation thereof are hereby incorporated into this chapter by reference as
if set out in full herein.



(‘81 Code, § 19-43)  (Ord. 182, passed 11-10-76; Am. Ord. 300, passed
6-23-83; Am. Ord. 524, passed 12-5-91)



§ 72.05  VEHICLE EQUIPMENT.



   All snowmobiles, ATV’s and recreational vehicles operated within the
city shall be equipped with:



   (A)   Standard mufflers which are properly attached and in constant
operation and which reduce the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum
necessary for operation.  No person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass,
straight pipe or similar device on any vehicle and the exhaust system shall
not emit or produce a sharp, popping or crackling sound;



   (B)   Brakes adequate to control the movement and to stop and hold
the vehicle under any conditions of operation; and



   (C)   At least one clear lamp, attached to the front of the vehicle,
with sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at
least 100 feet during the hours of darkness under normal atmospheric
conditions.  Headlamps shall be so aimed that glaring rays are not projected
into the eyes of an on-coming vehicle operator.  It shall also be equipped
with at least one red taillamp having a minimum candlepower of sufficient
intensity to exhibit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet
to the rear during the hours of darkness under normal atmospheric
conditions.  This equipment shall be operating when the vehicle is operated
between the hours of one-half hour before sunset and one-half hour after
sunrise or at times of reduced visibility.



(‘81 Code, § 19-44)  (Ord. 300, passed 6-23-83) 



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



Chapter



   90.   ABANDONED VEHICLES AND IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES



   91.   ANIMALS



   92.   CITY CEMETERY



   93.   FIRE PREVENTION



   94.   PUBLIC NUISANCES



   95.   PARKS AND RECREATION



   96.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



   97.   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT



CHAPTER 90:  ABANDONED VEHICLES AND IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES



Section



   90.01   Definitions



   90.02   Impoundment; tagging vehicles



   90.03   Report of police officer



   90.04   Notice; reclaiming vehicles



   90.05   Removal from private property



   90.06   Sale or disposal of unclaimed vehicles



   90.07   Designation of city towing contractor



   90.08   Storage of vehicles in violation of this chapter



   90.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning abandoned vehicles, see M.S. Chapter 168B



   For provisions concerning junkyards adjacent to highways, see M.S. §
161.441



§ 90.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE .



      (1)   A motor vehicle, as defined in M.S. § 169.01, that:



         (a)   Has remained:



            1.   For a period of more than 48 hours on any
public property or more than four hours on public property when it is
properly posted; or



            2.   On private property without the consent of
the person or entity in control of the property; and



         (b)   Lacks vital component parts or is in an inoperable
condition such that it has nosubstantial potential for future use consistent
with its usual functions, unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or storage
building.



      (2)   A motor vehicle, as defined in M.S. § 169.01, that has
remained on private property for a period of 90 days or more and is not
properly licensed for operation within the state, except seasonal service
vehicles where license is required for part of the year only, unless it is
kept in an enclosed garage or storage building; or



      (3)   A motor vehicle voluntarily surrendered by its owner to
the city or towing contractor.  A classic car or pioneer car, as defined in
state statutes, shall not be considered an abandoned vehicle within the
meaning of this chapter.



   JUNK VEHICLE .  Any vehicle that:



      (1)   Is three years or older;



      (2)   Is extensively damaged, with the damage including such
things as broken or missing wheels, motor, drive train, or transmission,
doors, or windows;



      (3)   Is apparently inoperable;



      (4)   Does not have a valid, current registration; and



      (5)   Has an approximate fair market value equal only to the
approximate value of the scrap in it.



   PRIVATE PROPERTY .  All property not defined as public property herein.



   PUBLIC PROPERTY .  Property in control of any governmental unit or its
agencies.  The traveled portion of a street for purposes of this chapter is
not public property or private property, but that portion of the right-of-way
between the traveled portion of a street and the adjacent property line is
public property.



   TOWING CONTRACTOR .  A person under contract with the city under this
chapter.



   UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE .  Any vehicle or motor vehicle as defined in
M.S. § 168B.011.



   VEHICLES CONSTITUTING A PUBLIC NUISANCE .  Any vehicle, whether
occupied or not, that is found stopped, standing or parked in violation of
Chapter 71 or that is reported stolen, or that is found impeding fire
fighting, snow removal or plowing, or the orderly flow of traffic.  Any
vehicle constituting an abandoned or junk vehicle or an unauthorized vehicle
subject to impoundment under M.S. § 168B.04 and § 169.041.



   VITAL COMPONENT PARTS .  Those parts of a motor vehicle that are
essential to the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including, but not
limited to, the motor, drive train and wheels.



(‘81 Code, § 19-70)  (Ord. 228, passed 8-27-79; Am. Ord. 418, passed
5-26-88; Am. Ord. 719, passed 7-11-02)



§ 90.02  IMPOUNDMENT; TAGGING VEHICLES.



   (A)   (1)   Upon the order of any police officer, a motor vehicle
which is deemed a public nuisance or is abandoned or driven by an individual
who has been arrested and taken into custody may be removed and impounded in
the manner herein provided.



      (2)   If the owner or operator requests that the vehicle be
towed to any garage other than the towing contractor’s, and provided before
the tow, the owner shall advance to the towing contractor a sum estimated to
equal the minimum towing charge as established by the towing contract and
upon arrival to the requested garage and prior to the release of the vehicle,
the owner or operator shall advance to the towing contractor a sum equal to
the actual minimum towing charge under the towing contract less the estimated
towing charge paid at the time of the tow; neither the towing contractor nor
the Police Department shall order the vehicle to be impounded in any storage
facility or impound lot designated hereunder unless the Police Department
considers possession of the motor vehicle necessary in the prosecution of a
violation of law.



   (B)   Any vehicle ordered impounded by the Police Department under
this chapter shall immediately be tagged for identification by the Police
Department, which tag shall show the disposition of the car ordered by the
Police Department, and the reason for which impounded.  The tag shall be
delivered to the towing contractor with the tow sheet.



(‘81 Code, § 19-71)  (Ord. 228, passed 8-27-79; Am. Ord. 547, passed
12-22-92)



§ 90.03  REPORT OF POLICE OFFICER.



   (A)   Any police officer or other authorized person directing the
impounding of any motor vehicle shall prepare an impound report which shall,
among other things, include the following:



      (1)   Year, make and model of the motor vehicle, license
number, vehicle identification number (VIN) if the information can reasonably
be obtained, tools and other separate articles of personal property within
the vehicle, and reason for which impounded;



      (2)   General description of the vehicle with regard to the
condition of damaged parts; and



      (3)   Other information as may be necessary to describe
adequately the vehicle and property delivered to the towing contractor. 



   (B)   An impound report shall be delivered to the towing contractor
at the time of impoundment.  The city towing contractor, or its employee or
agent,  shall sign the impound report or other form provided by the city,
evidencing receipt of the vehicle and property described in the impound
report at the time of impoundment.  The city's towing contractor shall send
a signed copy of the impound report to the Police Department.  The impound
report or other form signed by the contractor shall be filed in the Police
Department.



(‘81 Code, § 19-72)  (Ord. 228, passed 8-27-79; Am. Ord. 841, passed
7-24-08; Am. Ord. 923, passed 8-11-11)



§ 90.04  NOTICE; RECLAIMING VEHICLES.



   (A)   Notice to reclaim.



      (1)   When an impounded vehicle does not fall within the
provisions of § 90.05, the towing contractor shall give notice to the
registered owner and known lien holder of the impoundment within five days,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holiday.  The notice shall:



         (a)   State the date and place of the taking, the year,
make, model and vehicle identification number of the vehicle and the place
where the vehicle is being held;



         (b)   Inform the owner and any lienholders of the towing
charges then accrued against the vehicle and shall provide a schedule of
storage charges to be made by the towing contractor;



         (c)   Inform the owner and any lienholders of their
right to reclaim the vehicle under division (B) herein;



         (d)   State that the failure of the owner or lienholders
to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle within 15 days, in the case of
an abandoned or junk vehicle, or within 45 days in the case of an
unauthorized vehicle from the date of the notice shall be deemed a waiver by
them of all right, title and interest in the vehicle and a consent to the
sale of the vehicle at a public sale or auction pursuant to § 90.06, and
that the vehicle will be sold after the expiration of the time period stated
above;



         (e)   The notice shall be sent by United States mail to
the registered owner, if any, of the vehicle, and to all readily identifiable
lienholders of record; and



         (f)   If it is impossible to determine with reasonable
certainty the identity and address of the registered owner and all
lienholders, the notice shall be published once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the area where the motor vehicle was found.  Published
notices may be grouped together for convenience and economy.



      (2)   If an unauthorized vehicle remains unclaimed after 30
days from the date the notice was sent, a second notice shall be sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the registered owner, if any, of
the unauthorized vehicle, and to all readily identifiable lienholders of
record.



   (B)   Reclaiming impounded vehicles.



      (1)   Any motor vehicle impounded under this chapter shall
only be released from impoundment:



         (a)   To the registered owner, or person authorized by
the registered owner, a lienholder of record, or a person who has purchased
the vehicle from the registered owner, who provides proof of ownership of the
vehicle, proof of valid Minnesota driving privileges, and proof of insurance
required by law to cover the vehicle;



         (b)   If the vehicle is subject to a rental or lease
agreement, to a renter or lessee with valid Minnesota driving privileges who
provides a copy of the rental or lease agreement and proof of insurance
required by law to cover the vehicle;



         (c)   To an agent of a towing company authorized by the
registered owner, renter or lessee if the owner provides proof of ownership
of or the renter or lessee provides a copy of the rental or lease agreement
for the vehicle and proof of insurance required by law to cover the vehicle;
and



         (d)   Upon payment of all towing and storage charges
resulting from impounding the vehicle under this chapter.



      (2)   The proof of ownership, valid driving privileges and
insurance and, when applicable, the copy of the rental or lease agreement
shall be provided to the person or entity designated by the city as a towing
contractor to provide impoundment and storage services under this chapter.



      (3)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair any
lien of a garagekeeper under the laws of this state or the right of a
lienholder to foreclose.  For the purposes of this section,
“garagekeeper” is an operator of a motor vehicle storage facility, or an
operator of an establishment for the servicing, repair or maintenance of
motor vehicles.



      (4)   The person to whom the vehicle is released as permitted
herein shall sign a vehicle release receipt.  A copy of the vehicle release
receipt shall be sent to the Police Department.



(‘81 Code, § 19-75)  (Ord. 228, passed 8-27-79; Am. Ord. 547, passed
12-22-92; Am. Ord. 719, passed 7-11-02; Am. Ord. 841, passed 7-24-08; Am.
Ord. 923, passed 8-11-11)



§ 90.05  REMOVAL FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   This chapter does not prohibit the authority of an owner of private
property to remove an abandoned, junk or unauthorized vehicle located on the
owner's private property without the owner's consent.



(Ord. 719, passed 7-11-02)



§ 90.06  SALE OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES.



   (A)   Any abandoned, junk or unauthorized motor vehicle impounded
and not reclaimed under this chapter may be sold at public auction or sale,
and any such vehicles not sold may be disposed of as scrap metal. The city
may sell the vehicle by either public auction or public sale, whereby the
city provides notice of and receives bids for the sale of the vehicle, and
the vehicle shall be sold to the highest bidder.



   (B)   From the proceeds of the sale of any vehicle the towing
contractor shall receive the cost of towing, preserving and storing the
vehicle.  The city shall reimburse itself for all notice and publication
costs incurred pursuant to this chapter.  Any remainder from the proceeds of
a sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled lienholder for
90 days, and then shall be deposited in the general fund of the city treasury.



   (C)   The procedure for sale of vehicles established in this section
shall be in lieu of the procedures set forth in §§ 35.01 through 35.05.



(‘81 Code, § 19-76)  (Ord. 228, passed 8-27-79; Am. Ord. 719, passed
7-11-02; Am. Ord. 923, passed 8-11-11)



§ 90.07  DESIGNATION OF CITY TOWING CONTRACTOR.



   (A)   The City Council may, by motion or resolution, designate one
or more official towing contractors of the city, to serve at the pleasure of
the City Council on the terms and conditions as it may desire.  The city's
towing contractors shall implement and comply with all storage, sale or
disposal regulations set forth herein, and with any policy duly adopted by
the city.



(‘81 Code, § 19-77)  (Am. Ord. 565, passed 1-13-94; Am. Ord. 923, passed
8-11-11)



   (B)   A towing contractor shall not solicit, directly or indirectly,
the impounding or towing of vehicles under this chapter.



(‘81 Code, § 19-78)  (Ord. 228, passed 8-27-79)



§ 90.08  STORAGE OF VEHICLES IN VIOLATION OF THIS CHAPTER.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to store or keep, or permit another
to store or keep, an abandoned, junk or unauthorized vehicle on public or
private property, unless it is kept within an enclosed garage or permitted
storage building.



(Ord. 719, passed 7-11-02)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a petty misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in § 10.99.  Every
day that the offense occurs shall be deemed a separate violation of this
chapter.



(‘81 Code, § 19-79)  (Ord. 228, passed 8-27-79)



CHAPTER 91:  ANIMALS



Section



General Provisions



   91.01   Definitions



   91.02   Applicability



   91.03   Enforcing officers; interference prohibited



   91.04   Rabies control



   91.05   Kennels and catteries



   91.06   Animals within city limits



Regulations for Dogs



   91.15   License required



   91.16   Issuance of tags



   91.17   At large dogs prohibited



   91.18   Impoundment of untagged and at large dogs



   91.19   Creation of nuisances



   91.20   Dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs



   91.21   Disposition of certain animals



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning authority to regulate, see M.S. § 412.221,
subd. 21



   For provisions concerning cruelty to animals, see M.S. §§ 346.20et
seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 91.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL. Other than a human being or plant, any living thing of the
kingdom of animalia, including mammals, birds, fish, amphibian insects, and
reptiles.



   AT LARGE.   Off the premises of the owner and not controlled by leash,
confined in a vehicle or caged.



   BUSINESS DAY.   A day during which the City Hall is open to the public.



   CAT.   Any domesticated feline animal, male or female, whole or
neutered.



   CATTERY.   Any premises used for the purpose of keeping, maintaining,
breeding, training or raising more than three cats over four months of age.



   DANGEROUS DOG. Any dog that has:



      (1)   Without provocation, inflicted substantial bodily harm
on a human on public or private property;



      (2)   Killed a domestic animal without provocation while off
the owner’s property; or



      (3)   Been found to be potentially dangerous, and after the
owner has notice that the dog is potentially dangerous, the dog aggressively
bites, attacks or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals.



   DOG. Any male or female animal of the dog kind, whole or neutered.



   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any of the various animals domesticated so as to live
in a tame condition as a work animal, food source, or household pet.



   FARM ANIMAL. Any of the various species of domestic animals commonly
kept for agricultural purposes such as, but not limited to, horses, cattle,
goats, sheep, llamas, potbellied pigs, pigs, and bees.



   FARM POULTRY. Any of the various species of domestic animals commonly
kept for agricultural purposes such as, but not limited to, chickens, ducks,
geese, turkeys, pigeons, swans, and doves.



   HEARING OFFICER.  A person duly designated by the Apple Valley City
Administrator.



   HOBBY KENNEL. Any premises used for the purpose of keeping,
maintaining, breeding, training or raising more than three and not more than
six dogs, each over four months of age and weighing less than 20 pounds.



   HOUSEHOLD PET. Domestic animals kept for non-commercial and
non-agricultural purposes generally housed within the principal structure
throughout the entire year, but for purposes of this chapter, exclusively
consisting of the following domestic animals:



      (1)   Dogs. Any animal in whole (excluding hybrids with
wolves, coyotes, or jackals) of the species Canis familiarus;



      (2)   Cats. Any animal in whole (excluding hybrids with
ocelots or margays) of the species Felis catus;



      (3)   Ferrets. Any animal of the species Mustela putorius furo;



      (4)   Birds. Any of the class of Aves (birds) that are caged
or kept inside the residence, excluding all farm poultry;



      (5)   Rabbits. Any animal of the order Lagomorpha that are
caged and kept inside the residence or in an outdoor hutch on the subject
property;



      (6)   Rodents. Any of the order Rodentia such as mice, rats,
gerbils, hamsters, chinchillas and guinea pigs that are kept caged and kept
inside the residence;



      (7)   Reptiles. Any of the class non-poisonous Reptilia such
as snakes less than three feet in length, lizards less than three feet, and
turtles that are kept caged and kept inside the residence;



      (8)   Amphibians. Any of the non-poisonous class of Amphibia
such as salamanders, frogs, and toads all of which are kept caged and kept
inside the residence;



      (9)   Insects. Any of the non-poisonous, mostly small
arthropods class of Insecta such as butterflies, ants, and grasshoppers that
are kept caged and kept inside the residence;



      (10)   Fish. All varieties commonly raised as pets in tanks
inside or in decorative outdoor ponds at homes or commercial businesses
unless specifically prohibited by state or federal law, and those listed
elsewhere in this chapter; and



      (11)   Sugar gliders. Any animal of the species Petaurus
breviceps that are caged and otherwise kept inside the residence.



   KENNEL.   Any premises used for the purpose of keeping, maintaining,
breeding, training or raising more than three dogs over four months of age.



   OWNER. Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning,
keeping or harboring an animal.  Any person owning or harboring an animal
for three consecutive days shall, for the purposes of this chapter, be deemed
to be the owner thereof.



   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG.   Any dog that:



      (1)   When unprovoked, inflicts bites on a human or domestic
animal on public or private property;



      (2)   When unprovoked, chases or approaches a person,
including a person on a bicycle, upon the streets, sidewalks or any public or
private property, other than the dog owner’s property, in an apparent
attitude of attack; or



      (3)   Has a known propensity, tendency or disposition to
attack unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of
humans or domestic animals.



   POUNDMASTER.   The entity responsible for housing, maintaining and
disposing of animals for the city.



   PRIMARY ENCLOSURE.   Any building, room, pen, cage or run in which an
animal is housed for more than 50% of the time.



   PROPER ENCLOSURE. A structure that securely confines an animal indoors
or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure suitable to prevent the
animal from escaping, and which provides protection from the elements for the
animal. An outdoor enclosure shall be fully secured to and embedded no less
than two feet into the ground, have a roof or cover fully secured to the
sides of the enclosure, and be locked at all times when occupied by the
animal. A PROPER ENCLOSURE does not include a porch, patio, or any part of a
house, garage, or other structure that would allow the dog to exit of its own
volition, or any house or structure in which windows are open or in which
door or window screens are the only obstacles that prevent the dog from
exiting.  All enclosures shall comply with all state laws and zoning and
building code regulations in this code.



   PROVOCATION.  An act that an adult could reasonably expect may cause a
dog to attack or bite.



   SERVICE ANIMAL. Dogs that are individually trained to do work or
perform tasks for people with disabilities that are directly related to the
person's disability. Examples of such work or tasks include guiding people
who are blind, alerting people who are deaf, pulling a wheelchair, alerting
or protecting a person who is having a seizure, reminding a person with
mental illness to take prescribed medications, calming a person with Post
Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) during an anxiety attack, or performing
other duties. A dog whose sole function is to provide comfort or emotional
support does not qualify as a service animal.



   VACCINATION AGAINST RABIES. The inoculation of a dog, ferret, or cat
with a rabies vaccine. The vaccination shall be performed by a veterinarian
duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine.



   WILD ANIMAL. Any animal which is not naturally tame or gentle, but is
of a wild nature or disposition or which, because of its size, vicious
nature, or other characteristics would constitute a danger to human life or
property.



(‘81 Code, § 5-1)  (Ord. 145, passed 6-24-74; Am. Ord. 368, passed
9-25-86; Am. Ord. 523, passed 10-24-91; Am. Ord. 616, passed 6-6-96; Am. Ord.
825, passed 11-20-07; Am. Ord. 829, passed 1-24-08; Am. Ord. 847, passed
10-9-08; Am. Ord. 961, passed 2-27-14; Am. Ord. 1007, passed 3-24-16; Am.
Ord. 1021, passed 9-22-16)



§ 91.02  APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply throughout the city, except
that it shall not apply to any animal within the property of the Minnesota
Zoological Garden, owned or under the control of the Minnesota Zoological
Garden.



(‘81 Code, § 5-2)  (Ord. 145, passed 6-24-74; Am. Ord. 191, passed 6-6-77)



§ 91.03  ENFORCING OFFICERS; INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Enforcement officers; powers.  Any sworn police officer or
community service officer shall have full authority to enforce the provisions
of this chapter, and shall have the specific authority to issue a citation in
lieu of arrest or continued detention in the event of a violation of this
chapter.



(‘81 Code, § 5-3)  (Am. Ord. 407, passed 12-10-87; Am. Ord. 829, passed
1-24-08)



   (B)   Interference with officials prohibited.  It shall be a
violation of this chapter for any unauthorized person to break open the pound
or to attempt to do so, or to take or let out any dogs or other animals
therefrom, or to take or attempt to take from any officer any dog or other
animal taken up by the officer in compliance with this chapter, or in any
manner to interfere with or hinder the officer in the discharge of his or her
duties under this chapter.



(‘81 Code, § 5-4)  (Ord. 145, passed 6-24-74; Am. Ord. 829, passed
1-24-08) 



§ 91.04  RABIES CONTROL.



   (A)   Every dog, ferret, or cat, four months of age and older, shall
be vaccinated against rabies and distemper. The cost of vaccination shall be
borne by the owner of the dog, ferret, or cat, whichever is applicable.



   (B)   Every dog, ferret, and cat which is not vaccinated at the time
of its acquisition or transportation into the city shall be vaccinated within
30 days of acquisition or arrival, whichever is applicable, unless the dog,
ferret, or cat is under four months of age.



   (C)   Every dog shall be vaccinated thereafter at not more than
36-month intervals with a live rabies vaccine or at not more than 12-month
intervals with an inactivated rabies vaccine. Every cat shall be vaccinated
thereafter at not more than 36-month intervals regardless of the type of
vaccine used. Every ferret shall be vaccinated thereafter at not more than
12-month intervals regardless of the type of vaccine used.



   (D)   A metal or durable plastic current rabies vaccination tag,
issued by the attending veterinarian, shall be securely attached to the
collar or harness of the dog or cat by the owner. Whenever the dog or cat is
out of doors, whether on or off the owner's premises, the collar or harness
with the vaccination tag must be worn. In addition, the owner may be
requested to provide a current certificate of rabies vaccination issued by
the veterinarian. Except as otherwise provided, a violation of this section
is a petty misdemeanor. A violation of this section is a misdemeanor if the
person violates this section within ten years of the first of two or more
previous convictions under this section.



   (E)   The provisions of this chapter with respect to vaccination
shall not apply to any dog, ferret, or cat temporarily remaining within the
city for less than 30 days, or to any dog or cat brought into the city for
field trial or show purposes. Dogs and cats shall be kept under strict
supervision by the owner.  However, it shall be unlawful to bring any dog or
cat into the city under circumstances which are not in compliance with the
animal health laws and import and exhibition regulations of the state which
are applicable to dogs or cats.



   (F)   Any dog, ferret, or cat found off the owner's premises and not
wearing a valid rabies vaccination tag may be impounded.  Impoundment and
disposition of all animals shall be the same as provided for dogs in this
chapter. Any dog, ferret, or cat which is impounded pursuant to this division
shall be released to its owner upon payment of the impounding fees and the
costs of feeding and caring for the animal on a per day basis, as specified
in the appendix to Chapter 35, and by compliance with the rabies vaccination
requirements of this chapter. If the owner of a dog, ferret, or cat impounded
because of the absence of a valid rabies vaccination tag claims that his or
her animal has been vaccinated, the owner may reclaim the animal upon
production of proof of vaccination, payment of all fees, as described above,
and acquisition of a valid rabies vaccination tag.



   (G)   Whenever any dog, ferret, or cat has bitten a person, the
owner, having been so notified either orally or in writing, must:



      (1)   Provide a certificate of current rabies inoculation; and



      (2)   Immediately quarantine the animal at the owner's home or
other suitable place of confinement as directed by the responsible officer of
the city for a period of ten days after the occurrence.



         (a)   During the quarantine, the animal shall be
securely confined in a building or a yard enclosed by a fence so constructed
that the animal cannot escape or otherwise leave the enclosure, and which
will not permit other animals or persons to enter, for the purpose of
preventing the animal from biting or otherwise coming in contact with persons
or other animals. If the animal shows signs of illness or if it escapes, the
Animal Control Officer or Police Department must be notified immediately.



         (b)   The confinement, testing and treatment costs, in
addition to all other expenses incurred, as a result of a dog, ferret, or cat
biting a person shall be at the expense of the owner of the animal.



         (c)   In the event that a certificate of current rabies
inoculation is not provided or upon a reasonable suspicion that the dog,
ferret, or cat may be rabid, the dog, ferret, or cat shall be immediately
seized and subjected to the necessary tests by a doctor of veterinary
medicine for the purpose of determining if it is infected with rabies. In the
event that the dog, ferret, or cat is rabid, it may be disposed of as
provided under § 91.21. Any animal, other than a dog, ferret, or cat, which
has bitten a person may be destroyed and taken to the University Diagnostic
Lab to be determined if the animal has been infected with rabies.



   (H)   Nothing in this section shall be read as to conflict with the
requirements of § 91.21 as it pertains to the disposition of animals.



(‘81 Code, § 5-5)  (Ord. 145, passed 6-24-74; Am. Ord. 261, passed
11-12-81; Am. Ord. 522, passed 10-24-91; Am. Ord. 573, passed 4-28-94; Am.
Ord. 887, passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. 961, passed 2-27-14)



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning rabies control, see M.S. § 35.67et seq.



§ 91.05  KENNELS AND CATTERIES.



   (A)   Permit required.  No person shall operate or maintain a hobby
kennel, kennel or cattery in the city without first securing a permit as
provided herein. Application for the permit shall be made to the City Clerk
and shall be accompanied by the origination fee specified in the appendix to
Chapter 35.  The City Clerk shall refer the application to the City Council
which may grant or deny the request.



   (B)   Term and fee.  Permits shall expire on December 31 of each
year and application for renewal shall be accompanied by the annual fee
specified in the appendix to Chapter 35.  The fee for permits granted after
commencement of the permit year shall be prorated on a quarterly basis.



   (C)   Application.  The application for a hobby kennel, kennel or
cattery permit shall state the name and address of the owner, the location
where the hobby kennel, kennel or cattery is to be kept, the number of dogs
or cats proposed to be kept and a scale drawing and description of the
primary enclosure in which the dogs or cats are proposed to be kept.



   (D)   Minimum standards.  The provisions of M.S. §§ 346.35
through 346.44, cited as the Pet and Companion Animal Welfare Act, shall be
the minimum standards required for the care and keeping of dogs and cats.



   (E)   Hobby kennel requirements.  No permit shall be granted to any
owner for the operation of a hobby kennel unless the primary enclosure within
which the dogs are to sleep, eat and exercise is contained entirely within
the principal structure on the premises.



   (F)   Kennel requirements.  No permit shall be granted to any owner
for the operation of a kennel unless the primary enclosure within which the
dogs are to sleep, eat and exercise shall be enclosed completely with a wire
mesh fence at least six feet in height and of sufficient gauge to insure the
dogs’ confinement.  No kennel shall be constructed or operated within 500
feet of any residential dwelling other than the owner’s.



   (G)   Cattery requirements. No permit shall be granted to any owner
for the operation of a cattery unless the primary enclosure within which the
cats are to sleep, eat and exercise is contained entirely within the
principal structure on the premises.



   (H)   Health and sanitation conditions.  Every kennel or cattery
shall be maintained and operated in clean and healthful condition at all
times and shall be open to inspection by any health officer, animal control
officer or other person charged with enforcement of the city code or any
health or sanitary regulation of the city.  All refuse, garbage and animal
waste shall be removed at regular intervals so as to keep the surrounding
area free of obnoxious odors.



   (I)   Nuisance prohibited.  No owner shall permit any of the
animals to create any habitual noise from barking, crying, howling or
screeching, or create any disturbance or nuisance of any kind whatsoever
which unduly impairs the quiet and peaceful enjoyment of the surrounding area
by other residents. Except as otherwise provided, a violation of this section
is a petty misdemeanor.  A violation of this section is a misdemeanor if the
person violates this section within ten years of the first of two or more
previous convictions under this section.



   (J)   Exclusions.  Commercial animal establishments, pet shops and
veterinary clinics do not require permits under this section.



   (K)   Revocation.  Any kennel or cattery permit may be revoked by
the Council by reason of any violation of the city code or by reason of the
violation of any health or nuisance ordinance, order, law or regulation.



   (L)   Appeal.  Any person aggrieved by the action of the city or
any person whose permit has been revoked without notice may appeal to the
Council by filing, within 14 days after notice of the action complained of, a
written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal.  The
Council shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal and notice of
the hearing shall be given to the person appealing by mailing, to the address
set forth on the application, written notice at least seven days prior to the
hearing.



(‘81 Code, § 5-12)  (Ord. 145, passed 6-24-74; Am. Ord. 304, passed
10-13-83; Am. Ord. 368, passed 9-25-86; Am. Ord. 523, passed 10-24-91; Am.
Ord. 887, passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. 1019, passed 9-22-16)



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning state agency license requirements, see
M.S.§§ 347.32 and 347.34



§ 91.06  ANIMALS WITHIN CITY LIMITS.



   (A)   Keeping of animals. The keeping of animals within the city is
subject to the provisions of this chapter and applicable state and federal
statutes, rules and regulations, including but not limited to those
addressing prevention of cruelty to animals, animal health, stray animals,
companion animals, service animals and dangerous animals.



   (B)   Animals within the city. Except as otherwise provided
elsewhere in the code, no person shall keep or harbor any animal other than a
household pet or service animal within the city.



   (C)   Limitation on number.



      (1)   Purpose. The owning, harboring and keeping on any
premise of a large number of pet animals within the city adversely affects
the welfare of the entire city due to various noise, odor, health and safety
problems resulting from the keeping of a large number of pet animals, which
constitute a public nuisance.



      (2)   No person shall keep in any one dwelling unit, lot, or
premise or portion thereof more than three service animals or three of each
of the following household pets: dogs, ferrets, or cats over the age of four
months of age, but not to exceed a combined total of six said animals. This
provision shall not apply to veterinary clinics or hospitals, licensed
kennels or catteries, pet stores, animal shelters, pet care facilities, or
other similar uses permitted by the code.



   (D)   Keeping of certain animals prohibited.



      (1)   Prohibited animals. No person shall keep, maintain or
harbor within the city any of the following animals:



         (a)   Any animal or species prohibited by Minnesota or
federal law.



         (b)   Farm poultry or farm animal, except in the
following cases:



            1.   Farm poultry or farm animals may be kept on
property zoned for agricultural uses.



            2.   Horses may be kept on property zoned R-1
Single Family Residential (minimum lot size of 40,000 sq. ft.).



         (c)   Any animal or species not defined as a HOUSEHOLD
PET. Examples of prohibited animals include, but are not limited to, the
following:



            1.   All skunks, whether captured in the wild,
domestically raised, descented or not descented, vaccinated against rabies or
not vaccinated against rabies.



            2.   All large cats of the family Felidae, such as
lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards, cougars and ocelots, except commonly
accepted domesticated house cats.



            3.   All members of the family Canidae, such as
wolves, foxes, coyotes, dingoes and jackals, except domesticated dogs.



            4.   All crossbreeds, such as crossbreeds between
dogs and coyotes or dogs and wolves, but does not include crossbreeds between
domesticated animals.



            5.   All poisonous snakes, such as rattlesnakes,
coral snakes, water moccasins, cobras or copperheads.



            6.   All raccoons.



            7.   All piranhas, northern snakeheads, and
similar aggressive carnivorous fish.



            8.   All apes and monkeys.



      (2)   Selling prohibited. No person shall offer for sale,
within the city limits, any animal identified in divisions (D)(1)(a) and (c)
of this section.



      (3)   Exceptions; permit required.



         (a)   Any persons desiring to keep animals prohibited
under division (D)(1) of this section for entertainment, exhibition, show or
promotional purposes only may obtain a permit from the City Council. Such a
permit shall be issued for a period not to exceed 30 days and shall specify
further conditions under which such animals shall be kept. A public zoo or
other institution engaged in a permanent display of animals may be issued a
permanent permit, provided applicable zoning requirements are met. The
Minnesota Zoological Gardens is exempt from this requirement.



         (b)   Any accredited education or research institution
or veterinary hospital are exempt from the permit requirement, provided
protective devices adequate to prevent such animals from escaping or injuring
the public are provided.



   (E)   Removal of animal waste required. The owner or keeper of any
animal shall be responsible for the immediate removal and proper disposal of
any feces deposited by such animal on any property, public or private, not
owned or exclusively occupied by the owner or keeper. The owner or keeper of
any animal shall also be responsible for the periodic removal and proper
disposal of feces deposited by such animal on property owned or exclusively
occupied by such owner or keeper so as to prevent the creation of a public
nuisance within the meaning of § 94.15.



(Ord. 961, passed 2-27-14)



REGULATIONS FOR DOGS



§ 91.15  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No owner shall keep any dog, six months of age and older,
within the city unless a license therefor has first been secured.  Licenses
shall be issued for a two-year term by the Police Department, for the fee as
specified in the appendix to Chapter 35.



   (B)   Every application for a license shall be accompanied by a
certificate from a duly licensed veterinarian showing that the dog to be
licensed has been given a vaccination against rabies in compliance with §
91.04.



   (C)   An applicant for a license for a neutered male or spayed
female dog shall present a statement from a qualified veterinarian indicating
that the dog has been neutered or spayed and giving the date of the operation.



   (D)   Licenses shall expire on December 31 of every other year.



   (E)   It shall be the duty of each owner of a dog to pay the license
fee to the City Clerk before January 1 in the year following expiration of
the current license, or upon acquiring ownership or possession of any
unlicensed dog or upon establishing residence in the city.



   (F)   Upon payment for the license, the City Clerk shall give an
original receipt to the person who pays the fee, retaining a duplicate.



   (G)   No applicant, including members of applicant’s immediate
family, residing with applicant, shall be issued more than three licenses
except:



      (1)   Upon securing a permit to operate a kennel; or



      (2)   One additional license may be issued (making a total of
four dog licenses) if the applicant supplies information to and receives
approval by the Chief of Police establishing that one of the four dogs is
used primarily for assistance to the legally blind or primarily by a licensed
peace officer in the performance of the officer’s duties.



   (H)   Holders of kennel permits are hereby exempted from the duties
of obtaining individual licenses as herein specified.



(‘81 Code, § 5-6)  (Ord. 145, passed 6-24-74; Am. Ord. 261, passed
11-12-81; Am. Ord. 304, passed 10-13-83; Am. Ord. 410, passed 1-14-88; Am.
Ord. 825, passed 11-20-07)



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning regulations for dog houses, see M.S.§ 347.23



§ 91.16  ISSUANCE OF TAGS.



   (A)   Issuance.  The City Clerk shall procure a sufficient number
of suitable tags, which tags shall indicate the year for which the license
fee is paid and shall deliver one appropriate tag to the owner when the fee
is paid.



   (B)   Affixing.  The owner shall cause the tag to be affixed by a
permanent metal fastening to the collar of the dog so licensed in a manner
that the tag may be easily seen.  The owner shall see that the tag is
constantly worn by the dog.  Except as otherwise provided, a violation of
this section is a petty misdemeanor.  A violation of this section is a
misdemeanor if the person violates this section within ten years of the first
of two or more previous convictions under this section.



   (C)   Duplicates.  In case any dog tag is lost, a duplicate shall
be issued by the City Clerk for a fee as specified in the appendix to Chapter
35 and upon presentation of a receipt showing payment of the license fee for
the current period.



   (D)   Transfer.  Dog tags shall not be transferable.



   (E)   Refund.  No refunds shall be made on any dog license fee.



   (F)   Offenses involving.  It shall be unlawful to counterfeit or
attempt to counterfeit the tags or take from any dog a tag legally placed
upon it by its owner with the intent to place it on another dog, or to place
the tag upon another dog.



(‘81 Code, § 5-7)  (Ord. 145, passed 6-24-74; Am. Ord. 260, passed
10-22-81; Am. Ord. 304, passed 10-13-83; Am. Ord. 887, passed 4-8-10)



§ 91.17  AT LARGE DOGS PROHIBITED.



   No dogs shall be permitted to run at large in the city at any time.
Except as otherwise provided, a violation of this section is a petty
misdemeanor.  A violation of this section is a misdemeanor if the person
violates this section within ten years of the first of two or more previous
convictions under this section.



(Am. Ord. 887, passed 4-8-10)



§ 91.18  IMPOUNDMENT OF UNTAGGED AND AT LARGE DOGS.



   (A)   Impounding.  The city may seize, impound or restrain any
unlicensed dog or any dog without an affixed license tag or any dog running
at large found in the city.  The fact that a dog is without a tag attached
to a collar shall be presumptive evidence that the dog is unlicensed. To
enforce this chapter, sworn police and community service officers are
authorized to enter upon any public or private property on which they have
reasonable cause to believe a dog that is not licensed or tagged or running
at large is present.



   (B)   Notice to owner.  The officer who seized, impounded or
restrained a dog pursuant to this section shall, without delay, notify the
owner, personally or through the United States mail, if the owner be known to
the officer or can be ascertained with reasonable effort.  If the owner be
unknown or cannot be ascertained, then the officer shall post written notice
in three public places in the city, giving a description of the dog, stating
where it is impounded and the condition for its release.



   (C)   Redemption.  All dogs seized, impounded or restrained
pursuant to this section must be held by the poundmaster for redemption by
the owner for at least five regular business days of the pound.  For the
purpose of this division, “regular business day” means a day during which
the pound is open to the public not less than four consecutive hours between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.  If, after the five regular business
days, the owner does not claim the dog, then any right of redemption shall be
deemed to have been waived and the dog shall be disposed of as provided in
division (D) below.  Any impounded dog shall be released to the owner upon
presentation of a current license tag or a receipt for a dog license for the
current year and upon payment of the impounding fee and fees for the cost of
feeding and caring for the animal, on a per day basis, as specified in the
appendix to Chapter 35.



   (D)   Disposition of unclaimed dogs.  Any dog which is not claimed
within the five-day period, as defined in division (C), must be made
available to any licensed institution which has requested the dog as required
by M.S. § 35.71.  If a tag affixed to the dog or a statement by the dog’s
owner after the dog’s seizure specifies that the animal may not be used for
research, the dog must not be made available to any institution and may, in
the discretion of the pound, be sold for not less than the amount provided in
division (C) to anyone desiring to purchase the dog or be destroyed after the
expiration of the five-day period.



(‘81 Code, § 5-8)  (Ord. 145, passed 6-24-74; Am. Ord. 304, passed
10-13-83; Am. Ord. 522, passed 10-24-91)



Cross-reference:



   Control of pets, see § 151.29



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning dogs at large during rabies proclamation, see
M.S.§ 35.69



   For provisions concerning the seizure of unlicensed dogs, see M.S.§
347.14



§ 91.19  CREATION OF NUISANCES.



   The following are deemed public nuisances:



   (A)   Noise.  No person shall keep or harbor any animal which
habitually barks, cries, whimpers or otherwise emits loud or unusual noises.
Except as otherwise provided, a violation of this section is a petty
misdemeanor.  A violation of this section is a misdemeanor if the person
violates this section within ten years of the first of two or more previous
convictions under this section.



   (B)   Damage and litter.  No owner of any animals shall permit the
animal to damage or litter any lawn, garden, sandbox or other property.



   (C)   Attacking and biting.  The owner of an animal is in violation
of this chapter if the animal has:



      (1)   When unprovoked, bitten a person or domestic animal on
public or private property; or



      (2)   When unprovoked, chased or approached a person upon the
streets, sidewalks or any public property in an apparent attitude of attack.



(‘81 Code, § 5-10)  (Ord. 145, passed 6-24-74; Am. Ord. 406, passed
12-10-87; Am. Ord. 522, passed 10-24-92; Am. Ord. 887, passed 4-8-10)



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning dogs molesting people and nuisances, see
M.S.§ 347.04



§ 91.20  DANGEROUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS.



   (A)   M.S. §§347.50 through 347.565 adopted by reference.  Except
as otherwise provided in this chapter, the regulatory and procedural
provisions of M.S. §§ 347.50 through 347.565 (commonly referred to as the
dangerous dog regulations), as amended through Laws 2008, are hereby
incorporated herein and adopted by reference, including the penalty
provisions thereof, and regulatory provisions regarding microchip
identification, notice of dog’s death or relocation, dangerous dog on
rental property, sale of dangerous dog and dog sterilization.



   (B)   Declaration of potentially dangerous or dangerous dog. 



      (1)   A city police officer, community service officer or
animal control officer may declare a dog to be potentially dangerous or
dangerous when the officer has probable cause to believe that the dog is
potentially dangerous or dangerous as defined herein.  A written notice
declaring the dog potentially dangerous or dangerous shall be delivered or
mailed to the owner of the dog, or a copy thereof posted at the place where
the dog is kept, or delivered to a person residing on the property where the
dog is kept, and telephoning, if possible.  The officer shall provide a copy
of the notice served upon the dog owner, along with an affidavit of service,
to the City Clerk.



      (2)   For purposes of a notice declaring a dog potentially
dangerous or dangerous, the notice must include a copy of the provisions of
this section and M.S. §§ 347.50 through 347.565, and a form, with
instructions, to request an appeal of the declaration of the owner’s dog as
potentially dangerous or dangerous.



      (3)   Beginning 180 days from the date a dog is declared
potentially dangerous or dangerous, or the date of the hearing officer’s
written findings of fact and conclusion affirming the declaration of the dog
as potentially dangerous or dangerous, or the date the owner appeals the
notice of the declaration, the dog owner may request annually that the city
review the designation.  The owner shall provide clear and convincing
evidence that the dog’s behavior has changed due to the dog’s age;
neutering; environment; completion of obedience training that includes
modification of aggressive behavior; or other factors rendering the dog no
longer dangerous.  The hearing officer shall review the evidence without
hearing, and if the hearing officer finds sufficient evidence that the
dog’s behavior has changed, and the dog is no longer potentially dangerous
or dangerous; the hearing officer may rescind the designation.



   (C)   Appeal.



      (1)   Any owner of a dog declared potentially dangerous or
dangerous may appeal the declaration  by serving upon the City Clerk, within
14 business days of receipt of the notice declaring the dog potentially
dangerous or dangerous, inclusive of the date the notice is received, a
written notice of appeal.



      (2)   The appeal hearing shall be heard by the hearing officer
within 14 days of the city’s receipt of the dog owner’s request to appeal
the designation.  The appeal hearing shall be conducted in an informal
manner, and the Minnesota Rules of Civil Procedure and Rules of Evidence
shall not be strictly applied. The hearing need not be transcribed, but may
be transcribed at the sole expense of the party who requests transcription.



      (3)   After considering all evidence submitted and within ten
days after the hearing, the hearing officer shall make written findings of
fact and conclusion as to whether the dog is a potentially dangerous or
dangerous dog.  The hearing officer’s decision shall be delivered to the
dog’s owner by hand delivery or registered mail as soon as practical.



      (4)   An owner’s right to appeal or otherwise contest a
potentially dangerous or dangerous dog declaration shall be deemed waived if
the owner fails to serve a written request for appeal, as required herein, or
fails to appear at the scheduled appeal hearing date. 



(‘81 Code, § 5-11)



      (5)   If a dangerous dog designation is upheld by the hearing
officer, the dog owner shall pay the city’s actual expenses of the hearing,
not to exceed $1,000.



   (D)   Requirements for dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs. 
Immediately upon receipt of the notice declaring the dog dangerous, the owner
shall confine the dog in a proper enclosure as defined herein and shall
notify the city in writing of the dog’s subsequent death or relocation. 
If no timely appeal is received by the City Clerk within the time limits
prescribed herein or the dog’s owner is deemed to have otherwise waived his
or her right to appeal the declaration, or the hearing officer has upheld the
declaration, then  the owner shall immediately comply with the requirements
of this chapter, the provisions of M.S. §§347.50 to 347.565 and the
following:



      (1)   Implant a microchip in the dog for identification, and
provide to the city the name of the microchip manufacturer and identification
number.  All costs related to the purchase and implantation of the chip must
be paid by the dog's owner;



      (2)   Continue to confine the dog in a proper enclosure;



      (3)   Muzzle and restrain the dog on a substantial leash not
to extend more than six feet, whenever outside of the proper enclosure.  The
muzzle must be made in a manner that will prevent the dog from biting any
person or animal, but that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with
its vision or respiration;



      (4)   Notify the Police Department, in writing, of the death,
sale, relocation or transfer of the dog within 14 days of the death,
transfer, relocation or sale.  If requested by the city, the dog’s owner
shall execute an affidavit under oath setting forth either the circumstances
of the dog’s death and disposition or the complete name, address, and
telephone number of the person to whom the dog has been transferred and the
address where the dog has been relocated or is being kept;



      (5)   Present a certificate of liability insurance issued by
an insurance company authorized to conduct business in this state, which
specifically states that the owner is insured for any personal injuries
inflicted by the potentially dangerous or dangerous dog, in the amount of at
least $300,000;



      (6)   Provide written proof that the owner's insurance
provider has been notified, in writing, of the declaration of the potentially
dangerous or dangerous dog; and



      (7)   A dangerous dog shall be sterilized at the owner’s
expense.  If the owner does not have the animal sterilized and provide the
city verification thereof within 30 days, the city shall seize the dog and
have it sterilized at the owner’s expense.



      The owners of all dogs found to be dangerous or potentially
dangerous by another city or jurisdiction must notify the Police Department
with 14 days of moving into the city, and must follow the requirements of §
91.20(D).



      All dogs declared dangerous shall be housed or kept only on
property zoned industrial (I-1 and I-2).  The owner shall not allow the dog,
whether muzzled or in its proper enclosure, to be found in any area not zoned
industrial.



   (E)   Prohibition in residential areas.  No person may house or
keep a dangerous dog on property zoned residential.



   (F)   Regulatory and procedural responsibility.



      (1)   In accordance with Minnesota law, the city is
responsible for the regulatory and procedural provisions for potentially
dangerous and dangerous dogs pursuant to M.S. §§ 347.50 to 347.565, as
amended through Laws 2008, which are hereby incorporated herein and adopted
by reference in its entirety.



      (2)   The owner of a dangerous dog for which a certificate of
registration is required under this chapter shall pay an annual registration
fee, in addition to a fee for the cost of the dangerous dog warning symbol
and tag.  The fees shall be in the amounts as specified in the appendix to
Chapter 35.



      (3)   This section shall control if there is any conflict or
inconsistency with M.S. §§ 347.50 et seq.



   (G)   Destruction of dangerous dog.  The hearing officer is
authorized to order the destruction of the dog upon a finding that the dog
has been declared dangerous, the owner’s right to appeal hereunder has been
exhausted or expired, and the owner has failed to comply with the provisions
of M.S. §§ 347.50 through 347.565 and the provision of the city code.



(Am. Ord. 717, passed 6-27-02; Am. Ord. 825, passed 11-20-07; Am. Ord. 845,
passed 9-11-08; Am. Ord. 847, passed 10-9-08)



§ 91.21  DISPOSITION OF CERTAIN ANIMALS.



   (A)   Officer’s orders.  The hearing officer is authorized to
order the destruction or other disposition of any animal upon a finding that:



      (1)   The animal has habitually destroyed property or
habitually trespassed in a damaging manner on property of persons other than
the owner;



      (2)   The animal has habitually barked, cried, whimpered or
otherwise emitted loud or unusual noises or is otherwise kept within the
limits of the city in violation of the provisions of this chapter; or



      (3)   The animal has been found to be infected with rabies.



   (B)   Officer’s findings.  In the event the hearing officer
waives authority under this division, a sworn complaint of any person that
any one of the foregoing facts exist may be brought before a district court
judge in this county.  The judge shall issue a summons directed to the owner
or person having possession of the animal commanding the person to appear
before the judge to show cause why the animal should not be seized and killed
or otherwise disposed of by the poundmaster, or any police officer or animal
warden.  The summons shall be returnable not more than five days from the
date thereof and shall be served at least three days before the time of
appearance mentioned therein.  Upon the hearing and finding of the facts
true as complained of, the judge may either order the animal killed or order
the owner to remove it from the city or may order it confined to a designated
place, or may order its sale or other disposition as herein provided for the
impounded animals.  Costs of the proceedings specified by this section shall
be assessed against the owner of the animal, if the animal is found to be
kept in violation of any of the terms of this chapter.



   (C)   Notice and hearing.  The hearing officer, after having been
advised of the existence of the animal, as defined above, by sworn complaint
and having decided to retain its authority under this division, shall proceed
as follows:



      (1)   The owner of the offending animal shall be notified in
writing as to the reasons the animal is subjected to disposition under this
section and where applicable, the dates, times and places of animals or
persons bitten, attacked, injured or disfigured, or of other violations, and
shall be given 14 days to request a hearing for determination as to the
disposition of the animal.  If the owner does not request a hearing within
ten days of the notice, the hearing officer shall make findings and issue an
appropriate order including destruction or other proper disposition of the
animal.  The owner shall immediately make the animal available to the animal
control officer for the ordered disposition.



      (2)   If the owner requests a hearing for determination as to
the disposition of the animal, the hearing shall be held before the hearing
officer at a date not more than 14 days after demand for the hearing.  The
records of the animal control officer shall be admissible for consideration
without further foundation.  After considering all evidence, the hearing
officer shall make an appropriate order, including destruction or other
proper disposition of the animal.  The owner shall immediately make the
animal available to the animal control officer for the ordered disposition.



      (3)   The hearing officer may apply to the District Court of
Dakota County for subpoenas for hearings under division (D)(3)(b) above.



   (D)   Concealing of animals.  Any person who harbors, hides or
conceals an animal which has been ordered into custody for destruction or
other proper disposition shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(‘81 Code, § 5-11)  (Ord. 145, passed 6-24-74; Am. Ord. 522, passed
10-24-91; Am. Ord. 616, passed 6-6-96; Am. Ord. 647, passed 6-25-98; Am. Ord.
847, passed 10-9-08)



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning animals with infectious diseases running at
large, see M.S. § 346.26



CHAPTER 92:  CITY CEMETERY



Section



General Provisions



   92.01   Cemetery established



Cemetery Operations



   92.15   Sale of lots; interment fees



   92.16   Records of graves and lots



   92.17   Interment requirements



   92.18   Monuments, markers, memorials and plantings



   92.19   Transfer of lot ownership



   92.20   Hours



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 92.01  CEMETERY ESTABLISHED.



   The cemetery shall be known as the Lebanon Cemetery of Apple Valley,
hereinafter referred to in this chapter as “the cemetery,” and shall
consist of the following described tract of land, to wit:  That part of the
northwest quarter of Section 36, Township 115, Range 20, Dakota County,
Minnesota, described as follows: Beginning at the northwest corner of the
northwest quarter; thence south 89 degrees 42 minutes 57 seconds east,
assumed bearing, along the north line thereof, 833 feet; thence south 00
degrees 00 minutes 40 seconds east, parallel with the west line of the
northwest quarter, 570 feet; thence north 89 degrees 42 minutes 57 seconds
west, parallel with the north line of the northwest quarter, 293.93 feet;
thence westerly and southwesterly along a tangential curve which is concave
to the south, radius of 420.68 feet, central angle of 26 degrees 44 minutes
36 seconds, 196.36 feet to a point of reverse curve; thence southwesterly and
westerly along the curve which is concave to the north, radius of 420.68
feet, central angle of 26 degrees 44 minutes 36 seconds, 196.36 feet; thence
north 89 degrees 42 minutes 57 seconds west, tangent to last described curve,
160 feet to the west fine of the northwest quarter; thence north 00 degrees
00 minutes 40 seconds west, along the west line, 660 feet to the point of
beginning; plus other land as the city may acquire for cemetery purposes. 
The city shall hold, manage and operate the tract for cemetery purposes in
accordance with the following provisions.



(Ord. 653, passed 12-10-98)



CEMETERY OPERATIONS



§ 92.15  SALE OF LOTS; INTERMENT FEES.



   (A)   The city shall sell lots in accordance with the fee schedule
set forth in the appendix to Chapter 35.



   (B)   Interment fees shall be paid in accordance with the fee
schedule set forth in the appendix to Chapter 35.



(Ord. 653, passed 12-10-98)



§ 92.16  RECORDS OF GRAVES AND LOTS.



   Records concerning the sale of cemetery lots shall be kept by the city.



(Ord. 653, passed 12-10-98)



§ 92.17  INTERMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No interment shall be permitted in any lot in the cemetery
unless the requirements of all state statutes and city ordinances and
regulations regarding interments are met.



   (B)   The Cemetery Committee shall make recommendations to the City
Council to adopt regulations establishing interment standards and
requirements which shall have the force and effect of law.



(Ord. 653, passed 12-10-98)



§ 92.18  MONUMENTS, MARKERS, MEMORIALS AND PLANTINGS.



   The Cemetery Committee shall make recommendations to the City Council
to adopt regulations establishing standards and requirements regulating the
type, location, size, material, number, manner of placement and installation
and removal of monuments, markers and plantings permitted within the
cemetery.  Any charges for monument fees or marker fees shall be paid in
accordance with the fee schedule set forth in the appendix to Chapter 35.



(Ord. 653, passed 12-10-98; Am. Ord. 795, passed 9-14-06)



§ 92.19  TRANSFER OF LOT OWNERSHIP.



   (A)   Any lot in the cemetery shall be inalienable, except as
hereinafter provided.  Any conveyance or alienation, or attempted conveyance
or alienation of any right, title or interest in or to the lot contrary to
the following provisions shall be void.



   (B)   Owners may transfer a lot in the following circumstances:



      (1)   Sale to city.  A lot, if empty, may be resold to the
city for the original price paid for the lot or for $50, whichever amount is
greater.  If the original price is unknown, the resale price shall be the
then current sale price for a lot.



      (2)   Transfer by will.  Any lot owner may transfer a lot by
will to any surviving relative or to the city, in trust, for the use and
benefit of any person qualified to be buried in the cemetery.



      (3)   Transfer by interstate succession.  Upon the death of
an interstate lot owner, the lot, unless used by the decedent, shall descend
according to the provisions of M.S. § 525.14.



      (4)   Transfer during lifetime.  Provided that the city
receives prior notice and the appropriate transfer documents are completed,
any lot owner may transfer a lot, whether by gift or otherwise, to any other
person, provided further that no transfer shall be in excess of the
transferor’s original purchase price, or $50, whichever is greater.



(Ord. 653, passed 12-10-98)



§ 92.20  HOURS.



   The City Cemetery shall open one-half hour before sunrise and close
one-half hour after sunset.  No person other than a city agent, employee or
police officer acting in his/her official capacity shall be in the City
Cemetery during the hours it is closed.



(Am. Ord. 795, passed 9-14-06)



CHAPTER 93:  FIRE PREVENTION



Section



General Provisions



   93.01   Purpose



   93.02   Vehicle identification sticker



   93.03   Enforcing officers; interference with Fire Department



   93.04   False alarms



   93.05   Orders establishing fire lanes



   93.06   Fires or barbecues on balconies



Uniform Fire Code



   93.20   Definition



   93.21   Adoption of Fire Code



   93.22   Organization and enforcement



   93.23   Appeals



Recreational Fires



   93.30   Purpose



   93.31   Definitions



   93.32   Requirements



Open Burning



   93.40   Purpose



   93.41   Definitions



   93.42   Prohibited materials



   93.43   Permit required for open burning



   93.44   Purposes allowed for open burning



   93.45   Permit application for open burning



   93.46   Permit holder responsibility



   93.47   Revocation of open burning permit



   93.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Fire Department, see §§ 32.15 through 32.24



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 93.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe rules and regulations that
have as their objective the protective of lives and property within the city
from fire and other life or property threatening emergencies and to provide
for the orderly operation of the Fire Department.



(‘81 Code, § 10-1)  (Ord. 331, passed 12-27-84)



§ 93.02  VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION STICKER.



   Department vehicle identification stickers, issued by the Fire
Department to its members for their personal vehicles, shall be removed by
the member from the vehicle either when department membership ends or when
the member disposes of the vehicle. Members possessing special fire fighter
vehicle license plates shall comply with M.S. § 168.12(2b) when either
Department membership ends or when the member disposes of the vehicle.



(‘81 Code, § 10-2)  (Ord. 331, passed 12-27-84)



§ 93.03  ENFORCING OFFICERS; INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   The Fire Chief and Fire Marshal shall have the authority to
issue a citation in lieu of arrest or continued detention for any violation
of this chapter, the state code or Minnesota Rules, part 7510.0200 et seq.



   (B)   No person shall refuse or neglect to obey any reasonable order
of the Chief or the Chief’s designee at an emergency scene or interfere
with the Fire Department in the discharge of its duties.



(‘81 Code, § 10-3)  (Ord. 331, passed 12-27-84) 



§ 93.04  FALSE ALARMS.



   No person shall intentionally make, turn in or give a false alarm of
fire, or of need for police or ambulance assistance or aid or abet in the
commission of the act.



(‘81 Code, § 10-4)  (Ord. 331, passed 12-27-84) 



§ 93.05  ORDERS ESTABLISHING FIRE LANES.



   The Council may by resolution order the establishment of fire lanes on
public or private property as may be necessary in order that the travel of
fire equipment may not be interfered with, and that access to fire hydrants
or buildings may not be blocked off.  When a fire lane has been ordered to
be established, it shall be marked by a sign bearing the words “No
Parking--Fire Lane” or a similar message.  When the fire lane is on public
property or a public right-of-way, the signs shall be erected by the city,
and when on private property, they shall be erected by the owner at the
owner’s expense within 30 days after the owner has been notified of the
order.  Thereafter, no person shall park a vehicle or otherwise occupy or
obstruct the fire lane.  A vehicle occupied by a licensed driver and
immediately movable shall not be considered an obstruction.



(‘81 Code, § 10-7)  (Ord. 331, passed 12-27-84; Am.  Ord. 473, passed
2-22-90)



§ 93.06  FIRES OR BARBECUES ON BALCONIES.



   (A)   Open flame prohibited.  In any structure in which there are
two or more dwelling units on more than one level, no person shall kindle,
maintain or cause any fire or open flame on any balcony, above ground level,
or on any ground floor patio within 15 feet of the structure.  This
provision does not apply to structures in which each of the separate dwelling
units has its own private means of ingress and egress.



   (B)   Fuel storage prohibited.  No person shall store or use any
fuel, barbecue, torch or similar heating or lighting chemical or device in
the locations designated in division (A) above.



   (C)   Exception.  Listed electric or gas-fired barbecue grills that
are permanently mounted, wired or plumbed to the building’s gas supply or
electrical system and that maintain a minimum clearance of 18 inches on all
sides, unless listed for lesser clearances, may be installed on balconies and
patios when approved by the Fire Chief.



(‘81 Code, § 10-8)  (Ord. 489, passed 6-7-90) 



UNIFORM FIRE CODE



§ 93.20  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FIRE CODE.  The Minnesota State Fire Code, as adopted pursuant to M.S.
§ 299F.011 and modified by Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7511.



(‘81 Code, § 10-50)  (Ord. 537, passed 3-26-92; Am. Ord. 824, passed
10-25-07)



§ 93.21  ADOPTION OF FIRE CODE.



   The Minnesota State Fire Code, as adopted pursuant to M.S. § 299F.011
and modified by Minnesota Rules, Chapter 7511, one copy of which is on file
in the office of the City Clerk, is hereby adopted as the fire code for the
city.  The same are hereby incorporated in this section as if completely set
out in full.



(‘81 Code, § 10-51)  (Ord. 537, passed 3-26-92; Am. Ord. 824, passed
10-25-07)



§ 93.22  ORGANIZATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   The fire code shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire Prevention within
the Apple Valley Fire Department.  The Fire Chief may assign members of the
Fire Department as inspectors as shall, from time to time, be necessary.



(‘81 Code, § 10-52)  (Ord. 537, passed 3-26-92)



§ 93.23  APPEALS.



   (A)   Whenever the Fire Chief disapproves an application or refuses
to grant a permit applied for, or when the Chief issues an order enforcing
the fire code and the aggrieved party claims that the fire code does not
apply, or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued
or wrongly interpreted, the aggrieved party may appeal from the decision of
the Chief to the City Council within 30 days of the Chief’s decision.



   (B)   All appeals specified in this section shall be made in writing
and delivered to the City Clerk.  An aggrieved party who does not appeal
within the time specified shall be deemed to have waived all right to appeal.



(‘81 Code, § 10-53)  (Ord. 537, passed 3-26-92)



RECREATIONAL FIRES



§ 93.30  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish the guidelines for
recreational fires.



(Ord. 824, passed 10-25-07)



§ 93.31  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   RECREATIONAL FIRE.  A fire for recreational, ceremonial, food
preparation for social events.  Mobile cooking devices, such as manufactured
hibachis, charcoal grills, wood smokers and those that burn propane or
natural gas, are not defined as “recreational fires”.



   RECREATIONAL FIRE SITE.  An area no more then three feet by three feet
by three feet.  It shall be completely surrounded by non-combustible and
non-smoke- or odor-producing material, either of natural rock, cement, brick,
tile or blocks, or ferrous metal, including permanent, outdoor, wood-burning
fireplaces.  Freestanding, manufactured fire pits are also included.  These
sites must be 25 feet from any combustible structure, and 15 from the
property line.



   STARTER FUELS.  Dry, untreated, unpainted, kindling, branches,
cardboard or charcoal fire starter.  Starter sticks, propane gas torches or
other clean, gas-burning devices causing minimal pollution may be used to
start fires.



   STRUCTURES.  Include a house, garage, shed, deck or fence.



   WOOD.  Dry, clean fuel only, such as twigs, branches, limbs, presto
logs, charcoal, cord wood, pallet wood or untreated dimensional lumber.  The
term does not include wood that is green with leaves or needles, rotten, wet,
oil-soaked, or treated with paint, glue or preservatives.



(Ord. 824, passed 10-25-07)



§ 93.32  REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Adult supervision required.  All recreational fires shall be
supervised by an adult who is in the immediate vicinity of the recreational
fire until it is extinguished. 



   (B)   Extinguisher or similar device required. A fire extinguisher
or garden hose attached to a working water spigot shall be readily available
at the location of any open burning or recreational fire.



   (C)   Wind restriction.  No fire shall be allowed if winds are
greater than 15 miles per hour.



   (D)   Smoke complaints.  Any complaints about smoke from a fire
shall be cause for immediate extinguishment of the fire.



   (E)   Discontinuance by authorities.  All fires are subject to
discontinuance at the direction of the Fire or Police Department.



   (F)   Public property restrictions.  No fire shall be combusted in
a public right-of-way or on public property, except that a recreational fire
may be combusted on public property where designated.



   (G)   Prohibited materials.  No prohibited materials as established
in § 93.42 shall be combusted in a recreational fire.



   (H)   Wood length limitation.  No wood combusted in a recreational
fire shall exceed three feet in length.



(Ord. 824, passed 10-25-07)  Penalty, see § 93.99



OPEN BURNING



§ 93.40  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish permitted categories of
open burn events for residences and farms within the city, and to provide for
a permitting process for open burning, except when open burning is defined as
a “recreational fire” as prescribed in this subchapter.



(Am. Ord. 824, passed 10-25-07)



§ 93.41  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FIRE CHIEF, FIRE MARSHAL, and ASSISTANT FIRE MARSHALS. The Fire Chief,
Fire Marshal, and Assistant Fire Marshals of the city.



   OPEN BURNING. The burning of any matter if the resultant combustion
products are emitted directly to the atmosphere without passing through a
stack, duct or chimney, except a “recreational fire” as defined in §
93.31.



   STARTER FUELS. Dry, untreated, unpainted, kindling, branches, cardboard
or charcoal fire starter.  Propane gas torches or other clean, gas-burning
devices causing minimal pollution must be used to start an open burn.



(Am. Ord. 824, passed 10-25-07)



§ 93.42  PROHIBITED MATERIALS.



   (A)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning oils,
petro fuels, rubber, plastics, chemically treated materials, or other
materials which produce excessive or noxious smoke, such as tires, railroad
ties, treated, painted or glued wood composite, shingles, tar paper,
insulation, composition board, sheetrock, wiring, paint or paint fillers.



   (B)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of
hazardous waste or salvage operations, solid waste generated from an
industrial or manufacturing process or from a service or commercial
establishment, or building materials generated from demolition of commercial
or institutional structures.



   (C)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of
discarded material resulting from the handling, processing, storage,
preparation, serving or consumption of food.



   (D)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of any
leaves or grass clippings.



(Am. Ord. 824, passed 10-25-07)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.43  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR OPEN BURNING.



   No person shall start or allow any open burning on any property in the
city without first having obtained an open burn permit, except that a permit
is not required for any fire which is a “recreational fire” as defined in
§ 93.31.  A violation of this section is a petty misdemeanor.



(Am. Ord. 824, passed 10-25-07; Am. Ord. 887, passed 4-8-10)  Penalty, see
§ 93.99



§ 93.44  PURPOSES ALLOWED FOR OPEN BURNING.



   (A)   Open burn permits may be issued only for the following
purposes:



      (1)   Elimination by fire of a health hazard that cannot be
abated by other practical means;



      (2)   Ground thawing for utility repair and construction;



      (3)   Disposal of vegetative matter for managing forest,
prairie or wildlife habitat, and in the development and maintenance of land
and rights-of-way where chipping, composting, landspreading or other
alternative methods are not practical;



      (4)   Disposal of diseased trees generated on site, diseased
or infected nursery stock, diseased bee hives;



      (5)   Disposal of unpainted, untreated, non-glued lumber and
wood shakes generated from construction, where recycling, reuse, removal or
other alternative disposal methods are not practical.



   (B)   Fire training permits can only be issued by the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources.



(Am. Ord. 824, passed 10-25-07)



§ 93.45  PERMIT APPLICATION FOR OPEN BURNING.



   (A)   Open burning permits shall be obtained by making application,
on a form prescribed the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and adopted by
the Fire Department.  The permit application shall be presented to the Fire
Chief, Fire Marshal, or Assistant Fire Marshals for review and processing.



   (B)   Upon receipt of the completed open burning permit application,
the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, or Assistant Fire Marshals shall schedule a
preliminary site inspection to locate the proposed burn site, note special
conditions, and set the date and time of the permitted burn, and review fire
safety considerations.



   (C)   If established criteria for the issuance of an open burning
permit are not met during review of the application, or it is determined that
a practical alternative method for disposal of the material exists, or a
pollution or nuisance condition would result, or if an open burn event safety
plan cannot be drafted to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal,
or Assistant Fire Marshals, the application for the open burn permit may be
denied.



(Am. Ord. 824, passed 10-25-07)



§ 93.46  PERMIT HOLDER RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   Every open burn event shall be constantly attended by the
permit holder or his or her competent representative.  The open burning site
shall have available appropriate communication and fire suppression
equipment, as set out in the fire safety plan.



   (B)   The open burn fire shall be completely extinguished before the
permit holder or his or her representative leaves the site.  No fire may be
allowed to smolder with no person present.



   (C)   The permit holder shall have a valid permit, as required by
this subchapter, available for inspection on the open burn site by the Police
Department, Fire Department, MPCA representative or DNR Forest Officer.



   (D)   No recreational fire or open burn will be permitted when the
city or DNR has officially declared a burning ban due to potential hazardous
fire conditions, or when the MPCA has declared an Air Quality Alert.



   (E)   The permit holder shall comply and implement all permanent
conditions and the burn event safety plan as established.  The permit holder
shall be responsible for all costs incurred as a result of the burn,
including but not limited to, fire suppression and administrative fees.



(Am. Ord. 824, passed 10-25-07)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.47  REVOCATION OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.



   The open burning permit is subject to revocation at the discretion of
DNR Forest Officer, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, or Assistant Fire
Marshals.  Reasons for revocation include, but are not limited to, a fire
hazard existing or developing during the course of the burn, any of the
conditions of the permit being violated during the course of the burn,
pollution or nuisance conditions developing during the course of the burn, or
a fire smoldering with no flame present.



(Am. Ord. 824, passed 10-25-07)



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a
misdemeanor punishable as provided in § 10.99.



(‘81 Code, § 10-9)  (Ord. 407, passed 12-10-87; Am. Ord. 489, passed
6-7-90)



   (B)   Each violation shall constitute a separate misdemeanor.  The
imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation
nor permit it to continue.  Any person found guilty of these acts shall be
required to correct or remedy the violations or defects within a reasonable
time as determined by the Chief. 



(‘81 Code, § 10-54)  (Ord. 537, passed 3-26-92)



CHAPTER 94:  PUBLIC NUISANCES



Section



General Provisions



   94.01   Assessable current services



Public Nuisances



   94.15   Public nuisances affecting health



   94.16   Public nuisances affecting public welfare



   94.17   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety



   94.18   Immediate abatement



Weeds



   94.35   Definitions



   94.36   Owners responsible for trimming, removal and the like



Cross-reference:



   Property maintenance regulations, see § 155.360.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 94.01  ASSESSABLE CURRENT SERVICES.



   (A)   Definition.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   CURRENT SERVICE.  Any of the following services performed by the city
to abate the public nuisance, and the costs thereof, may be charged as a
special assessment against the property benefitted: snow, ice, or rubbish
removal from sidewalks; weed elimination from public street boulevard areas
or private property; removal or elimination of public health or safety
hazards from private property, excluding any hazardous building under M.S.
§§ 463.15 through 463.26; installation or repair of water service lines, or
other dust treatment of streets; repair of public rights-of-way, trimming and
care of trees, and treatment or removal of insect-infested or diseased trees
on public rights-of-way or private property; and the operation of a street
lighting system; abatement of public nuisances.



   (B)   Abatement of public nuisance.



      (1)   It shall be the primary responsibility of a property
owner or occupant to abate any public nuisance, as defined in this section or
elsewhere in this code, which exists on the owner’s property or abutting
thereto.



      (2)   Upon the city’s service by U.S. mail to the property
address (and to the property owner if different than the property address) of
notice of the public nuisance and required abatement, the property owner or
occupant shall remove or otherwise abate the public nuisance within five days
of the date of the city’s notice.  Upon the property owner or occupant’s
failure to remove or otherwise abate the public nuisance, the city may
perform the current service to abate the public nuisance.



   (C)   Costs of abatement. The owner and occupant of property on or
adjacent to which a current service has been performed shall be personally
liable for the cost of the current service. The city shall prepare and mail
an invoice of the charges for the cost of the current service to the owner
and occupant, and the charges shall be immediately due and payable to the
city.  Unpaid charges for a current service shall be subject to monthly
service charges (late fee/penalty) until paid in full or assessed as provided
herein.



   (D)   Special assessment for unpaid charges. Any unpaid charges for
a current service shall be specially assessed against the property benefitted
in accordance with M.S. § 429.101.



(Am. Ord. 830, passed 1-24-08; Am. Ord. 839, passed 6-26-08)



PUBLIC NUISANCES



§ 94.15  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.



   The following are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting
health:



   (A)   Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or
vegetable matter;



   (B)   All diseased animals running at large;



   (C)   All ponds or pools of stagnant water;



   (D)   Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours
after death;



   (E)   Accumulations of manure, refuse or other debris;



   (F)   Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or
fly-tight or which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to
emit foul and disagreeable odors;



   (G)   The pollution of any storm sewer system, public well or
cistern, stream or lake, canal or body of water by sewage, industrial waste
or other substances;



   (H)   All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon
public or private property;



   (I)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in
unreasonable quantities;



   (J)   All public exposure of people having a contagious disease; and



   (K)   Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute not
operating under local license.



§ 94.16  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC WELFARE.



   The following are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting
public welfare:



   (A)   All gambling devices, slot machines and punch boards, except
as otherwise authorized by federal, state or local law;



   (B)   Betting, bookmaking and all apparatus used in the occupations;



   (C)   All houses or vehicles kept or used for the purpose of
prostitution or promiscuous sexual intercourse, gambling houses, houses of
ill fame and bawdy houses or the unlawful transportation of intoxicating
liquor; or



   (D)   All places where intoxicating liquor is manufactured or
disposed of in violation of law or where, in violation of law, people are
permitted to resort for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor, or where
intoxicating liquor is kept for sale or other disposition in violation of
law, and all liquor and other property used for maintaining such a place.



§ 94.17  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.



   The following are declared to be public nuisances affecting public
peace and safety:



   (A)   All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks within 48
hours after the snow or other precipitation causing the condition has ceased
to fall as required in this code;



   (B)   All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which
prevent people from having a clear view of all traffic approaching an
intersection;



   (C)   All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface
of a sidewalk or street as to constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;



   (D)   All unnecessary noises and annoying vibrations;



   (E)   All obscene pictures, books, pamphlets, magazines and
newspapers;



   (F)   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary public use
of streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds except under conditions as
are permitted by this code or other applicable law;



   (G)   Radio aerials or television antennae erected or maintained in
a dangerous manner;



   (H)   Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or
any use of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to
gather, obstructing traffic and the free use of the street or sidewalk;



   (I)   All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over
streets and sidewalks, or so situated so as to endanger public safety, or not
constructed and maintained as provided by ordinance;



   (J)   The allowing of rain water, ice or snow to fall from any
building or structure upon any street or sidewalk or to flow across any
sidewalk;



   (K)   Any barbed wire fence less than six feet above the ground and
within three feet of a public sidewalk or way;



   (L)   All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so
situated or operated on private property as to attract the public;



   (M)   Waste water cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or
other public properties;



   (N)   Outdoor storage of discarded or unused machinery, household
appliances or furniture, automobile bodies or other material in a manner
conducive to creating fire, health or safety hazards from accumulation;



   (O)   Any well, hole or similar excavation which is left uncovered
or in other condition as to constitute a hazard to any person coming on the
premises where it is located;



   (P)   Obstruction to the free flow of water of a lake, canal, basin,
pond or other waterway or a public street drain, gutter or ditch except as
authorized by this code or other law;



   (Q)   The placing, throwing or depositing on any street, sidewalk or
other public property, any dirt, rubbish or other material;



   (R)   The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way
or on adjacent private property;



   (S)   Annoying, injuring or endangering the safety, comfort or
repose of the public;



   (T)   Looking, gazing, staring or peeping in the window of a house
or place of dwelling of another with intent to intrude upon or interfere with
the privacy of a member of the household thereof; or



   (U)   Willfully or intentionally urinating or defecating by any
person in any public place, or in any place where there is reason to believe
others may be exposed to that conduct, other than in a permanent or portable
designed lavatory, bathroom, washroom, restroom or similar place which is
equipped with a urinal or toilet.



(‘81 Code, § 14-6)  (Ord. 27, passed 1-17-66; Am. Ord. 265, passed
1-28-82; Am. Ord. 491, passed 7-26-90; Am. Ord. 545, passed 10-22-92)



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning the city’s authority to define and abate
nuisances, see M.S. § 412.221, subd. 23



§ 94.18  IMMEDIATE ABATEMENT.



   Nothing in this section shall prevent the city, without notice or other
process, from immediately abating any condition which poses an imminent and
serious hazard to human life or safety.



WEEDS



§ 94.35  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DESTRUCTION ORDER.  The notice served by the City Council or
designated city official, in cases of appeal, on the property owner of the
ordinance violation.



   PROPERTY OWNER.  The person occupying the property, the holder of
legal title or a person having control over the property of another, such as
a right-of-way, easement, license or lease.



   WEEDS and RANK VEGETATION.  Noxious weeds including but not limited
to: 



      (1)   Alum (allium), Buckthorn, Bur Cucumber, Canada Thistle,
Corncockle, Cressleaf Groundsel, Curly Dock, Dodder, Field Bindweed, French
Weed, Hairy Whitetop, Hedge Bindweed, Hoary Cress, Horsenettle, Johnsongrass,
Leafy Spurge, Mile-A-Minute Weed, Musk Thistle, Oxeye Daisy, Perennial
Sowthistle, Poison Hemlock, Purple Loosestrife, Quackgrass, Russian Knapweed,
Russian Thistle, Serrated Tussock, Shatter Cane, Sorghum, Wild Carrot, Wild
Garlic, Wild Mustard, Wild Onion, Wild Parsnip;



      (2)   Grapevines when growing in groups of 100 or more and not
pruned, sprayed, cultivated, or otherwise maintained for two consecutive
years; and



      (3)   Nuisance weeds as defined by state statutes and rules.



§ 94.36  OWNERS RESPONSIBLE FOR TRIMMING, REMOVAL AND THE LIKE.



   All property owners within the city shall remove, cut, dispose and
prevent the growth of weeds, grasses and rank vegetation or other
uncontrolled plant growth on their property in excess of eight inches in
height.  A violation of this section shall constitute a public nuisance. 
This section shall not apply to natural areas defined as woods, pastures,
parks, bogs, marshes, and agricultural areas.  A violation of this section
is a petty misdemeanor.



(Am. Ord. 752, passed 6-10-04; Am. Ord. 887, passed 4-8-10)



CHAPTER 95:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



General Provisions



   95.01   Purpose



   95.02   Definitions



   95.03   General regulations



   95.04   Hours



Keller Lake and Lac Lavon Motorized Vehicle Regulations



   95.15   Purpose



   95.16   Definitions



   95.17   Prohibitions



   95.18   Use and operation standards



   95.19   Exemption



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 95.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter which is enacted pursuant to M.S.§ 471.62,
is to secure the orderly and suitable use and enjoyment of public parks, city
recreation areas and facilities, city-wide trail systems, wildlife
sanctuaries, forests, historical sites and public access to lakes, rivers and
streams, in parks established by the city, and to further the safety, health,
comfort and welfare of all persons in the use thereof.



(‘81 Code, § 14.5-1)  (Ord. 242, passed 6-9-80)



§ 95.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Every device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, but
including motorized bicycles, minibikes and snowmobiles.



   NUDE.  The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or
buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below
the top of the nipple.



   PARK.  A park, playground, beach or other area within the city, owned,
leased or used, wholly or in part, by the city for park and recreational
purposes or which is designated by the City Council as a park.



(‘81 Code, § 14.5-2)



(Ord. 242, passed 6-9-80)



§ 95.03  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Operation of motor vehicles.  No person shall drive or
operate a motor vehicle in any park except on roads or designated parking
areas or other areas as the city shall designate, and no person shall operate
a motor vehicle within a park at a speed in excess of ten miles per hour.



   (B)   Parking of motor vehicles.  No person shall park or stop any
motor vehicle at any place in a park, except in designated parking areas or
upon a public street and no person shall park or leave any unauthorized motor
vehicle within a park when persons are not permitted in the park as set forth
in § 95.04. A violation of this section is a petty misdemeanor.



   (C)   Fires.  No person shall light a fire in any park except in
places or receptacles provided for the purpose.  All fires must be
extinguished before leaving the site.



   (D)   Littering.  No person shall litter park grounds with waste
material of any form.



   (E)   Swimming and bathing.  No person shall bathe, swim or wade in
any lake, pond or watercourse within a park, except in designated swimming or
wading areas.  All persons shall comply with the posted rules in swimming
areas.



   (F)   Handbills and posters.  No person shall, in any manner,
attach or affix any handbill or poster to any property or object within any
park.



   (G)   Alcoholic beverages.  Persons 21 years of age or older are
allowed to possess, consume or display alcoholic beverages in any park,
except that no distilled spirits shall be allowed in any park, excluding
Valleywood Golf Course.  Distilled spirits may be purchased from, consumed,
possessed or displayed within Valleywood Golf Course in accordance with its
liquor license under this code and state law.  Distilled spirits are
distilled beverages containing ethyl alcohol or hydrated oxide of ethyl,
including, but not limited to: whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, tequila, vodka,
schnapps, and liqueur including all dilutions and mixtures thereof.



   (H)   Defacing and destroying park property.  No person shall write
upon, deface, break, destroy, injure, remove or carry away any tree, plant,
flower, shrub, rock, soil, sand, fence, bench or any other structure or
property within any park area.



   (I)   Firearms and bows and arrows.  No person shall discharge or
display any firearms, air guns, shot guns, rifles, pistols, revolvers, air
rifles or BB guns. The use of bows and arrows, except in designated areas, is
prohibited.  Hunting or trapping is prohibited.



   (J)   Boat launching and parking of trailers.  No person shall
violate the posted rules related to public boat launching and parking of
trailers.



   (K)   Park animals.  No person shall disturb or interfere with any
birds or animals kept or found therein.



   (L)   Domestic animals.  No person shall bring any animal into a
park unless the animal is leashed or inside a motor vehicle or cage.  Animal
owners or their handlers shall remove any excreta dropped by their animals.



   (M)   Riding horses.  No person shall ride a horse or other animal
within any park unless in possession of a permit issued by the City Council
or as part of an organized community event.



   (N)   Erection of structures and public service utilities.  No
person shall construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind,
whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any public
service utility into, upon or across any park lands except on special written
permission from the City Council.



   (O)   Throwing stones and other missiles; golf.



      (1)   No person shall throw or cast any stone or other missile
carelessly or heedlessly in disregard of the rights or safety of others, or
in any manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or
property.



      (2)   Except as permitted at the Valleywood Municipal Golf
Course and Park, no person shall hit or strike a golf ball or swing a golf
club.



   (P)   Hockey.  No person shall play hockey, except in designated
areas.  No hockey sticks or pucks shall be permitted in general skating
areas.



   (Q)   Nudity; committing nuisances; obscene language and behavior. 
No person shall appear nude, commit any nuisance or use threatening, abusing,
insulting, obscene or indecent language or act in any indecent, lascivious or
improper manner or do any act which constitutes a breach of the public peace.



   (R)   Operation of minibikes, motor bikes, other recreational
vehicles.  No person shall operate minibikes, motor bikes, snowmobiles or
any motorized recreational vehicle in parks other than at sites designated by
the City Council.



   (S)   Aircraft, hot air balloons, parachutes.  No person shall use
any park for a starting or landing field for any aircraft, hot air balloons
or parachutes, except by permit from the City Council.



   (T)   Peddling and selling.  No person shall sell, solicit or carry
on any business or commercial enterprise or service in any park except in
connection with an activity for which a park use permit has been issued by
the Park Director or lease or contract granted by the City Council.



   (U)   Exemptions.  City agents, employees and police officers
acting in their official capacity shall be exempt from the provisions of this
section.



(‘81 Code, § 14.5-3)  (Ord. 242, passed 6-9-80; Am. Ord. 278, passed
11-9-82; Am. Ord. 308, passed 10-27-83; Am. Ord. 414, passed 4-28-88; Am.
Ord. 859, passed 5-14-09; Am. Ord. 887, passed 4-8-10)



§ 95.04  HOURS.



   No person other than a city agent, employee or police officer acting in
his or her official capacity shall be in any park during the hours the park
is closed. Parks shall be opened at 5:00 a.m. and closed at 10:00 p.m.,
except:



   (A)   The use of city-owned and operated lighted tennis courts and
lighted athletic fields shall be permitted until 11:30 p.m.; and



   (B)   Events or activities authorized by the city shall be permitted
until 12:00 a.m. midnight.



(‘81 Code, § 14.5-4)  (Ord. 242, passed 6-9-80; Am. Ord. 441, passed
4-13-89; Am. Ord. 1028, passed 5-11-17)



KELLER LAKE AND LAC LAVON MOTORIZED VEHICLE REGULATIONS



§ 95.15  PURPOSE.



   It shall be the intent of the provisions of this subchapter to achieve
the following objectives:



   (A)   To preserve the natural beauty of Keller Lake and Lac Lavon;



   (B)   To promote the peaceful enjoyment of Keller Lake and Lac Lavon
and protect the public health, safety and general welfare of those who
utilize its facilities;



   (C)   To provide for the compatibility of various uses of the lakes
and surrounding park area; and



   (D)   To limit the congestion, pollution and noise created by
certain motorized vehicles by setting standards for and limiting the use
thereof.



(‘81 Code, § 14.5-10)  (Ord. 415, passed 5-5-88; Am. Ord. 533, passed
2-13-92)



§ 95.16  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DAYTIME.  That part of each calendar day between the hours of 5:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m.



   MOTORBOAT.  The meaning given in M.S. § 86B.005, subd. 9.



   MOTORIZED VEHICLE.  Any self-propelled vehicle or any vehicle or
flotation device propelled or drawn by any self-propelled vehicle or
flotation device.  This term includes snowmobiles and all terrain
vehicles.  All terrain vehicles shall have the meaning given in M.S. §
84.92, subd. 8.



   NIGHTTIME.  That part of each calendar day between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 5:00 a.m. and between 10:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight.



   REMOTE CONTROL INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINE BOAT.  Any boat which is
controlled by the user by means of a control cable or radio control unit and
which is powered by an internal combustion engine.  This does not include
those remote control boats powered by steam, electricity or wind.



   SNOWMOBILE.  Any self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or
ice steered by skis, skids or runners.



(‘81 Code, § 14.5-11)  (Ord. 415, passed 5-5-88; Am. Ord. 533, passed
2-13-92)



§ 95.17  PROHIBITIONS.



   No motorized vehicle or flotation device shall be utilized on Keller
Lake or Lac Lavon, except in compliance with sections §§ 95.03 (U) and
95.18.



(‘81 Code, § 14.5-12)  (Ord. 415, passed 5-5-88; Am. Ord. 533, passed
2-13-92)



§ 95.18  USE AND OPERATION STANDARDS.



   (A)   No person shall operate or permit the operation of any
motorized vehicles or flotation devices powered by internal combustion,
gasoline or diesel engines on Lac Lavon.



   (B)   No person shall operate or permit the operation of any
motorized vehicle or motorboat with more than a five horsepower motor or
remote control internal combustion engine boat on Keller Lake.



   (C)   The operation of motorized vehicles or motorboats on Keller
Lake and the operation of motorized vehicles or flotation devices powered by
small electric engines on Lac Lavon shall be allowed during the daytime
provided that:



      (1)   No person shall operate a motorized vehicle or flotation
device in a condition of disrepair as to create loud or unnecessary grating,
grinding, rattling or other noise; and



      (2)   No person shall create loud and excessive noise in
connection with unloading or unpacking any motorized vehicle or flotation
device.



   (D)   No person shall operate a motorized vehicle or flotation
device during the nighttime hours.



(‘81 Code, § 14.5-13)  (Ord. 415, passed 5-5-88; Am. Ord. 533, passed
2-13-92)



§ 95.19  EXEMPTION.



   (A)   Motorized vehicles or motorboats used by rescue personnel or
authorized resource management or enforcement personnel acting in the course
of their employment shall be exempt from this subchapter.



   (B)   The city may allow the use of remote control internal
combustion engine boats at a specific location after review of a reasonable
request.



(‘81 Code, § 14.5-15)  (Ord. 533, passed 2-13-92)



CHAPTER 96:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



   96.01   Street lighting; location and costs



   96.02   Height of wires



   96.03   Snow and ice removed from sidewalks



   96.04   Media vending boxes



   96.05   Mailboxes within the ring route, Fischer Market Place and
Central Village areas



   96.06   Obstructions and excavations in public right-of-way or
property



   96.07   Snow and ice in street or on sidewalks



 



   96.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Streets and sidewalks; construction and maintenance, see § 151.23



§ 96.01  STREET LIGHTING; LOCATION AND COSTS.



   (A)   Purpose.  It is the Council’s intention to encourage the
installation of street lighting throughout the city to promote the general
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city.



(‘81 Code, § 18-1)



   (B)   Location.



      (1)   The Council, upon a petition of at least 35% of the
property owners in an existing subdivision or developed area or upon its own
initiative, shall determine the streets, parks or other public and private
areas on which the city shall install and operate a street lighting system.



      (2)   Before any service is furnished, the Council shall
schedule a hearing pursuant to the provision of M.S. Chapter 429, as amended,
at which time the Council will consider the project.



      (3)   The city may pay a portion of the costs of installation
of street lighting systems as the Council may by policy determine from
general ad valorem tax levies or from other revenues or funds of the city
available for that purpose.  In the event the Council elects not to pay all
of the installation costs, the remaining unpaid portion shall be assessed
against the benefitted property owners as a public improvement following a
public hearing and in full accordance with the provisions of M.S. Chapter
429, as amended. 



(‘81 Code, § 18-2)  (Ord. 210, passed 9-28-78)



   (C)   Operating costs; assessments.



      (1)   The City Clerk shall keep a record of the costs of
operation, maintenance and replacement of the street lighting system
including clerical, administrative and incidental costs.



      (2)   Those costs shall be apportioned to each lot and parcel
of property benefitted by the street lighting system, whether or not the
property abuts the street or other public or private area in which the system
is located.  Further, the costs shall be apportioned to similar classes of
property similarly.



      (3)   The City Council, based on the information, shall by
resolution, determine the rate to be paid by each lot or parcel.



      (4)   The City Clerk shall prepare a bill based on the adopted
rate for each lot or parcel.  The bill shall be issued on the same periodic
schedule as that of the water and sewer billing.  The bill may be added to
the water and sewer billing for each lot or parcel benefitted by the street
lighting system.  The amount billed will thereupon become immediately due
and payable.



      (5)   In accordance with M.S. § 429.101, the City Clerk is
authorized to certify the unpaid portion of any bill to the County Auditor to
be added to the tax rolls for the property involved.



(‘81 Code, § 18-3)  (Ord. 503, passed 2-14-91; Am. Ord. 929, passed
2-9-12)



§ 96.02  HEIGHT OF WIRES.



   All wires which are strung less than 15 feet above the surface of any
roadway constitute a public nuisance.  It shall be unlawful for the owners
of any wires to string or allow to remain any wires below that height.



(‘81 Code, § 18-6)  (Ord. 27, passed 1-17-66) 



§ 96.03  SNOW AND ICE REMOVED FROM SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to require owners or
occupants of real property to remove snow and ice from public sidewalks to
prevent a public nuisance affecting the safety of the general public.



   (B)   Requirements.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or the occupant of
real property to fail to remove snow or ice from public sidewalks within 48
hours after the snow or ice has been deposited.



      (2)   This section shall not apply to sidewalks on dead-end
streets where no houses face that side of the street nor to sidewalks which
are asphalt surfaced.



      (3)   The Mayor, or in the absence of the Mayor, the acting
mayor, may file with the City Clerk a written declaration suspending the
requirements of this section when the accumulation of snow makes removal
unreasonable.  Suspension shall continue for the remainder of the winter
season, unless revoked by the City Council at its first regular meeting
following the date of the written declaration.



   (C)   A violation of this section is a petty misdemeanor.



(‘81 Code, § 18-7)  (Ord. 230, passed 10-11-79; Am. Ord. 266, passed
1-28-82; Am. Ord. 373, passed 11-25-86; Am. Ord. 887, passed 4-8-10)



§ 96.04  MEDIA VENDING BOXES.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section and § 96.05 is to
protect public property and to provide for the safe erection or placement of
newspaper, magazine, vending boxes, mailboxes or other media vending
structures within the public way.



   (B)   Definition.  “Media vending boxes” shall include any
structure designed for the purpose of the sale, receipt or free distribution
of newspapers, magazines or any other type of media.



   (C)   Regulations in Ring Route, Fischer Market Place, and Central
Village area.



      (1)   Location.  Media vending boxes within the public way
along both sides of the following routes:



         (a)   Galaxie Avenue from 147th Street W. to 157th
Street W. and Pennock Avenue and Flagstaff Avenue from 147th Street W. to
153rd Street W.;



         (b)   147th Street and 153rd Street W. from Pennock
Avenue to Flagstaff Avenue;



         (c)   Cedar Avenue, from 147th Street W. to 153rd Street
W.;



         (d)   County Road 42 (150th Street W.) from 147th Street
W. to Flagstaff Avenue;



         (e)   Foliage Avenue from 147th Street W. to 153rd
Street W.;



         (f)   152nd Street W. from Fortino Street from Galaxie
Avenue to Foliage Avenue;



         (g)   Founders Lane; and



         (h)   Fresco Terrace.



      (2)   Placement.



         (a)   A media vending box  shall be set back 20 feet
from any curb.



         (b)   A media vending box shall be set back at least
five feet from any driveway curb cut.



         (c)   A media vending box shall not be placed within
five feet of any fire hydrant.



         (d)   No media vending box shall be placed closer than
five feet to any marked crosswalk or handicapped access lane; and



         (e)   No box, or any part thereof, shall be placed on,
in, or upon any sidewalk or pathway surface area.



      (3)   Height.  A media vending box shall be no more than 60
inches in height above the street grade.



   (D)   Affixing and securing prohibited.  A media vending box shall
not be affixed or chained to traffic signs, parking meters, fences, benches,
trees, fire alarm boxes or fire hydrants, light, or notice posts installed or
maintained by any entity of government or utility.  A media vending box
shall not be secured by any device that requires drilling into, removal of,
or reconstruction of paved surfaces, sidewalks, brick pavers, or other
improvements within public ways.



   (E)   Use and appearance.  A media vending box shall be maintained
by the applicant in a state of good repair and neat appearance.  The name,
address, and phone number of the owner of the device or person responsible
for maintenance shall be legibly displayed thereon.



   (F)   Collection and storage of nonconforming boxes.  In addition
to other penalties or remedies in this code, the city may collect and store
media vending boxes which are unlawfully placed, vacated, inoperable,
attached to public improvements, or are a physical obstruction on the public
way.  The Director of Public Works shall give written notice to the owner of
the media vending box in noncompliance advising that the box shall be removed
by the city within ten days unless the box is brought into compliance or the
owner requests a hearing before the City Council.  The city, however, may
immediately remove a box that unreasonably interferes with vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.  The owner of the box so removed may seek a subsequent
hearing before the City Council.



   (G)   Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor. 
Additionally, any person violating this section shall reimburse the city for
any damage done to the city’s property.



(‘81 Code, § 18-8)  (Ord. 491, passed 7-26-90; Am. Ord. 781, passed
7-28-05) 



§ 96.05  MAILBOXES ALONG THE “RING ROUTE.”



   (A)   This section shall apply to customer mailboxes placed along
both sides of the following public ways:



      (1)   Galaxie Avenue from 147th Street W. to 157th Street W.,
and Pennock Avenue and Flagstaff Avenue, from 147th Street W. to 153rd Street
W.;



      (2)   147th Street W. and 153rd Street W., from Pennock Avenue
to Flagstaff Avenue;



      (3)   Cedar Avenue, from 147th Street W.  to 153rd Street W.;



      (4)   County Road 42 (150th Street W.) from 147th Street W. to
Flagstaff Avenue;



      (5)   Foliage Avenue from 147th Street W. to 153rd Street W.;



      (6)   152nd Street W. and Fortino Street from Galaxie Avenue
to Foliage Avenue;



      (7)   Founders Lane; and



      (8)   Fresco Terrace.



   (B)   All customer mailboxes shall be placed on private property at
the edge of the sidewalk subject to the approval of the location by the U.S.
Postal Manager.



   (C)   The boxes shall not be secured by any device that requires
drilling into, removal of, or reconstruction of paved surfaces, sidewalks,
brick pavers or other improvements within public ways.



   (D)   Any person violating this section shall reimburse the city for
any damage done to the city’s property.



(‘81 Code, § 18-9)  (Ord. 491, passed 7-26-90; Am. Ord. 782, passed
7-28-05)



§ 96.06  OBSTRUCTIONS AND EXCAVATIONS IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY OR PROPERTY.



   (A)   Application and scope.  This section shall not apply to
obstructions or excavations within public rights-of-way by a person or entity
owning or controlling a utility service facility therein, which is regulated
elsewhere in this code.



   (B)   Public nuisance declared.  Any obstructions or excavations
within a public right-of-way or public grounds, except under a permit issued
by the city, constitute a public nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any
person to place or make any obstruction or to excavate within any public
right-of-way or public grounds unless the city grants, in its sole discretion,



a written permit therefor.  This section shall not apply to a lawfully
registered motor vehicle pursuant to M.S. Chapter 168 that is lawfully parked
in the roadway portion of the public right-of-way or upon a portion of a
driveway within the public right-of-way, provided the motor vehicle is not
blocking any portion of a sidewalk or trail.  This section shall not apply
to excavations in the boulevard area of a public right-of-way in connection
with installation of mailboxes or irrigation systems and planting of trees.



   (C)   Permit fee.  A permit fee, as set forth in Chapter 35 of this
code, shall be required for any permit required for excavation under this
section that is within any vehicular traffic roadway area including curb or
gutter systems, of a public right-of-way, or any pedestrian circulation
system, including, but not limited to any sidewalk or pathway.



   (D)   Exception.  This section shall not apply to obstructions
within the boulevard of a public right-of-way used in connection with viewing
the 4th of July parade during the period from 9:00 a.m. on July 3 to 4:00
p.m. on July 4.



   (E)   Definitions.



      EXCAVATION. To dig into or in any way remove or physically
disturb or penetrate any public right-of-way ground surface, or any portion
thereof.



      OBSTRUCTION. To place, store, maintain or the placement or
maintenance of any building, structure or object.



      PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The term is defined in § 97.02 of this code.



      ROADWAY PORTION OF THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. That portion of a
public right-of-way that is improved, designed, or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the area between the curb and the abutting
property line.



(Ord. 715, passed 5-23-02; Am. Ord. 813, passed 6-14-07; Am. Ord. 968, passed
6-12-14)



§ 96.07  SNOW AND ICE IN STREETS OR ON SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   Placement of snow or ice. No person, unless acting under a
specific contract with the city or with special permission from the city,
shall place snow or ice in any travel portion of any street, sidewalk or
trail right-of-way or push or otherwise move snow across the surface of the
travel portion of any public street.



   (B)   Removal of snow and ice.  The owner or occupant of any
property who deposits, or employs another who deposits, snow or ice in the
travel portion of any street, sidewalk or trail right-of-way shall remove the
deposit snow or ice within 12 hours after notice is given by the city.  If
the owner or occupant fails to remove the snow or ice as required in the
notice within the 12 hours, the city may perform such work and the owner or
occupant shall be personally liable and shall pay the cost within 30 days of
mailing of invoice by the city.  When payment is not remitted as required
herein, the city Clerk-Treasurer may, at the next meeting, present such
information to the City Council.  The City Council may approve all or a
portion of any snow removal costs as herein provided as a special assessment
against the abutting property and such special assessments shall, at the time
of certifying taxes to the County Auditor, be certified for collection as
other special assessments are certified and collected pursuant to M.S. §
429.101.



(Ord. 915, passed 4-14-11)



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty has been provided shall be subject to the fine in §
10.99.



   (B)   Any person who violates § 96.03 shall be guilty of a petty
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of up to $100.



   (C)   A separate violation occurs each day that a violation
hereunder continues.



(‘81 Code, § 18-7)  (Ord. 230, passed 10-11-79; Am. Ord. 266, passed
1-28-82; Am. Ord. 373, passed 11-25-86)



CHAPTER 97:  PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT




Section




   97.01   Application and scope



   97.02   Definitions



   97.03   Franchises



   97.04   Registration requirement



   97.05   Permit requirement



   97.06   Conditions of permit and registration



   97.07   County or state rights-of-way



   97.08   Installation of underground facilities within public
rights-of-way



   97.09   Supplement permit or permit extension



   97.10   Revocation of permits



   97.11   Permit fees



   97.12   Public right-of-way restoration



   97.13   Inspection



   97.14   Permissible work without a permit



   97.15   Mapping data



   97.16   General public right-of-way regulations



   97.17   Public right-of-way vacation



   97.18   Indemnification and liability



   97.19   Abandoned facilities



   97.20   Appeal



   97.21   Insurance



Cross-reference:



   Obstructions and excavations in public right-of-way or property, see §
96.06



   Streets and sidewalks; construction and maintenance, see § 151.23



§ 97.01  APPLICATION AND SCOPE.



   This chapter shall apply exclusively to excavations and obstructions
within public rights-of-way by any person who owns or controls, or intends to
own or control, any utility service facility therein. All other excavations
or obstructions are regulated elsewhere in this code.



(Ord. 715, passed 5-23-02)



§ 97.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:



   ABANDONED FACILITY .  A facility that is:



      (1)   No longer in service or physically disconnected from any
other facility that is in use or still carries service; or



      (2)   Deemed abandoned by the owner of the facility.



   APPLICANT .  Any public right-of-way user required to obtain a permit
under this chapter.



   CITY MANAGEMENT COSTS.  The actual costs incurred by the city for
public rights-of-way management, including, but not limited to, costs
incurred in connection with the registration process, the right-of-way
excavation or obstruction permit process, the small wireless facility
conditional use permit, if any, process, the inspection of project work and
restoration and enforcement and correction of non-complying project work,
mapping of public right-of-way users and maintenance and regulation of public
right-of-ways occupied by public right-of-way users. Management costs do not
include payment by a public right-of-way user for the use of the
right-of-way, unreasonable fees of a third-party contractor used by a local
government unit as part of managing its public right-of-way, including but
not limited to any third-party contractor fee tied to or based upon customer
counts, access lines, revenue generated by the public right-of-way user, or a
local government unit, or the fees and cost of litigation relating to the
interpretation of the act or any ordinance enacted under the act, or the city
fees and costs related to appeals taken pursuant to this chapter.



   COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION.  Install, mount, maintain, modify, operate,
or replace a small wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent to an
existing wireless support structure that is owned privately or by the city or
other local government unit.



   DEGRADATION .  A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way
caused by excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the
need to reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the
excavation or disturbance did not occur.



   DEGRADATION COST .  Subject to Minnesota Rules 7819.1100, the cost to
achieve a level of restoration as determined by the city at the time the
permit is issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration shown in plates 1 to
13, set forth in Minnesota Rules parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950.



   DEGRADATION FEE .  The estimated fee established at the time of
permitting by the city to recover costs associated with the decrease in the
useful life of the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals
the degradation cost.



   DIRECTOR .  The City of Apple Valley Director of Public Works and
his/her designee.



   EMERGENCY .  A condition that:



      (1)   Immediately endangers the life, safety, or welfare of
persons;



      (2)   Causes an immediate threat of significant loss or injury
to property; or



      (3)   Requires immediate repair or replacement in order to
restore service to customers.



   EQUIPMENT .  Anything tangible used to install, repair or maintain
facilities in any public right-of-way.



   EXCAVATE or EXCAVATION .  To dig into or in any way remove or
physically disturb or penetrate any public right-of-way ground surface, or
any portion thereof.



   FACILITY or FACILITIES .  Anything tangible, including equipment,
which is required to provide utility services.



   HOLE .  An excavation having a length that is equal to or less than
the width of the public right-of-way for the section of the roadway where the
work is occurring.



   LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE .  A person, or designee of such person,
authorized by a public right-of-way user to accept service and to act and
make decisions regarding matters within the scope of this section on behalf
of the public right-of-way user.



   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY.  A small wireless facility that is no larger
than 24 inches long, 15 inches wide, and 12 inches high, and whose exterior
antenna, if any, is no longer than 11 inches.



   OBSTRUCT or OBSTRUCTION .  To place or the placement of any object in
a public right-of-way, or to remove or the removal of an existing structure,
or any portion thereof, from a public right-of-way, for an aggregate period
of eight hours or more.



   PATCH or PATCHING .  A method of roadway surface replacement or
restoration that consists of:



      (1)   The compaction of the sub-base and aggregate base; and



      (2)   The replacement, in kind, of the existing roadway
surface for a minimum of two feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all
directions.



   PERMITTEE .  A person to whom an excavation or obstruction permit has
been issued by the city under this chapter.



   PROJECT or PROJECT WORK .  Any activity, including construction,
reconstruction, installation, maintenance, relocation, or replacement of any
facility or a public right-of-way in which the facility is located and
restoration of the public right-of-way that is regulated under this chapter.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY or PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY .  The surface, air space
above the surface, and the area below the surface of any public street,
highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, trail, avenue, boulevard, drive, court,
concourse, bridge, tunnel, park, parkway, skyway, waterway, dock, bulkhead,
wharf, pier, easement, or similar property or waters within the city owned
by, under control of, or maintained by the city, or dedicated or otherwise
conveyed to the city for general public use, including, but not limited to,
any riparian right, which, consistent with the purposes for which it was
created, obtained, or dedicated, may be used for the purpose of installing,
operating, and maintaining utility service facilities. No reference herein to
a PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by
the city that its interest or other right to control or use such property is
sufficient to permit its use for the purpose of installing, operating, and
maintaining utility service facilities.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT EXCAVATION PERMIT .  A permit which is
issued by the city authorizing the permittee to excavate in a public
right-of-way as specifically described in the permit.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT OBSTRUCTION PERMIT .  A permit which is
issued by the city authorizing the permittee to obstruct a public
right-of-way as specifically described in the permit.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY USER .  Any person or entity which owns or
controls a facility that is located, or is sought or intended to be located,
in a public right-of-way including persons who have installation and
maintenance responsibilities by contract, lease, sublease, or assignment.



   RESTORATION COST .  The amount of money paid to the city by a
permittee to meet restoration requirements in accordance with plates 1 to 13
of the PUC rules.



   RESTORE or RESTORATION .  The process, including patching, by which a
public right-of-way and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation,
is returned to the same condition that existed before any project work.



   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY.



      (1)   A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications:



         (a)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no
more than six cubic feet in volume, or, in case of an antenna that has
exposed elements, the antenna and all its exposed elements could fit within
an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and



         (b)   All other wireless equipment associated with the
small wireless facility, excluding electric meters, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, battery backup power systems, grounding
equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical
cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and any equipment
concealed from public view within or behind an existing structure or
concealment, is in aggregate no more than 28 cubic feet in volume; or



      (2)   A micro wireless facility.



   TRENCH.  An excavation in the roadway surface having a length that is
equal to or in excess of the width of the roadway or sections of roadway
where the work is occurring.



   UTILITY POLE.  A pole that is used in whole or in part to facilitate
telecommunications or electric service.



   UTILITY SERVICE.  Services provided by:



      (1)   A public utility as defined in Minnesota Statutes;



      (2)   A telecommunications, wireless service, pipeline,
community antenna television, fire and alarm communications, water, sewer,
electricity, light, heat, cooling energy, or power services;



      (3)   A corporation organized for the purposes set forth in
M.S. Chapter 300;



      (4)   A district heating or cooling system; or



      (5)    A cable communication system as defined in Minnesota
Statutes.



   WIRELESS FACILITY.



      (1)   Wireless facility means equipment at a fixed location
that enables the provision of wireless services between user equipment and a
wireless service network, including:



         (a)   Equipment associated with wireless service;



         (b)   A radio transceiver, antenna, coaxial or
fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable
equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and



         (c)   A small wireless facility.



      (2)   Wireless facility does not include:



         (a)   Wireless support structures;



         (b)   Wireline backhaul facilities; or



         (c)   Coaxial or fiber-optic cables that are either:



            1.   Between utility poles or wireless support
structures, or



            2.   That are not otherwise immediately adjacent
to or directly associated with a specific antenna.



   WIRELESS SERVICE.  Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless
spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or by means
of a mobile device, that is provided using wireless facilities. Wireless
service does not include services regulated under Title VI of the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, including cable service under 47 USC
522(6).



   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE.  A new or existing structure in a public
right-of-way designed to support, or capable of supporting, small wireless
facilities, as reasonably determined by a local government unit.



   WIRELINE BACKHAUL FACILITY.  A facility used to transport
communications data by wire from a wireless facility to a communications
network.



(Ord. 715, passed 5-23-02; Am. Ord. 1038, passed 2-8-18)



§ 97.03  FRANCHISES.



   The city may, in addition to the requirements of this chapter, require
any public utility or cable operator who has or seeks to have facilities or
equipment located in any public right-of way to obtain a franchise.



(Ord. 715, passed 5-23-02)



§ 97.04  REGISTRATION REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   Registration.  As of the effective date of this chapter, any
public right-of-way user, including any person or entity with installation
and maintenance responsibilities by lease, sublease, collocation agreement or
assignment, which owns or controls a facility within any public right-of-way,
or any portion thereof, shall register with the city. Registration shall be
deemed completed upon the public right-of-way user submitting to the city a
completed registration form furnished by the city and paying the registration
fee. A right-of-way user is required to update its registration within 60
days of any change of the information contained in a current registration
statement.



   (B)   Transfer of ownership or interest.  Whenever any public
right-of-way user transfers, sells, assigns or otherwise conveys ownership or
interest in facilities or equipment to another person, the registered public
right-of-way user shall notify the city of the date of the conveyance and the
name of the transferee within 30 days of the conveyance.



(Ord. 715, passed 5-23-02; Am. Ord. 1038, passed 2-8-18)



§ 97.05  PERMIT REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no
person or public right- of-way user may obstruct or excavate any public
right-of-way or install or collocate a small wireless facility or support
structure without first having obtained the appropriate permit from the city
unless another reporting process is approved by the Director or his/her
designee.



      (1)   An excavation permit is required for any excavation. An
obstruction permit is required for any obstruction in connection with the
installation, relocation, operation or maintenance of a utility service.



      (2)   Any public right-of-way user which owns or controls a
facility within any public right-of-way, or any portion thereof, on the
effective date of this chapter, that subsequently excavates or otherwise
obstructs any public right-of-way, or any portion thereof, shall first obtain
a permit therefor as required under this chapter.



      (3)   A person seeking to install a new wireless support
structure for the siting of a small wireless facility in a right-of-way in a
district or areas zoned for or allowing single family residential uses, or in
an established historic district, is also required to apply for and obtain a
conditional use permit under Chapter 155 of this code.



   (B)   Permit applications.



      (1)   An application for a permit shall be on a form furnished
by the city and completed and submitted to the city with the following
information:



         (a)   The applicant's name; Gopher One-Call registration
certificate number; address; e-mail address; telephone number; and facsimile
number.



         (b)   The local representative's name; address; e-mail
address; telephone number; facsimile number; and current information
regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency.



         (c)    The name, Gopher One-Call registration
certificate number, address and telephone number of the person(s) or
entities, other than the applicant, to perform the project work or any
portion thereof.



         (d)    A certificate of insurance or self-insurance
verifying the coverage as required in this chapter.



         (e)   All mapping data and information in form and
substance as required in this chapter, except a registrant who is not
applying for an excavation or obstruction permit need not provide this
information.



         (f)   A detailed description and drawing to a scale as
required by the city of the proposed project and project work, including
identification of the obstructions to be placed, the size and depth of any
excavation, the schedule for commencement and completion of the proposed
project, and the location and size of any trees impacted in the designated
work area.



      (2)   Permits for multiple telecommunications facilities,
including small wireless facilities, may be filed in consolidated
applications as required by M.S. § 237.163 subd. 3a. Permit applications
that propose collocation of facilities shall indicate, to the extent
practicable, the owner of the other facility or facilities, and if the city
is the owner of those facilities, the application shall include a request for
a collocation agreement using a form and providing such information as
required by the city.



   (C)   Issuance of permit.



      (1)   If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this
chapter, the city shall issue a permit within 90 days of receiving a
completed application, or shall provide written reasons for denial of the
application if the city believes the requirements have not been satisfied,
unless that time period is extended or tolled as specified in M.S. §
237.163, subd 3c. If the city receives applications within a single seven-day
period from one or more applicants seeking approval of permits for more than
30 small wireless facilities, the city may extend the 90-day deadline by an
additional 30 days. If the city elects to invoke this extension, it must
inform in writing any applicant to whom the extension will be applied.



      (2)   (a)   The city may deny a permit for the following
reasons:



            1.   The applicant failed to fully comply with the
application requirements herein.



            2.   The city has initiated revocation of a prior
permit issued under this chapter against the applicant.



            3.   The applicant has violated within the past
two years any requirements of this chapter.



            4.   The time schedule for the project will
conflict with or interfere with a community exhibition, celebration,
festival, or any other similar community event in the area of the project.



            5.   The time schedule for the project conflicts
with scheduled public improvement of the public right- of-way.



            6.   The proposed project violates a provision of
this code.



            7.   The proposed project is adverse to the public
health, safety, and welfare by interfering with the safety and convenience of
ordinary travel over the public right-of-way, or endangers the public
right-of-way and its users based on one or more of the following factors:



               A.   The extent of public right-of-way area
available;



               B.   The competing demands for the
particular proposed area space in the public right-of-way;



               C.   The availability of other locations in
the public right-of-way or in other public rights-of-way for the facility(s)
or equipment of the permit applicant;



               D.   The applicability of an ordinance or
other regulation that affects the location of a facility or equipment in the
public right-of- way;



               E.   The applicant’s prior compliance with
the terms and conditions of its franchise, this section and other applicable
ordinances and regulations;



               F.   The condition and age of the public
right-of-way and the city’s scheduled construction thereof; and



               G.   The costs of disruption to the public
and damage to the public right-of-way balanced against any benefits to the
public served by an expansion into additional parts of the public
right-of-way for facilities or equipment.



         (b)   Any denial of a right-of-way or small wireless
facility permit must be made in writing and must set forth the basis for the
denial. The city must notify the applicant in writing within three business
days of the decision to deny or revoke a permit. If a permit application is
denied, the applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the city and
resubmit its application. If the applicant resubmits the application within
30 days of receiving written notice of the denial, it may not be charged an
additional filing or processing fee. The city must approve or deny the
revised application within 30 days after the revised application is submitted.



      (3)   (a)   Permit applications that propose collocation of
facilities on city-owned poles, buildings, or other structures owned or under
the control of the city shall be authorized by the City Council upon terms
and conditions established by the City Council.  A wireless service provider
that is granted authority to collocate small wireless facilities on wireless
support structures owned or controlled by the city and located within the
public roads or rights-of-way is required to enter into a standard small
wireless facility collocation agreement, but not an individual license,
franchise, or other similar agreement with the local government unit or any
other entity.



         (b)   Any initial engineering survey and preparatory
construction work associated with collocation must be paid by the cost causer
in the form of a one-time, nonrecurring, commercially reasonable,
nondiscriminatory, and competitively neutral charge to recover the costs
associated with a proposed attachment.



(Ord. 715, passed 5-23-02; Am. Ord. 1038, passed 2-8-18)



§ 97.06  CONDITIONS OF PERMIT AND REGISTRATION.



   All permits issued and all registrations made under this chapter shall
be subject to the following requirements:



   (A)   All permits issued under this chapter or a copy of the permit
shall be conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the
indicated project work site and shall be available for inspection immediately
upon request by the Director or his/her designee.



   (B)   If the obstruction or excavation of the public right-of-way
begins later or ends sooner than the dates specified in the permit, the
permittee shall promptly notify the Director.



   (C)   Installation, placement, location, and relocation of equipment
and facilities shall comply with all federal, state and local laws.



   (D)   Public right-of-way restoration shall be in accordance with
the restoration regulations set forth in this chapter.



   (E)   Installation of all underground utilities shall be in
accordance with the underground utilities regulations set forth in this
chapter and all other applicable federal, state, and local laws.



   (F)   Precautions shall be taken as are necessary to avoid creating
unsafe or unsanitary conditions and a permittee shall not obstruct a public
right-of-way, except as expressly authorized by the permit, so as to hinder
the natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters or other
waterways. Personal vehicles of those doing work in the public right-of-way
may not be parked within or next to a permit area, unless parked in
conformance with city parking regulations. The loading or unloading of trucks
must be done solely within the defined permit area unless specifically
authorized by the permit.



   (G)   Project operations and work shall be conducted in a manner so
as to ensure the least obstruction to and interference with present and
continued use of the public right-of-way.



   (H)   Precautions shall be taken to assure the safety of the general
public, employees, invitees and those who require access to abutting
property, including appropriate signage.



   (I)   The permittee shall notify abutting property owners, with a
48-hour written notice, prior to commencement of any project work that may
disrupt the use of and access to the abutting property.



   (J)   The permittee involved in underground projects shall register
with Gopher State One Call and comply with the requirements thereof.



   (K)   The permittee shall comply with the Uniform Traffic Manual for
Traffic Control at all times during any project work and shall protect and
identify excavations and work operations with barricade flags in the daylight
hours and by warning lights at dusk and night.



   (L)   The permittee shall comply with all conditions of the permit.



   (M)   When any trail or drive has been cut, the appropriate signage
must be kept in place and maintained until restoration is complete.



   (N)   The permittee shall provide proper trench protection as
required by O.S.H.A. to prevent any cave-in; injury to property or persons;
or enlargement of the excavation.



   (O)   Excavations, trenches, and jacking pits off the roadway
surface area or adjacent to the roadway or curbing shall be sheathed and
braced. When unattended, all excavations, trenches and jacking pits shall be
protected to prevent surface drainage.



   (P)   The permittee shall protect the root growth of significant
trees and shrubbery located within the public right-of-way and adjacent
thereto.



   (Q)   The permittee shall coordinate project work and installation
of facilities in co-locations involving other public right-of-way users.



   (R)   The permittee shall maintain access to all properties and
cross streets during project work, including emergency vehicle access.



   (S)   The permittee shall physically locate property lines abutting
the project work. The permittee shall replace, with the services of a
Minnesota-licensed surveyor, any property corners or monuments disturbed as a
result of the project.



   (T)   The permittee shall complete restoration of the public
right-of-way in conformance with this chapter.



   (U)   No permittee, or any agent, subcontractor or employee thereof,
shall use lugs (steel tracks) on any roadway surfaces.



   (V)   The permittee shall remove daily all dirt or debris from
sidewalks, trails, public and private roadway surfaces, and curbs and gutters
during project work.



   (W)   The permittee shall obtain all other necessary permits,
licenses, and approvals; pay all required fees therefor and comply with all
requirements of local, state, and federal laws.



   (X)   The permittee shall not do any work outside the project area
as specified in the permit.



   (Y)   Screening and decorative structures. The permittee shall
screen all aboveground facilities and make reasonable accommodations for
decorative wireless support structures or signs, as required by the Director
of Public Works. Screening methods shall include the use of shrubs, trees
and/or with landscape rock or installation using stealth or camouflaged forms
of the facility. The Director may also impose reasonable restocking,
replacement, or relocation requirements when a new wireless support structure
is placed in a public right-of-way.



   (Z)   Height restrictions of small wireless facilities.  No
wireless support structure installed in the public right-of-way after May 31,
2017, shall exceed 50 feet above ground level and a wireless facility
installed in the public right-of-way after May 31, 2017, may not extend more
than ten feet above an existing wireless support structure in place as of May
31, 2017.



(Ord. 715, passed 5-23-02; Am. Ord. 1038, passed 2-8-18)



§ 97.07  COUNTY OR STATE RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   Any public right-of-way user who is required to obtain any county or
state permit for excavation or obstruction in any Dakota County or Minnesota
Department of Transportation right-of-way must provide notification of
permitting to the city within one week of obtaining the permit but no less
than 48 hours before the excavation would begin.



(Ord. 715, passed 5-23-02)



§ 97.08  INSTALLATION OF UNDERGROUND FACILITIES WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   The permittee shall comply with the following requirements when
installing underground facilities:



   (A)   Underground facilities shall, where reasonably possible, be
installed outside the paved or surface area. If unable to install outside the
surfaced area, the installation shall be as close to the edge of the roadway
surface as possible to allow access thereto without unnecessarily disturbing
paved areas of the roadway.



   (B)   Public right-of-way alignment and grade shall be maintained.



   (C)   Fiber facilities shall be buried in a proper conduit and at a
depth of no less than three feet deep and no more than four feet; copper
facilities below concrete or bituminous paved roadway surfaces shall be
buried no less than three feet deep and no more than four feet deep, and all
other copper facilities shall be buried no less than 30 inches deep and no
more than four feet deep.



   (D)   All underground facilities which cross streets or hard
surfaced driveways shall be bored and installed in conduit when requested by
the city. Gas does not need to be installed in conduit.



   (E)    When required, the permittee shall excavate an observation
hole over a city utility to ensure that a city utility is not damaged.



   (F)   If the project work involves an open cut, the permittee shall
install visual tracers 12 inches over buried facilities. If other
construction methods are used, substitute location methods may be used upon
approval by the city.



   (G)   During plowing or trenching of facilities, a warning tape
shall be placed at a depth of 12 inches above copper cables with over 200
pairs and fiber facilities and a locating wire or conductive shield shall be
installed above buried telecommunication facilities, except for di-electric
cables.



   (H)   Restoration of areas disturbed by facilities will include
returning the right-of-way to the same condition that existed before
excavation as per MN Rules 7819.1100. Subject to this standard, plates 1 to
13, shown in parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950, indicate maximum limits of
restoration methods and area requirements the local government unit can
impose when a right-of-way user excavates in the public right-of-way. The
local government unit and right-of-way user may agree to a lesser
requirement. The right-of-way user is responsible for all of its work done in
the public right-of-way, whether by employees, agents, or independent
contractors. All levels of restoration include compaction of the materials
placed in the excavation of the subgrade and aggregate base, plus pavement
replacement, in kind. If required by the local government unit, all work must
be performed according to the local government unit's specifications and
drawings.



   (I)   All facilities shall be located so as to not interfere with
existing and potential future traffic signals and signs.



   (J)   Unless approved by the city, all above ground appurtenances
shall be located no closer than ten feet to city hydrants, waterline valves,
manholes, lift stations, catch basins; not in front of or within visual sight
lines of any city sign, monument or amenity for facilities or parks; and no
closer than two feet from sidewalks and trails.



   (K)   Underground facilities shall not be installed between a
hydrant and an auxiliary valve.



   (L)   Where utility easements exist beyond the roadway surface area
of the public right-of-way and space is available therein, underground
facilities shall not be installed within five feet of hydrants, waterline
valves, lift stations, manholes or catch basins. In those areas in which no
utility easement exists, placement of an underground facility shall be
between the edge of pavement and no closer than three feet to an existing
city utility appurtenance, unless approved by the city.



   (M)   The location and installation of telecommunications facilities
shall comply with the National Electric Safety Code, as incorporated by
reference in Minnesota Statutes.



(Ord. 715, passed 5-23-02)



§ 97.09  SUPPLEMENT PERMIT OR PERMIT EXTENSION.



   (A)   Limitation on area. No permittee shall obstruct or excavate an
area greater than that specified in the permit without first obtaining a new
permit or permit extension therefor by the city.



   (B)   Limitation on dates. No permittee shall begin its work before
the permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after
the completion date.



(Ord. 715, passed 5-23-02)



§ 97.10  REVOCATION OF PERMITS.



   (A)   Grounds for revocation. The city may revoke a permit issued
hereunder on the following grounds:



      (1)   A material provision or condition of the permit or City
Code was substantially breached.



      (2)   A material misrepresentation was made in the application
for a permit.



      (3)   The permittee failed to maintain the required bonds or
other security and insurance.



      (4)   The permittee failed to complete the project work within
the time specified in the permit unless the failure to complete work is due
to reasons beyond the permittee's control.



      (5)   The permittee failed in a timely manner to correct work
that does not conform to applicable standards, conditions, federal, state or
local laws.



      (6)   There was an evasion or attempt to evade any material
provision of the public right-of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt
to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the city.



   (B)    Notice of revocation.  If the Director determines that
grounds for revocation exists, the Director shall provide written notice to
the permittee. If the permittee's violation is related to non-complying
project work, the Director shall notify the permittee of the actions
necessary to remedy such violation within a reasonable period of time or be
subject to potential revocation of the permit. The Director may impose
additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate or remedy the
violation.



   (C)   Right to hearing by City Council.  In the event that the
permittee fails to remedy the violation for which the Director gave the
permittee notice, a revocation of permit hearing shall be held before the
City Council at the immediately next City Council meeting. The purpose for
the hearing shall be to determine whether any of the grounds for revocation
as set forth herein exist against the permittee. No suspension or revocation
shall take effect, until the permittee has been afforded a hearing as
provided in this subparagraph. Such hearing shall be set by the City Council
upon written notice to the permittee served by U.S. Mail not less than 15
days prior to the hearing date, specifically stating the date, time and
purpose thereof.



   (D)   Revocation costs.  If a permit is revoked, the permittee
shall reimburse the city for its reasonable costs (including restoration
costs) incurred in connection with the revocation.



(Ord. 715, passed 5-23-02)



§ 97.11  PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   All permit fees shall be submitted to the city with the
application. Permit fees shall be set to recover the city management costs
and, where applicable, restoration costs. The permit fees shall be
established as set forth in Chapter 35 and by City Council resolution. No
permit fee shall be refundable. No permit fees shall be required for any
obstruction or excavation permit issued to the city, although the city shall
be allocated its full portion of the city management costs in calculating the
permit fees. Except where an extension permit has been granted, the permittee
shall, as a delay penalty, be required to obtain a new permit and pay the
associated fee for failure to complete the project work under the initial
permit within the required time period. Applicants may jointly apply for
permits to excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time.
There shall be a single permit and permit fee for joint excavation and
obstruction permit applications. Applicants must agree among themselves as to
the portion each will pay and indicate the same on the application.



   (B)   (1)   A fee for a conditional use permit as may be required
herein for small wireless facilities shall be in addition to any obstruction
or excavation permit fee and is governed by Chapter 155 of this code.



      (2)   Total application fees for a small wireless facility
permit must comply with this chapter with respect to costs related to the
permit. For each small wireless facility attached to a wireless support
structure owned by the city, the small wireless provider shall pay the
following fees:



         (a)   $150.00 per year for rent to occupy space on a
wireless support structure;



         (b)   $25.00 per year for maintenance associated with
the space occupied on a wireless support structure; and



         (c)   A monthly fee for electricity used to operate a
small wireless facility, if not purchased directly from the applicable
electrical utility provider, at the rate of:



            1.   $73.00 per radio node less than or equal to
100 maximum watts;



            2.   $182.00 per radio node over 100 maximum
watts; or



            3.   The actual costs of electricity, if the
actual costs exceed the amount in 1. or 2. above.



   (C)   (1)   Permit fee for small wireless facilities. As required
by state law, a person is not required to pay a small wireless facility
permit fee, obtain a small wireless facility permit, or enter into a small
wireless facility collocation agreement to solely conduct any of the
following activities:



         (a)   Routine maintenance of a small wireless facility;



         (b)   Replacement of a small wireless facility with a
new facility that is substantially similar or smaller in size, weight,
height, and wind or structural loading than the small wireless facility being
replaced; or



         (c)   Installation, placement, maintenance, operation,
or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables
strung between existing utility poles in compliance with national safety
codes.



      (2)   Prior to the performance of any of the above excepted
activities, the small wireless facility provider shall provide the city
advance notification of these activities if the work will obstruct a public
right-of-way. 



(Ord. 715, passed 5-23-02; Am. Ord. 1038, passed 2-8-18)



§ 97.12  PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY RESTORATION.



   (A)   Timing.  All project work under a permit shall be completed
within the dates specified in the permit, unless the project work could not
be completed due to circumstances beyond permittee's control, including
seasonal weather prohibitions or inclement weather.



   (B)   Restoration costs.  The permittee shall restore the public
right-of-way and assume all costs therefor unless otherwise agreed upon. The
right-of-way user shall remain responsible for replacing and compacting the
sub-grade and aggregate base material in the excavation. The city, at its
option, may choose to perform it's own restoration including any paving. If
the city performs the restoration pursuant to this paragraph, the permittee
shall pay to the city all costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If
following such restoration, the roadway surface, boulevard, sidewalk, curb,
or related infrastructure settles due to permittee's improper backfilling;
the permittee shall, at its option, either correct the defector pay to the
city all costs associated with correcting the defective work within 30 days
of billing. If the permittee restores the public right-of-way, the city may
require, and the permittee shall provide at the time of application for the
permit, a city- specified type of security, in accordance with PUC rules, to
cover the cost of repair and restoration. If within 24 months after
completion of restoration of the right-of-way, the Director determines the
right-of-way has been properly restored, the posted security will be released.



   (C)   Standards.  All restoration shall be in accordance with the
standards and materials specified by the city. The city shall establish
written procedures and standards for public right-of-way restoration, which
shall comply with PUC standards. Subject to PUC rules, the city shall have
the authority to prescribe additional restoration procedures and standards on
a case by case basis based on the following considerations:



      (1)   The number, size, depth, and duration of the excavation,
disruption or damage to the public right-of-way;



      (2)   The traffic volume carried by the public right-of-way;



      (3)   The character of the neighborhood surrounding the public
right-of-way;



      (4)   The pre-project condition of the public right-of-way;



      (5)   The remaining life-expectancy of the public right-of-way
due to the project;



      (6)   The costs of the restoration method in relation to the
prevention of an accelerated depreciation of the public right-of-way that
could result due to the project work in the public right-of-way; and



      (7)   The likelihood that the particular restoration method
would be effective in slowing the depreciation of the public right-of-way
that would otherwise occur.



   (D)   Duty to correct defects.  The permittee shall guarantee the
restoration of the public right-of-way for 24 months following its completion
(12 months for turf establishment). During the 24-month period, the permittee
shall, upon written notification from the city, correct all non-complying
restoration work, using the method required by the city. The correction work
shall be completed within ten calendar days of the receipt of the notice from
the city, not including days during which work cannot be done due to
circumstances constituting force majeure or of unseasonable or inclement
weather.



   (E)   As-built drawings. The permittee shall, if not already
provided through another filing made within one year of completion of the
project, annually submit to the city "as-built" drawings in a format usable
by the city, as per state statutes, incorporating project work and
restoration.



(Ord. 715, passed 5-23-02)



§ 97.13  INSPECTION.



   (A)   Site inspection.  The permittee shall make the project work
site available to the Director, and all others authorized by law, for
inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion
of the project work.



   (B)   Inspection findings and requirements.



      (1)   The Director may order the immediate cessation of any
project work which poses a serious immediate threat to the life, health,
safety, or welfare of the public.



      (2)   The Director may order the permittee to correct any
project work to comply with the terms of the permit or other applicable
standards, conditions, or laws. The order shall state the violation, the
terms of correcting the violation, and that failure to correct the violation
within the stated time limits shall be cause for revocation of the permit. If
the violation is not corrected within the stated time limits, the Director
may initiate revocation of the permit.



   (C)   Notice of completion.  The permittee shall sign a certificate
of project completion stating the completion date, identification of the
installer and designer of record, and certifying that the project work was
completed in accordance with the requirements herein.



(Ord. 715, passed 5-23-02)



§ 97.14  PERMISSIBLE WORK WITHOUT A PERMIT.



   Emergency exception.  All persons with facilities in the public
right-of-way shall include the city in its list of those to be notified
immediately of any event regarding its facilities that may be considered as
an emergency. The owner of the facilities may proceed to take whatever
actions are necessary to respond to the emergency, but shall apply for the
necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill all
requirements as set forth in this chapter within two business days after the
occurrence of the emergency. These permitting requirements shall not apply if
the repair is made within the hole of the permitted excavator. If the city
becomes aware of an emergency regarding facilities, the city will attempt to
contact the local representative of each facility affected, or potentially
affected, by the emergency. The city may take whatever action it deems
necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be assumed and
paid by the owner of the facility which occasioned the emergency.



(Ord. 715, passed 5-23-02)



§ 97.15  MAPPING DATA.



   (A)   Information required. All permittees shall provide mapping
information in accordance with Minnesota Rules and as follows:



      (1)   The location of underground and above-ground
appurtenances of the public right-of-way user's mains, cables, conduits,
switches, and related equipment and facilities, identified by:



         (a)   Offsets from property lines, distances from the
centerline of the public right-of-way and curb lines and/or other reference
points as requested by the city; or



         (b)   Coordinates derived from the coordinate system
being used by the city.



      (2)   The type, quantity, and size of the equipment;



      (3)   A dimensional description of above-ground appurtenances;



      (4)   A legend explaining symbols, characters, abbreviations,
scale, and other data shown on the map; and



      (5)   The location of any facilities that were abandoned in
conformance with Minnesota Statutes.



   (B)   Submittal requirements.



      (1)   Within six months after the effective date of this
chapter, all public right-of-way users which own or control facilities within
public rights-of-way within the city on the effective date of this chapter
shall submit detailed mapping data in accordance with this section for all
facilities and equipment located within the public right-of-way. Following
initial mapping, all right-of-way users shall submit details mapping data by
April 1st of every year for all new facilities located within public
rights-of-way in the city during the preceding calendar year.



      (2)   At the request of any public right-of-way user,
information required by the city which qualifies as "trade secret" data under
the Minnesota Data Practices Act, shall be protected accordingly.



   (C)   Fees.  If mapping data is provided to the city which is
GIS-compatible and in a format used by the city, the mapping portion of the
excavation fee is waived.



(Ord. 715, passed 5-23-02)



§ 97.16  GENERAL PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY; REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Undergrounding facilities. Any new non-replacement facilities
or equipment shall be located underground or contained within buildings or on
other structures unless prohibited/restricted in accordance with all
applicable federal, state, or local laws.



   (B)   Corridors.  The city may assign specific corridors within the
public right-of-way, or portion thereof, as may be necessary for each type of
facility. All permits issued by the city involving the installation or
replacement of facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the
facility at issue.



   (C)   Limitation of space. To protect the health, safety, and
welfare of the city or when necessary to protect the public right-of-way and
its current use, the city may prohibit public right-of-way users from a
particular right-of-way after consideration of the public interest, the
public's needs for the particular utility service, the condition of the
public right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities,
the protection of existing facilities in the public right-of-way, and future
city plans for public improvements and development projects which have been
determined to be in the public interest.



   (D)   Relocation of facilities.  A public right-of-way user shall
promptly, and at its own expense, with due regard to seasonal working
conditions, permanently remove and relocate any facility in the public
right-of-way when it is necessary to prevent interference and not merely for
the convenience of the city, in connection with:



      (1)   A present or future city use of the public right-of-way
for a public project;



      (2)   The public health or safety; or



      (3)   The safety and convenience of travel over the public
right-of-way.



   The public right-of-way user shall restore any public rights-of-way in
accordance with this chapter. A right-of-way user is not required to remove
or relocate its facilities from a right-of-way that has been vacated and in
favor of a non-governmental entity unless and until the reasonable costs to
do so are first paid to the right-of-way user.



   (E)   Damage to other facilities.  Public right-of-way users shall
be subject to all restoration requirements provided in this chapter. Every
public right-of-way user shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any
facility it damages. This provision is intended to include costs for damages
to boulevard amenities placed by adjacent property owners (e.g. sprinkler
systems, etc.). Each facility owner shall be responsible for the cost of
repairing any damage to the facilities of another occasioned by an emergency
related to that owner's facilities.



(Ord. 715, passed 5-23-02)



§ 97.17  PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.



   (A)   Reservation of right.  If the city vacates a public
right-of-way which contains the equipment or facilities of a public
right-of-way user and the vacation does not require the relocation of the
equipment or facilities, the city shall reserve, to and for itself and the
public right-of-way user, the right to install, maintain, and operate any
equipment and facilities in the vacated public right-of-way and to enter upon
such public right-of-way at any time for the purpose of reconstruction,
inspecting, maintaining or repairing the same.



   (B)   Relocation of facilities.  If the vacation requires the
relocation of the public right-of-way user's equipment or facility, and the
vacation proceedings are initiated by the public right-of-way user or the
city for a public project, the public right-of-way user shall pay the
relocation costs. If the vacation proceedings are initiated by a person or
persons other than the public right-of-way user, the initiating person or
persons shall pay the relocation costs.



(Ord. 715, passed 5-23-02)



§ 97.18  INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.



   (A)   Limitation of liability. Upon the issuance of a public
right-of-way permit, the city does not assume any liability for:



      (1)   Injuries to persons, damage to property, or loss of
service claims by parties other than the registrant or the city; or



      (2)   Claims or penalties of any sort resulting from the
installation, presence, maintenance or operation of equipment or facilities
by registrants or permittees or activities of registrants or permittees.



   (B)   Indemnification. A registrant or permittee shall indemnify,
keep and hold the city, its officials, employees, and agents free and
harmless from any and all costs, liabilities, and claims for damages of any
kind arising out of the construction, presence, installation, maintenance,
repair, or operation of its equipment and facilities, or out of any activity
undertaken in or near a public right-of-way, whether or not any act or
omission complaint of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by a public
right-of-way permit. The foregoing does not indemnify the city for its own
negligence except for claims arising out of or alleging the city's negligence
in issuing the permit or in failing to properly or adequately inspect or
enforce compliance with a term, condition or purpose of a permit. This
section is not, as to third parties, a waiver of any defense or immunity
otherwise available to the registrant, permittee or the city, and the
registrant or permittee, in defending any action on behalf of the city, shall
be entitled to assert in any action every defense or immunity that the city
could assert on its own behalf.



   (C)   Consent.  If the registrant or permittee is required to
indemnify and defend, it shall thereafter have control of the litigation, but
the registrant or permittee may not settle the litigation without the consent
of the city. Such consent will not be unreasonably withheld.



(Ord. 715, passed 5-23-02)



§ 97.19  ABANDONED FACILITIES.



   (A)   Notification.  A public right-of-way user shall notify the
city when facilities are abandoned. The public right-of-way user shall submit
to the Director a plan for the removal of the abandoned equipment or
facility. The Director may require the public right-of-way user to post a
bond in an amount sufficient to reimburse the city for reasonably anticipated
costs to be incurred in removing the equipment and facilities if the public
right-of-way user fails to do so.



   (B)   Removal of abandoned facilities.  A right-of-way user shall
notify the city when facilities are to be abandoned. A right-of-way user that
has abandoned facilities in the right-of-way shall remove them from that
right-of-way if required in conjunction with other right-of-way repair,
excavation or construction, unless the city waives this requirement.



(Ord. 715, passed 5-23-02)



§ 97.20  APPEAL.



   A public right-of-way user that:



   (A)   has been denied registration;



   (B)    has been denied a permit;



   (C)   has had permit revoked; or



   (D)   believes that the fees imposed are invalid; may have the
denial, revocation, or fee imposition reviewed by the City Council upon
written request. The City Council shall act on a written request at its next
regularly scheduled meeting. The decision by the City Council shall be in
writing and supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness of
the decision.



(Ord. 715, passed 5-23-02)



§ 97.21  INSURANCE.



   (A)   All certificate(s) of insurance or self-insurance required
under this chapter shall provide the following:



      (1)   That an insurance policy has been issued to the
applicant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of
Minnesota, or a form of self insurance acceptable to the Director;



       (2)   Verify that the applicant is insured against claims for
personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property damage
arising out of the:



         (a)    Use and occupancy of the public right-of-way by
the permittee, its officers, agents, employees and permittees, and



         (b)   Placement and use of facilities and equipment in
the public right-of-way by the permittee, its officers, agents, employees and
permittees, including, but not limited to, protection against liability
arising from completed operations, damage of underground facilities and
collapse of property;



      (3)   Name the city as an additional insured as to whom the
coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense
will be provided as to all such coverages;



      (4)   Require that the Director be notified 30 days in advance
of cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage term; and



      (5)   Indicate comprehensive liability coverage, automobile
liability coverage, workers compensation and umbrella coverage established by
the Director in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the public and to
carry out the purposes and policies of this chapter:



   (B)   Public liability insurance, including premises, products and
complete operations;



      (1)   General liability:



         (a)    Bodily injury liability:  $1,000,000 each
person, $3,000,000 each occurrence



         (b)   Property damage liability:  $3,000,000 each
occurrence



         (c)   In lieu of (1) and (2) bodily injury and property
damage, combined:  $3,000,000 single limit.



   (C)   Automobile liability insurance, including owned, non-owned and
hired vehicles;



      (1)   Comprehensive



         (a)   Bodily injury liability:  $1,000,000 each person,
$3,000,000 each occurrence



         (b)    Property damage liability:  $3,000,000 each
occurrence



         (c)   In lieu of (1) and (2) bodily injury and property
damage, combined - $3,000,000 single limit



   (D)   The city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies;
if the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate required to be
filed under M.S. § 300.06 as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of
State; a copy of the person's order granting a certificate of authority from
the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other applicable state or
federal agency, where the person is lawfully required to have such
certificate from said commission or other state or federal agency. A
franchise agreement may exempt a permittee from this paragraph.



(Ord. 715, passed 5-23-02)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



Chapter



   110.   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT



   111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



   112.   AMUSEMENTS



   113.   LODGING; OPERATION TAXES



   114.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



   115.   TOBACCO REGULATIONS



   116.   FUEL DISPENSING FACILITIES



   117.   PAWNBROKERS AND PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS



   118.   VENDING CARTS



   119.   FRANCHISE REGULATIONS



   120.   SALE OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS



   121.   RESERVED



   122.   RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY



   123.   MASSAGE THERAPY BUSINESS AND MASSAGE THERAPIST LICENSES



CHAPTER 110:  ADULT ENTERTAINMENT



Section



General Provisions



   110.01   Findings and purpose



   110.02   Definitions



License Requirements



   110.15   License required



   110.16   Location



   110.17   Application procedure



   110.18   Execution, verification and consideration



   110.19   Fees and payments



   110.20   Conditions of ineligibility



   110.21   Renewal process



   110.22   Effectiveness and maintenance



   110.23   Transfer prohibited



   110.24   Changes in ownership and officers; license validity



   110.25   Changes in character of business



   110.26   Hours of operation



   110.27   Entrance of minors prohibited



   110.28   Sanitation and health requirements



   110.29   Right of inspection



   110.30   Conditions of license



License Suspension and Revocation



   110.40   Suspension and revocation of license



   110.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 110.01  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   Minnesota State Attorney General’s Office and the Cities of
St. Paul, Minnesota; Indianapolis, Indiana; Phoenix, Arizona; Seattle,
Washington; Houston, Texas; and Los Angeles, California, have conducted
studies of the impact of adult establishments on their respective
communities.  Based on these studies and the study done by the Apple Valley
Urban Affairs Committee, the Apple Valley City Council finds:



      (1)   Residential neighborhoods located within close proximity
to adult theaters, bookstores and other adult establishments experience
increased crime rates (sex-related crimes in particular), lowered property
values, increased transiency, neighborhood blight and potential health risks;



      (2)   Adult establishments can have an adverse impact on
adjacent commercial uses;



      (3)   The adverse impacts which adult establishments have on
surrounding areas diminish as the distance from the adult establishments
increases;



      (4)   Many members of the public perceive areas within which
adult establishments are located as less safe than other areas which do not
have such uses;



      (5)   Adult establishments can exert a dehumanizing influence
on persons attending nearby places of worship, children attending family day
care homes, group family day care homes and child care centers, students
attending schools and people using parks;



      (6)   The concentration of adult establishments in one area
can have a substantially detrimental effect on the area in which the
businesses are concentrated and on the overall quality of urban life.  A
cycle of decay can result from the concentration of adult establishments. 
The presence of the businesses is perceived by others as an indication that
the area is deteriorating which can cause other businesses and residents to
move out of the vicinity.  Declining real estate values, which can result
from the concentration of the businesses, erode the city’s tax base and
contribute to a feeling that that section of the city is depressed; and



      (7)   Adult establishments can increase the risk of exposure
to communicable diseases. Experiences of other cities indicate that the
businesses can facilitate the spread of communicable diseases by virtue of
the design and use of the premises, thereby endangering not only the patrons
of the establishments but also the general public.



   (B)   In order to minimize the detrimental effect adult
establishments have on adjacent land uses, and to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare of the city, the City Council adopts the following
licensing regulations, recognizing that it has a great interest in the
present and future character of the city’s residential and commercial
neighborhoods.  Adoption of these regulations is not intended to
unreasonably restrict the opportunity of adult establishments to locate in
the city.



(‘81 Code, § 4-30)  (Ord. 619, passed 9-26-96)



§ 110.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT ACCESSORY USE.  Less than a fourth of the floor area, up to a
maximum of 500 square feet, of an otherwise permitted business, not including
storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements or any portion of the business
not open to the public and open to employees/agents only, is devoted to
materials or persons depicting, exposing, describing, discussing or relating
to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (1)   ADULT ACCESSORY USE— LIMITED IMPACT.  A business or
establishment where material distinguished and characterized by an emphasis
on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specific
anatomical areas is available for barter, rental or sale and meeting all of
the following requirements:



         (a)   All materials distinguished and characterized by
an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specific anatomical areas must be provided for use or entertainment off the
businesses premises only;



         (b)   All materials distinguished and characterized by
an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specific anatomical areas shall be restricted from and prohibit access to
minors by physical separation of the items from areas of general public
access.



      (2)   ADULT ACCESSORY USE—HIGH IMPACT.  A business
establishment where materials or persons distinguished and characterized by
an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specific anatomical areas are available and meeting the following
requirements:



         (a)   A business where materials distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specific anatomical areas are sold, bartered,
distributed, leased, furnished, exhibited or otherwise provided for use or
entertainment on the business premises;



         (b)   A business where specified sexually activities are
explicitly verbally described or shown;



         (c)   A business providing materials distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for off-site use or
entertainment, which has a separate area for the materials distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specific anatomical areas, but does not meet the size or
other restrictions to qualify as an adult accessory use—limited impact;



         (d)   A business providing materials distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specific anatomical areas for off-site use or
entertainment, where materials distinguished and characterized by an emphasis
on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specific
anatomical areas are dispersed within the business rather than isolated in a
separate area.



      (3)   ADULT ACCESSORY USE ACTIVITIES.  The sale or display of
instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are used or designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities, shall be prohibited at any
public show, movie, caravan, circus, carnival, theatrical or other
performance or exhibition presented to the general public where minors are
admitted.



   ADULT ESTABLISHMENT. 



      (1)   Any business that is conducted exclusively for the
patronage of adults and as to which minors are excluded from patronage either
by operation of law or by the owners of the business; and



      (2)   Any business that:



         (a)   Derives 25% or more of its gross receipts during
any calendar month from; or



         (b)   Devotes 25% or more of its floor area (not
including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any portion of
the business not open to the public) to items, merchandise, devices or other
materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material
depicting, exposing, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; or



         (c)   Any business that engages in any adult use as
defined in this section.



   ADULT USE.  An adult use is any of the activities and businesses
defined below:



      (1)   ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO.  An establishment or
business which provides the service of applying paint or other substance,
whether transparent or non-transparent, to or on the body of a patron when
the body is wholly or partially nude in terms of specified anatomical areas
as defined herein.



      (2)   ADULT BOOK STORE.  An estab-lishment used for the
barter, rental or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures,
slides, records, audio tapes, videotapes, motion picture films, CDs (compact
discs), DVDs (digital video discs)  or any other form of recording, if:



         (a)   The business is not open to the public generally
but only to one or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason
of age, and



         (b)   Twenty-five percent or more of the business' gross
receipts during any calendar month are derived from items, merchandise, or
other materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material
depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; or



         (c)   Twenty-five percent or more of its floor area (not
including storerooms, stock rooms, bathrooms, basements, or any portion of
the business not open to the public) is devoted to items, merchandise, or
other materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on materials
depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.



      (3)   ADULT CABARET.  A building or portion of a building
used for providing dancing or other live entertainment, if the building or
portion of a building excludes minors by virtue of age or if the dancing or
other live entertainment is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on
the presentation, display, depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (4)   ADULT COMPANIONSHIP ESTABLISHMENT.  A companionship
establishment which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the
service for a fee of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or
discussion between an employee of the establishment or an independent
contractor connected with the establishment and a customer, if the service is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein.



      (5)   ADULT CONVERSATION/RAP PARLOR.  A conversation/rap
parlor which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the services
of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion, if the
services are distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (6)   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY.  A building or space
wherein an admission is charged for entrance or food or nonalcoholic
beverages are sold or intended for consumption and wherein may be observed
live presentation or entertainment distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein.



      (7)   ADULT HEALTH/SPORT CLUB.  A health/sport club which
excludes minors by reason of age, if the club is distinguished and
characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activity or specified
anatomical areas.



      (8)   ADULT HOTEL or MOTEL.  A hotel or motel from which
minors are specifically excluded from patronage and where material is
presented which is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



      (9)   ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR.  A massage parlor or health club
which restricts minors by reason of age, and which provides the services of
massage, if the service is distinguished and characterized by an emphasis on
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (10)   ADULT MINI MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A building or
space with a capacity for fewer than 50 persons used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters, depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas as herein defined, for observation by patrons therein. The phrase
“used for” in this definition shall mean a regular and substantial course
of conduct and not a one-time presentation of the material.



      (11)   ADULT MODELING STUDIO.  An establishment whose major
business is the provision to customers, of figure models who are so provided
with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to
customers and who engage in specified sexual activities as defined herein or
display specified anatomical areas as defined herein while being observed,
painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise
depicted by the customers.



      (12)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE.  Any place to which the
public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled or operated still or
motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are
maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one
time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished and characterized
by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.



      (13)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A building or space
with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas as herein defined, for observation by patrons therein. The phrase
“used for” in this definition shall mean a regular and substantial course
of conduct and not a one-time presentation of the material.



      (14)   ADULT NOVELTY BUSINESS.  Any business that meets any
of the following criteria:



         (a)   It offers for sale items from any two of the
following categories: sexually oriented media; items or merchandise depicting
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or devices which
wither stimulate human genitals or are designed for sexual stimulation;
lingerie; leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their
use for sadomasochistic practices; and the combination of such items
constitutes 25% or more than the stock-in trade of the business or occupies
25% or more of the gross public floor area of the business or the sale of
such items constitutes 25% or more of its gross receipts during any calendar
month; or



         (b)   Five percent or more of the stock-in-trade of the
business consists of items or merchandise depicting specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; or devices which either stimulate
human genitals or are designed for sexual stimulation; or



         (c)   Five percent or more of the gross public floor
area of the business is devoted to the display of items or merchandise
depicting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or
devices which either stimulate human genitals or are designed for sexual
stimulation; or



         (d)   It advertises or hold itself out in any forum as
"XXX", "adult", "sex", or otherwise as an adult establishment.



      (15)   ADULT SAUNA.  A sauna which provides a steam bath or
heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation or reducing,
utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the
service provided by the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as
defined herein.



   BOOTHS, STALLS,PARTITIONED PORTIONS OF ROOMS or INDIVIDUAL ROOMS.



      (1)   Enclosures specifically offered to persons for a fee or
as an incident to performing high- risk sexual conduct; or



      (2)   Enclosures which are part of a business operated on the
premises which offers movies or other entertainment to be viewed within the
enclosure, including enclosures wherein movies or other entertainment is
dispensed for a fee.



      (3)   The phrase BOOTHS, STALLS,PARTITIONED PORTIONS OF ROOMS
or INDIVIDUAL ROOMS does not mean enclosures which are private offices used
by the owners, managers or persons employed by the premises for attending to
the tasks of their employment, and which are not held out to the public or
members of the establishment for hire or for a fee or for the purpose of
viewing movies or other entertainment for a fee, and are not open to any
persons other than employees.



   DOORS, CURTAINS or PORTAL PARTITIONS.  Full, complete, nontransparent
closure devices through which one cannot see or view activity taking place
within the enclosure.



   HEALTH INSPECTORS.  Inspectors employed by the County of Dakota or
their agents.



   MINOR.  Any natural person under the age of 18 years.



   NUDITY.  The showing of the human male or female genitals or pubic
area with less than fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast
with less than a fully opaque covering below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; or the depiction or showing of the covered male genitals
in a discernibly turgid state.



   OPEN TO AN ADJACENT PUBLIC ROOM SO THAT THE AREA INSIDE IS VISIBLE TO
PERSONS IN THE ADJACENT PUBLIC ROOM.  Either the absence of any entire
“door, curtain or portal partition” or a door or other device which is
made of clear, transparent material such as a glass, plexi-glass or other
similar material meeting building code and safety standards, which permits
the activity inside the enclosure to be entirely viewed or seen by persons
outside the enclosure.



   PERSON.  One or more natural persons; a partnerships, including a
limited partnership; a corporation, including a foreign, domestic, or
nonprofit corporation; a trust; a political subdivision of the state; or any
other business organization.



   SCHOOL.  Any public or private elementary or secondary school,
alternative learning center or any place of educational, cultural, artistic,
spiritual, physical or vocational learning or instruction which is provided
primarily to minors.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.



      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered:



         (a)   Human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair;



         (b)   Buttock;



         (c)   Female breast or breasts below a point immediately
above the top of the areola; or



         (d)   Any combination of the foregoing.



      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even
if completely and opaquely covered.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  Includes, but is not limited to the
following:



      (1)   Human genitals in a discernible state of sexual
stimulation or arousal;



      (2)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region or pubic hair, buttock or female breast or breasts;



      (3)   Actual or simulated intercourse, oral copulation, anal
intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of
unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual
relationship or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual
relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct:
anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio,
necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty;



      (4)   Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral
copulation, coitus or masturbation;



      (5)   Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom
are nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and who
are engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering,
binding or other physical restraint of any person;



      (6)   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other
sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or



      (7)   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or
anal irrigation.



   SUBSTANTIAL or SIGNIFICANT.  For purposes of this section, the phrase
SUBSTANTIAL or SIGNIFICANT means that at least a fourth of the portion of the
floor area or at least 500 square feet of the business, not including
storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements or any portion of the business
not open to the public and open to employees/agents only, is devoted to
items, merchandise or other material that is distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.



(‘81 Code, § 4-31)  (Ord. 619, passed 9-26-96; Am. Ord. 652, passed
10-22-98; Am. Ord. 722, passed 1-23-03)



LICENSE REQUIREMENTS



§ 110.15  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall own or operate an adult establishment or adult
accessory use—high impact within the city unless the person is currently
licensed under this chapter.



(‘81 Code, § 4-32)  (Ord. 619, passed 9-26-96)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.16  LOCATION.



   Licenses for adult establishments and adult accessory use - high impact
may be granted only for sites permitted pursuant to § 155.359.



(‘81 Code, § 4-33)  (Ord. 619, passed 9-26-96)



§ 110.17  APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   The application for a license under this chapter shall be made on a
form supplied by the City Clerk and shall request the following information:



   (A)   For all applicants:



      (1)   Whether the applicant and owner is a natural person,
corporation, partnership or other form of organization;



      (2)   Name, address, phone number and birth date of the
applicant or owner and the operator or manager of the operation who shall be
responsible for all code compliance, if different from applicant or owner;



      (3)   The legal description and address of the premises where
the adult establishment is to be located;



      (4)   A floor plan of the premises which details all internal
operations and activities including a statement of the total floor space
occupied by the business.  The floor plan need not be professionally
prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus
six inches;



      (5)   A site plan of the premises for which the license is
sought, showing dimensions, locations of buildings, site and building
lighting, street access and parking facilities.  Illumination of the
exterior premises must be adequate to observe the location and activities of
all persons on the exterior of the premises;



      (6)   A building elevation drawing which shows exterior
construction, proposed building signs, materials and colors of the proposed
adult establishment.  Signs for the adult establishments shall comply with
the city’s sign ordinance; in addition, signs for adult establishments
shall not contain representational depiction of an adult nature or graphic
descriptions of the adult theme of the operation;



      (7)   The name of the business.  If the business is to be
conducted under a designation, name or style other than the name of the
applicant, a certified copy of the certificate required by M.S. § 333.01
shall be submitted;



      (8)   The activities and types of business to be conducted;



      (9)   The intended hours of operation;



      (10)   The names, residences and business addresses of three
persons, residents of the state, of good moral character, not related to the
applicant or financially interested in the premises or business, who may be
referred to regarding the applicant’s character or, in the case where
information is required of an operating officer, the operating officer’s
character;



      (11)   Whether all taxes due and owing on the premises to be
licensed have been paid; and



      (12)   Abstractor’s certificate of property ownership of the
subject parcel and all parcels within 1,000 feet of the subject parcel.



   (B)   If the applicant is a natural person:



      (1)   The name, place and date of birth, street and city
address and phone number of the applicant and operator/manager;



      (2)   Whether the applicant and operator/manager have ever
used or have been known by a name other than his or her name, and if so, the
name or names used and information concerning dates and places where used;



      (3)   The street and city addresses at which the applicant and
operator/manager have lived during the preceding two years;



      (4)   The type, name and location of every business or
occupation in which the applicant’s spouse and operator/manger have been
engaged during the preceding two years and the name(s) and address(es) of
their employer(s) and partner(s), if any, for the preceding two years; and



      (5)   Whether the applicant, applicant’s spouse and
operator/manager have ever been convicted of a felony, crime or violation of
any ordinance other than traffic.  If so, they shall furnish information as
to the time, place and offense for which they were convicted.



   (C)   If the applicant is a partnership:



      (1)   The name(s) and address(es) of all general partners and
the operator/manager and all of the information concerning each general
partner and the operator/manager that is required of applicants in (B) of
this section;



      (2)   The name(s) of the managing partner(s) and the interest
of each partner in the business; and



      (3)   A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be
submitted with the application.  If the partnership is required to file a
certificate as to a trade name pursuant to M.S. § 333.01, a certified copy
of the certificate shall be attached to the application.



   (D)   If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:



      (1)   The name of the corporation or business firm, and if
incorporated, the state of incorporation;



      (2)   A true copy of the certificate of incorporation,
articles of incorporation or association agreement and by-laws shall be
attached to the application.  If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a
certificate of authority as required by M.S. § 303.06, shall be attached;



      (3)   The name of the manager(s), proprietor(s) or other
agent(s) in charge of the business and all of the information concerning each
manager, proprietor or agent that is required of applicants in division (B)
above; and



      (4)   A statement detailing any felony convictions by the
owners of more than 5% of the issued and outstanding stock of the
corporation, and whether or not those owners have ever applied for or held a
license to operate a similar type of business in other communities.



(‘81 Code, § 4-34)  (Ord. 619, passed 9-26-96)



§ 110.18  EXECUTION, VERIFICATION AND CONSIDERATION.



   (A)   If the application is that of a natural person, the
application shall be signed and sworn to by that person; if of a corporation,
by an officer thereof; if of a partnership, by one of the general partners;
if of an unincorporated association, by the manager or managing officer
thereof.



   (B)   Applications for licenses under this chapter shall be
submitted to the City Clerk.  Within 30 calendar days of receipt of a
completed application and payment of all licensing application fees, the City
Clerk and Police Chief or their designees shall verify any and all of the
information requested of the applicant in the application including the
ordering of criminal background checks, and conduct any necessary
investigation to assure compliance with this chapter.  The period for
investigation may be extended 15 days by the City Council if an out-of-state
investigation is required.



(‘81 Code, § 4-35)



   (C)   (1)   No later than 30 calendar days after the completion
of the license application verification and investigation by the City Clerk,
as prescribed in divisions (A) and (B) above, the City Clerk shall accept or
deny the license application in accordance with this chapter.  If the
application is denied, the City Clerk shall notify the applicant of the
determination in writing.  The notice shall be mailed by certified and
regular mail to the applicant at the address provided on the application form
and it shall inform the applicant of the applicant’s right, within 20
calendar days of receipt of the notice by the applicant, to request an appeal
of the City Clerk’s determination to the City Council or to immediately
challenge the determination in a court of law. 



      (2)   If an appeal to the City Council is timely received by
the City Clerk, the hearing before the City Council shall take place within
20 calendar days of the receipt of the appeal by the City Clerk.  If an
application is granted for a location where a building is under construction
or not ready for occupancy, the license shall not be delivered to the
licensee until a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the licensed
premises.  During the application consideration process prescribed herein,
an applicant operating a business not previously subject to the license
provisions of this chapter may remain operating pending the outcome of the
application consideration.



(‘81 Code, § 4-36)



(Ord. 619, passed 9-26-96)



§ 110.19  FEES AND PAYMENTS.



   (A)   Application fee.



      (1)   The annual license application fee shall be as set out
in the appendix to Chapter 35.



      (2)   The license application fee shall be paid in full before
the application for a license is accepted.  All fees shall be paid to the
City Clerk for deposit into the general fund of the city.  Upon rejection of
any application for a license or upon withdrawal of application before
approval by the City Clerk the license fee shall be refunded to the applicant.



      (3)   When the license is for premises where the building is
not ready for occupancy, the time fixed for computation of the license fee
for the initial license period shall be 90 days after approval of the license
by the issuing authority or upon the date an occupancy permit is issued for
the building.



   (B)   Investigation fee.



      (1)   At the time of each original application for a license,
applicant shall pay in full an application fee.  The application fee shall
be as specified in the appendix to Chapter 35.  If any investigation outside
the state is required, the applicant shall be charged the cost, not to exceed
$10,000, which shall be paid prior to issuance of a license, after deducting
the initial application fee, whether or not the license is granted.



      (2)   At any time an additional investigation is required
because of a change in the ownership of any license or control of a corporate
license within the meaning of § 110.24, the licensee shall pay an additional
investigation fee.  The investigation fee shall be as specified in the
appendix to Chapter 35.  If any investigation outside the state is required,
the applicant shall be charged the cost, not to exceed $10,000, which shall
be paid after deducting the initial investigation fee.



      (3)   At any time an additional investigation is required
because an amendment to the license is required under § 110.25, the licensee
shall pay an additional investigation fee as specified in the appendix to
Chapter 35.



      (4)   Fees for additional investigation required because of a
change in the operating officer or proprietor or other agent in charge of the
licensed premises shall be as specified in the appendix to Chapter 35.



(‘81 Code, § 4-37)  (Ord. 619, passed 9-26-96)



§ 110.20  CONDITIONS OF INELIGIBILITY.



   The City Clerk shall issue a license under this chapter to an applicant
unless one or more of the following conditions exist:



   (A)   The applicant is under the age of 21 at the time the
application is submitted;



   (B)   The applicant failed to supply all of the information
requested on the license application;



   (C)   The applicant or applicant’s spouse is overdue in his or her
payment of city, county or state taxes, fees, fines or penalties;



   (D)   The applicant gave false, fraudulent or untruthful information
on the license application;



   (E)   The applicant, spouse or anyone residing with the applicant
has had an adult establishment license revoked or suspended or has been
denied a license to operate an adult establishment within a one-year period
immediately preceding the date the application was submitted;



   (F)   The applicant or spouse has had a conviction of a felony or a
gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor relating to sex offenses, obscenity offenses
or adult uses in the past five years;



   (G)   The applicant has an operator or manager who is not eligible
for a license pursuant to this chapter;



   (H)   The spouse of the applicant is ineligible for a license
pursuant to this chapter or the applicant is not the real party in interest
or beneficial owner of the business operated, or to be operated, under the
license.  “Interest” shall have the meaning as defined in §
111.29(A)(5);



   (I)   The adult establishment does not meet all of the requirements
prescribed in the city code, the city’s zoning code, building code, fire
code and the city’s health regulations, this chapter and all provisions of
state and federal laws;



   (J)   The premises to be licensed as an adult establishment is
currently licensed by the city as an adult establishment, therapeutic massage
enterprise or an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages;



   (K)   The applicant has not paid the license and investigation fees
required.



(‘81 Code, § 4-38)  (Ord. 619, passed 9-26-96)



§ 110.21  RENEWAL PROCESS.



   (A)   All licenses issued under this chapter shall be effective for
only one year commencing with the date of approval by the City Clerk or City
Council. An application for the renewal of an existing license shall be
submitted to the City Clerk at least 60 calendar days prior to the expiration
date of the existing license.



   (B)   Within 30 calendar days of receipt by the City Clerk of a
fully completed renewal application, the City Clerk and Chief of Police or
designee shall verify any and all of the information requested of the
applicant in the renewal application, including the ordering of criminal
background checks, and shall conduct any necessary investigation to assure
compliance with this chapter.  No later than 30 calendar days after the
completion of the renewal application verification and investigation by the
City Clerk or designee, as prescribed herein, the City Clerk shall issue a
renewal license, unless one or more of the conditions listed in § 110.20
exist.



   (C)   If the City Clerk denies a renewal application, the City Clerk
shall notify the applicant in accordance with this chapter and the notice
shall, in addition, state the grounds for the denial.



   (D)   After the denial of a renewal application by the City Clerk,
the applicant may appeal the City Clerk’s determination to the City Council
in accordance with § 110.18 or by immediately challenging the determination
in a court of law.  If the city denies renewal of a license under this
chapter, the applicant shall not be issued a license under this chapter for
one year from the date of denial.  If, subsequent to the denial, the city
finds that the basis for the denial of the renewal license has been corrected
or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have
elapsed since the date the denial became final.



(‘81 Code, § 4-39)  (Ord. 619, passed 9-26-96)



§ 110.22  EFFECTIVENESS AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Posting of license.  A license issued under this chapter must
be posted in a conspicuous place in the premises for which it is used.



   (B)   Scope of license.  A license issued under this chapter is
only effective for the compact and contiguous space specified in the approved
license application.



   (C) Maintenance of order.  A licensee and licensee’s designated
operator or manager under this chapter shall be responsible for the conduct
of the business being operated and shall not allow any illegal activity to
take place on or near the licensed premises, including but not limited to
prostitution, public indecency, indecent exposure, disorderly conduct or the
sale or use of illegal drugs.  Every act or omission by an employee or
independent contractor of the licensee constituting a violation of this
chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the licensee and licensee’s
operator or manager if the act or omission occurs either with the
authorization, knowledge or approval of the licensee, operator or manager, or
as a result of the licensee’s, operator’s or manager’s negligent
failure to supervise the licensed premises.



(‘81 Code, § 4-40)  (Ord. 619, passed 9-26-96)



§ 110.23  TRANSFER PROHIBITED.



   (A)   A license granted under this chapter is for the person and the
premises named on the approved license application.  No transfer of a
license shall be permitted from place to place or from person to person
without complying with the requirements of an original application.



   (B)   When an adult establishment licensed under this chapter is
sold or transferred, the existing licensee shall immediately notify the City
Clerk of the sale or transfer.  If the new owner or operator is to continue
operating the adult establishment, the new owner or operator must immediately
apply for a license under this chapter including payment of the investigation
fee.



(‘81 Code, § 4-41)  (Ord. 619, passed 9-26-96)



§ 110.24  CHANGES IN OWNERSHIP AND OFFICERS; LICENSE VALIDITY.



   (A)   Licenses issued to corporations shall be valid only so long as
there is no change in the officers or ownership interest of the corporation,
within the meaning of division (E) of this subchapter, unless the change is
approved by the Council, in which event the license shall continue in force
until the end of the then current license year.



   (B)   License issued to associations or partnerships shall be valid
only so long as there is no change in the partnership or association
agreement or in the ownership of the partnership or association unless the
change is approved by the Council, in which event the license shall continue
in force until the end of the then current license year.



   (C)   Corporations, partnerships or associations holding adult
establishment or adult accessory use— high impact licenses shall submit
written notice to the Clerk of any changes described herein on or before 60
days prior to the effective date of any change and pay any fee required by §
110.19(B)(2).  Notwithstanding the definition of “interest” as given in
this chapter, in the case of a corporation, the licensee shall submit written
notice to the Clerk when a person not listed in the application will be
acquiring an interest and shall give all information about the person as is
required of a person pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



   (D)   Corporations holding adult establishment or adult accessory
use—high impact licenses shall submit written notice to the Clerk of any
change in operating officers within ten days of the change.  The written
notice shall designate the interim operating officer and shall contain all
the information about the person as is required of a single applicant in §
110.17(B).  The operating officers shall be subject to the investigation
required by § 110.18(B).  Investigation fees shall be as determined by the
City Council pursuant to § 110.19(B)(4).



   (E) The designation of a new operating officer shall not cause the
corporation’s license to become invalid before a decision is rendered by
the City Council provided proper notice and application are made pursuant to
division (D) above.  A proposed new operating officer shall be referred to
as the interim operating officer.  In the event an interim operating officer
is rejected by the City Council, the corporation shall designate another
interim operating officer and make the required application pursuant to
division (D) within 15 calendar days of the Council’s decision.



(‘81 Code, § 4-42)  (Ord. 619, passed 9-26-96)



§ 110.25  CHANGES IN CHARACTER OF BUSINESS.



   An application for approval of any proposed enlargement, change in
character of the establishment or extension of premises previously licensed
shall be made to the Clerk before the time application is made for a building
permit for any change.  The additional fee required by § 110.19 shall be
paid at the time of application if the enlargement, substantial alteration or
extension requires an amendment to the license. The change shall not be
allowed unless the City Council approves an amendment to the license before
the time any authorization for a building permit is given.



(‘81 Code, § 4-43)  (Ord. 619, passed 9-26-96)



§ 110.26  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   A licensee shall not be open for business to the public before 8:00
a.m., nor after 1:00 a.m.



(‘81 Code, § 4-44)  (Ord. 619, passed 9-26-96)



§ 110.27  ENTRANCE OF MINORS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The licensee shall not permit any person under the age of 18
to enter or be present in the licensed premises.  The licensee shall not
sell, barter, furnish, rent, or give any item of merchandise to a person
under the age of 18.  The licensee shall have an affirmative duty to request
proof of age at any point of sale or transaction or at any time it is
reasonable to the licensee to believe the patron present in the licensed
premises is under the age of 18.



   (B)   Proof of age may be established only by a valid driver's
license or identification card issued by Minnesota, another state or a
province of Canada, and including the photograph and date of birth of the
licensed person, a valid military identification card issued by the United
States Department of Defense or in the case of a foreign national from a
nation other than Canada, a valid passport.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to enter an
establishment licensed under this chapter.  It is unlawful for any person
under the age of 18 years to purchase or attempt to purchase any item or
merchandise in a licensed premises unless the minor is lawfully involved in a
compliance check conducted by law enforcement agency.



(‘81 Code, § 4-45)  (Ord. 619, passed 9-26-96; Am. Ord. 725, passed
5-22-03)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.28  SANITATION AND HEALTH REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Partitions facilitating sexual activity.  A licensee under
this chapter shall not allow any partition between a subdivision, portion or
part of the licensed premises having any aperture which is designed or
constructed to facilitate sexual intercourse, sodomy or fondling or other
erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair, buttocks or
female breast between persons on either side of the partition.



   (B)   Restrictions on booths, stalls and partitions. A licensee
under this chapter shall not allow or have on the licensed premises or
adjoining areas any booths, stalls or partitions used for the viewing of
motion pictures or other forms of entertainment that have doors, curtains or
portal partitions, unless the booths, stalls or partitions have at least one
side open to an adjacent public room so that the area inside is visible to
persons in the adjacent public room.  The areas shall be lighted in a manner
that the persons in the area used for viewing motion pictures or other forms
of entertainment are visible from the adjacent public rooms.  No reclining
surfaces inside any booths, stalls or partitions used for the viewing of
motion pictures or other forms of entertainment, including but not limited to
live entertainment shall be prohibited.



   (C)   Distance requirement for live adult entertainment.  All
performers, dancers and persons providing live entertainment distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas in the licensed
facility or in areas adjoining the licensed facility where the entertainment
can be seen by patrons of the licensed facility shall remain at all times a
minimum distance of ten feet from all patrons, customers or spectators and
shall dance or provide entertainment on a platform intended for that purpose,
which shall be raised at least two feet from the level of the floor on which
patrons or spectators are located.



   (D)   Interaction with patrons.  No dancer, performer or person
providing live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas in the licensed facility or in areas adjoining the
licensed facility where the entertainment can be seen by patrons of the
licensed facility shall fondle or caress any spectator or patron.



   (E)   Authority of health inspectors.  City staff or designees
shall have the authority to inspect or cause to be inspected the licensed
premises and adjoining areas in order to ascertain sources of infection or
reduce the spread of communicable diseases.  Officials shall have the
authority to issue appropriate orders to the licensee regarding health and
sanitation.



   (F)   Limitation on number of persons in partitioned areas.  Any
booths, stalls or partitioned portions of a room or individual rooms used for
the viewing of motion pictures or other forms of entertainment, including but
not limited to live entertainment shall not be occupied by more than one
person at a time.



   (G)   Duty to supervise.  The licensee shall not permit specified
sexual activities as defined herein to take place on the premises and shall
have an affirmative duty to supervise the licensed premises and prevent the
activities.



(‘81 Code, § 4-46)  (Ord. 619, passed 9-26-96)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.29  RIGHT OF INSPECTION.



   Prior to issuance of an initial license or renewal license, a police
officer, building inspector or a city designee must inspect the premises for
compliance with this section and applicable building and health codes.  Any
police officer, building inspector or any properly designated officer or
employee of the city shall have the unqualified right to enter, inspect and
search the premises of any licensee hereunder at any time without a warrant.



(‘81 Code, § 4-47)  (Ord. 619, passed 9-26-96)



§ 110.30  CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.



   Any license issued under this chapter shall be subject to the following
conditions and any violation thereof shall be deemed unlawful:



   (A)   The licensee shall comply with all provisions and regulations
of this chapter, all provisions and regulations of this City Code, and other
county, state, or federal law or regulation.



   (B)   The licensee shall keep itemized written records of all floor
inventory and all sale or rental transactions for all merchandise for a
period of 24 months.  The itemized written records as required under this
division shall include, at a minimum, a numerical description of the monthly
inventory on the licensed premises, the date of each sale or rental
transaction, the description of the item of merchandise in the transaction,
the purchase price or rental price of the item of merchandise and a
description of the type of transaction (e.g. sale or rental).  All itemized
written records shall be provided to the city within seven business days of
the city's request.



   (C)   No item of merchandise depicting specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas shall be visible from the exterior of the
licensed premises, regardless if the visibility is by way of any window, door
or apertures.



(Ord. 725, passed 5-22-03)  Penalty, see § 110.99



LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION



§ 110.40  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Suspension.  The City Council may suspend a license issued
pursuant to this article for up to 60 days if the City Council determines
that a licensee or the licensee's designated operator or manager has
committed the following:



      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in
a license application or a renewal application;



      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the
course of carrying on the licensed occupation or business;



      (3)   Any violation of this chapter;



      (4)   A licensee's criminal conviction that is directly
related to the occupation or business licensed as defined by M.S. § 364.03,
subd. 2, provided that the licensee cannot show competent evidence of
sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of the
licensed occupation or business as defined by M.S. § 364.03, subd. 3; or



      (5)   Conducting the licensed business or occupation in an
unlawful manner or in a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the community.



   (B)   Revocation.  The City Council may revoke a license if the
City Council determines that:



      (1)   The licensee's license was suspended in the preceding 14
months and an additional cause for suspension as detailed in division (A)
above is found by the City Council to have occurred within the 14-month
period;



      (2)   The licensee gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted to the city during the application process;



      (3)   A licensee or an employee or independent contractor of
the licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled
substances on the premises;



      (4)   A licensee or an employee or independent contractor has
knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;



      (5)   A licensee violated any of the provisions of M.S. §§
617.241 through 617.299 relating to the illegal distribution, possession or
sale of obscene materials;



      (6)   A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the adult
establishment during a period of time when the licensee's license was
suspended;



      (7)   A licensee or licensee's operator or manager has been
convicted of an offense listed in § 110.20 of this article for which the
time period required has not elapsed;



      (8)   On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a
person or persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed
premises of a crime listed in this chapter for which a conviction has been
obtained, and the person or persons were employees or independent contractors
of the licensee at the time the offenses were committed;



      (9)   A licensee or an employee or independent contractor of
the licensee has knowingly allowed specified sexual activities to occur in or
on the licensed premises; or



      (10)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city,
county, state or federal governments for hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem
taxes, sales taxes or other financial obligations.



   (C)   Hearing procedures.  A revocation or suspension shall be
preceded by written notice to the licensee and a public hearing.  The notice
shall give at least eight days notice of the time and place of the public
hearing and shall state the nature of the charges against the licensee.  The
notice shall be mailed to the licensee at the most recent address listed on
the application.



(‘81 Code, § 4-48)  (Ord. 619, passed 9-26-96)



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to the fine in § 10.99.



   (B)   A violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor under
Minnesota law.  The city may also pursue injunctive remedies.  (‘81 Code,
§ 4-49)  (Ord. 619, passed 9-26-96)



CHAPTER 111:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



Municipal Liquor Stores



   111.01   Establishment



   111.02   Enforcing officers; evidence



   111.03   Adoption of state law



   111.04   Location and operation; employees



   111.05   Municipal Liquor Store Fund



Liquor, Wine or Beer Licenses



   111.20   Adoption of state law



   111.21   Definitions



   111.22   License required; types



   111.23   Application procedure; renewals



   111.24   Execution; granting licenses



   111.25   License fees; payment



   111.26   Refunds



   111.27   Change of ownership; exception



   111.28   Bond and liability insurance required



   111.29   Ineligibility



   111.30   Conditions; special restrictions



   111.31   Hours of operation



   111.32   Employment of minors



   111.33   Inspection



   111.34   Change in ownership or character of business; validity



   111.35   Public character of liquor sales



   111.36   Underage persons; restrictions and requirements



   111.37   Revocation or suspension of license



   111.38   Temporary on-sale liquor licenses



   111.39   Brewpub license and regulations



   111.40   Brewer taproom on-sale license



   111.41   Brewer off-sale malt liquor license



   111.42   Microdistillery and cocktail room



Consumption and Display of Intoxicating Liquor



   111.50   Adoption of state law



   111.51   Permit required



   111.52   Application; fees



   111.53   Hours of operation



   111.54   Exemptions



 



   111.99   Penalty



MUNICIPAL LIQUOR STORES



§ 111.01  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There are hereby established municipal liquor stores for the on-sale
and off-sale of intoxicating liquor.  No liquor may be sold off-sale at
retail elsewhere in the city, unless otherwise authorized in this chapter.



(‘81 Code, § 3-20)  (Ord. 76, passed 5-27-70; Am. Ord. 814, 6-14-07; Am.
Ord. 999, passed 10-22-15)



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning the authority to establish, see M.S.§§ 340
A.601 through  340A.604.



§ 111.02  ENFORCING OFFICERS; EVIDENCE.



   It shall be the duty of all police officers of the city to enforce the
provisions of this chapter, and to search premises and seize evidence of law
violation and preserve the same as evidence against any person alleged to be
violating this chapter, and to prepare the necessary processes and papers
therefor.



(‘81 Code, § 3-21)  (Ord. 76, passed 5-27-70)



§ 111.03  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.



   The provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 340A, as amended, with
reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation, restrictions
on consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale, and all other
matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and consumption of
intoxicating liquor in or by a municipal liquor store are hereby adopted and
made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein.



(‘81 Code, § 3-23)  (Ord. 97, passed 7-14-71; Am. Ord. 624, passed
1-23-97)



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning municipal liquor stores and definitions, see
M.S. §§ 340A.601 through 340A.604



§ 111.04  LOCATION AND OPERATION; EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   The municipal liquor store shall be located at a suitable
place in the city as the Council determines by motion. However, no premises
upon which taxes or other public levies are delinquent shall be leased for
municipal liquor store purposes.



   (B)   The municipal liquor store shall be in the immediate charge of
a liquor store manager selected by the Council, and paid compensation as
fixed by the Council. The manager shall operate the municipal liquor store
under the Council's direction, and shall perform such duties in connection
with the store as may be imposed upon the manager by the Council. The manager
shall be responsible to the Council for the conduct of the store in full
compliance with this chapter, and with the laws relating to the sale of
liquor or beer.



   (C)   The Council shall also appoint additional employees as may be
required for the store, and shall fix their compensation. All employees,
including the manager, shall hold their positions at the pleasure of the
Council. No minor shall be employed in the store.



   (D)   The Council shall have the right to establish additional
off-sale municipal liquor stores, and shall have the right to establish one
or more on-sale municipal liquor stores, including Valleywood Golf Course and
Apple Valley Senior Center, at other locations in the city as it may, from
time to time, by motion, determine.



(‘81 Code, § 3-24)  (Ord. 76, passed 5-27-70; Am. Ord. 814, 6-14-07; Am.
Ord. 917, passed 5-12-11; Am. Ord. 969, passed 6-26-14)



§ 111.05  MUNICIPAL LIQUOR STORE FUND.



   (A)   A municipal liquor store fund is hereby created in which all
revenues received from the operation of the store shall be deposited and from
which all ordinary operating expenses shall be paid. Any amounts it may be
necessary to borrow from the general fund of the city for initial costs of
rent, fixtures and stock or for operating expenses shall be reimbursed to
that fund out of the first available moneys coming into the liquor store fund
thereafter. Surpluses accumulating in the liquor store fund may be
transferred to the general fund or to any other appropriate fund of the city
by resolution of the Council and expended for any municipal purpose.



   (B)   The handling of municipal liquor store receipts and
disbursements shall comply with the procedure prescribed by law for the
receipts and disbursements of city funds generally.



   (C)   The Council shall provide as soon as possible following the
close of each fiscal year for an audit of the accounts of the municipal
liquor store for that fiscal year by the state auditor or a qualified public
accountant.



(‘81 Code, § 3-25)  (Ord. 76, passed 5-27-70)



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning the supervision of accounts by state auditor,
see M.S. § 6.50



LIQUOR, WINE OR BEER LICENSES



§ 111.20  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.



   Except to the extent the provisions of this chapter are more
restrictive, the provisions of M.S. Chapter 340A, relating to the definition
of terms, licensing, consumption, sales, hours of sale and all other matters
pertaining to the retail sale, distribution and consumption of intoxicating
liquor, wine and 3.2 malt liquor are adopted and made a part of this chapter
as if set out in full.



(‘81 Code, § 3-30)  (Ord. 458, passed 9-21-89)



§ 111.21  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Any beverage containing more than .5% alcohol by
volume.



   BREWPUB.  A restaurant establishment holding an on-sale intoxicating
liquor license in which malt liquor is brewed or manufactured solely for sale
and consumption on tap on the licensed premises that shall be owned by the
brewer or for off-sale from the licensed premises as permitted herein.



   BREWER TAPROOM.  An area on the premises of a brewery or on premises
adjacent to a brewery owned by the brewer in which the brewer sells or
otherwise provides exclusively malt liquor produced by the brewer for
consumption within the BREWER TAPROOM.



   CLASS I RESTAURANT.  Traditional and casual restaurant only, as
defined in § 155.003. (Ord. 654, passed 12-10-98)



   CLUB and BONA FIDE CLUB.  As defined in M.S. Chapter 340A, as amended.



   COCKTAIL ROOM.  An area on the premises of a microdistillery or on
premises adjacent to a microdistillery owned by the distiller in which the
distiller sells or otherwise provides exclusively distilled spirits produced
by the distiller for consumption within the COCKTAIL ROOM.



   DISTILLED SPIRTS.  Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, spirits of
wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, and other distilled spirits, including all
dilutions and mixtures thereof, for nonindustrial use.



   HOTEL and MOTEL.  An establishment where, in consideration of payment
therefor, food and lodging are regularly furnished to transients and which
has a resident proprietor or manager; a dining room serving the general
public at tables and having facilities for seating at least 30 guests at one
time; and at least 50 guest rooms.



   INTOXICATING LIQUOR.  Ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented, spirituous,
vinous and malt beverages containing more than 3.2% of alcohol by weight.



   MICRODISTILLERY.  A distillery operated within the state producing
premium, distilled spirits in total quantity not to exceed 40,000 proof
gallons in a calendar year.



   OPERATING OFFICER, MANAGER or AGENT.  A natural person, who is a
resident of the state, appointed in writing to take full responsibility for
the conduct of the licensed premises and serve as agent for service of
notices and other process relating to the license.  The person must be of an
age, character, reputation and other attributes to qualify individually as a
licensee.



   PROOF GALLON.  One liquid gallon of distilled spirits that is 50%
alcohol at 60 degrees Fahrenheit.



   SALE and SELL.  Include all barters and all manners or means of
furnishing intoxicating and 3.2% malt liquors or wine in violation or evasion
of law and also include the usual meaning of the terms.



   THREE AND TWO-TENTHS PERCENT (3.2%) MALT LIQUOR.  Malt liquor
containing not less than 0.5% alcohol by volume nor more than 3.2% alcohol by
weight.



   WINE.  A beverage made by normal alcoholic fermentation of grapes,
grape juice, other fruits or honey or a beverage made from other agricultural
products, imitation wine, compounds sold as wine, vermouth, cider, perry, and
sake, containing not less than 0.5% nor more than 24% alcohol by volume for
nonindustrial use.



(‘81 Code, § 3-31)  (Ord. 458, passed 9-21-89; Am. Ord. 470, passed
12-28-89; Am. Ord. 624, passed 1-23-97; Am. Ord. 695, passed 6-14-00; Am.
Ord. 999, passed 10-22-15)



§ 111.22  LICENSE REQUIRED; TYPES.



   (A)   No person, except as provided in M.S. §§ 340A.301, subd. 1
and 8, 340A.510, and manufacturers and wholesalers to the extent authorized
by law, shall directly or indirectly deal in, sell, keep for sale or deliver
any intoxicating liquor, malt liquor or wine without first having received a
license to do so as provided in this chapter; nor shall any private club or
public place, directly or indirectly, or upon any pretense or by any device,
allow the consumption or display of intoxicating liquor or serve any liquid
for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquor without first obtaining a
license from the city as provided in this chapter.



(‘81 Code, § 3-32)



   (B)   (1)   On-sale intoxicating liquor license.  This shall be
granted only to hotels and Class I restaurants as defined herein.  This
shall not prohibit renewal or issuance of licenses for premises which have
on-sale licenses in effect as of January 1, 1990.



      (2)   Special club license.  This shall be issued only to
clubs as provided in M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 1.



      (3)   Wine license. This shall be issued only to restaurants
as defined in M.S. § 340A.101, subd. 25.



      (4)   Special license for Sunday liquor sales.  This shall be
issued only to establishments to which on-sale liquor licenses or club
licenses have been issued or hereafter may be issued which establishments are
hotels, restaurants or clubs in conjunction with the serving of food.



      (5)   On-sale 3.2% malt liquor license.  This shall be
granted only to bona fide clubs, bowling centers, golf courses, restaurants
as defined in M.S. § 340A.101, subd. 25, and hotels where food is prepared
and served for consumption on the premises.  On-sale 3.2% malt liquor
licenses shall permit the sale of malt liquor for consumption on the premises
only.



      (6)   Temporary on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license.  This shall
be granted only to a club or charitable, religious or non-profit organization
for a period not exceeding ten days in duration.



      (7)   Off-sale 3.2% malt liquor license.  This shall permit
the sale of malt beverages at retail in the original package for consumption
off the premises only.



      (8)   Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor license.  This
may be issued by the City Council as authorized by § 111.38.



      (9)   Concessionaire on-sale intoxicating liquor license. 
This shall be granted only to entities holding a concessions contract with
the Minnesota Zoological Board, for use on the premises of the Minnesota
Zoological Gardens.  This license authorizes sales on all days of the week,
except as otherwise prohibited by law.



(‘81 Code, § 3-33)



(Ord. 458, passed 9-21-89; Am. Ord. 470, passed 12-28-89; Am. Ord. 561,
passed 9-23-93; Am. Ord. 624, passed 1-23-97; Am. Ord. 735, passed 9-25-03)



§ 111.23  APPLICATION PROCEDURE; RENEWALS.



   (A)   Information required for application.



      (1)   General.  In addition to information which may be
required by forms of the Commissioner of Public Safety, applications for
annual on-sale licenses to be issued under this chapter shall contain
information as required on forms prescribed by the City Clerk.



      (2)   Nature of application.  The application shall state
whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation, partnership or other
form of organization.



      (3)   Natural person.  If the applicant is a natural person,
the following information shall be furnished:



         (a)   True name, place and date of birth and street
residence address of the applicant;



         (b)   Whether the applicant has ever used or been known
by a name other than his or her true name and, if so, what was the name or
names, and information concerning dates and places where used;



         (c)   The name of the business if it is to be conducted
under a designation, name or style other than the full individual name of the
applicant;



         (d)   Whether the applicant is a registered voter, and
if so, where;



         (e)   Street address at which the applicant and present
spouse have lived during the preceding ten years;



         (f)   Kind, name and location of every business or
occupation the applicant or present spouse has been engaged in during the
preceding ten years;



         (g)   Names and addresses of the applicant’s and
spouse’s employers and partners, if any, for the preceding ten years;



         (h)   Whether the applicant or spouse has ever been
convicted of any crime or violation of any city ordinance, other than
traffic.  If so, the applicant shall furnish information as to the time,
place and offense for which convictions were had;



         (i)   Whether the applicant or spouse has ever been
engaged as an employee or in operating a saloon, hotel, restaurant, café,
tavern or other business of a similar nature.  If so, applicant shall
furnish information as to the time, place and length of time of the
employment or operation;



         (j)   Whether the applicant has ever been in military
service; and



         (k)   The name, address and business address of each
person who is engaged in Minnesota in the business of selling, manufacturing
or distributing intoxicating liquor or on-sale 3.2% malt liquor and who is
nearer of kin to the applicant or spouse than a second cousin, whether of the
whole or half blood, computed by the rules of civil law, or who is a
brother-in-law or sister-in-law of the applicant or spouse.



      (4)   Partnership.  If applicant is a partnership, the names
and addresses of all partners and all information concerning each partner as
is required of a single applicant in division (A)(3) above.  A managing
partner, or partners, shall be designated.  The interest of each partner in
the business shall be disclosed.



      (5)   Corporation.  If applicant is a corporation or other
association, the following information shall be required:



         (a)   Name and, if incorporated, the state of
incorporation;



         (b)   A true copy of the certificate of incorporation,
articles of incorporation or association agreement and by-laws and, if a
foreign corporation, a certificate of authority as described in Minnesota
Statutes;



         (c)   The name of the operating officer or proprietor or
other agent in charge of the premises to be licensed, giving all the
information about the person as is required of a single applicant in division
(A)(3).  As used in this chapter, the term “operating officer” shall
mean the person responsible for the day- to-day operating decisions of the
licensed premises; and



         (d)   A list of all persons who, singly or together with
their spouse, or a parent, brother, sister or child or either of them, own or
control an interest in the corporation or association in excess of 5% or who
are officers or directors of the corporation or association, together with
their addresses and all information as is required of a single applicant in
division (A)(3) of this section.



      (6)   Club.  If an application is submitted by a club,
charitable, religious or non-profit organization, the following information
shall be submitted in addition to that required by the commissioner of public
safety, and by the prior subdivisions hereof:



         (a)   The purpose for which the entity was originally
organized and for which it is now existing;



         (b)   Date the entity was first organized and place of
organization;



         (c)   The number of members;



         (d)   The full name of each member of the club’s board
of directors, club officers, and each member of any operating committee which
has decision-making authority for the club’s overall operation, and the
operating manager(s) or other person who shall be in charge of the licensed
premises, together with the same information concerning the person as is
required of a single applicant for a license as set forth in division (A)(3)
above.  The application shall include a sworn statement by a board member or
officer of the club setting forth all persons and titles as is required in
this clause;



         (e)   If the application is submitted by a club, whether
for an on-sale or special club license, a sworn statement by a responsible
individual having personal knowledge of the facts shall be submitted with the
application verifying that the club meets all the requirements of M.S. §§
340A.101, subd. 7 and 340A.404, subd. 1; and



         (f)   If an application is for a “club” license, the
sworn statement required by subsection (A)(6)(e) above shall include a
statement that the club meets all the requirements of M.S. §§ 340A.404,
subd. 1 and 340A.101, subd. 7.  In the event no person can make this
statement from personal knowledge of the facts, satisfactory documentary
proof may be submitted to satisfy this requirement.



      (7)   Type.  The application shall state the type of license
the applicant seeks.



      (8)   Description of premises.



         (a)   Legal description.  The exact legal description
of the premises to be licensed, together with a plot plan of the area for
which the license is sought showing dimensions, location of buildings, street
access parking facilities.



         (b)   Street address.  The street address where the
sales are to be conducted and identification of the rooms including hotel
rooms, if applicable, where beverages are to be sold or consumed.



         (c)   Floor plan.  A floor plan of the building,
including dining rooms open to the public, showing dimensions and indicating
the number of persons intended to be served in each of the rooms. The floor
number and street number where sales are to be conducted and the rooms where
it is to be sold or consumed.



         (d)   Preliminary plans.  Whenever the application for
a license is for premises either planned or under construction or undergoing
substantial alteration, the application shall be accompanied by a set of
preliminary plans showing the design and floor plan of the proposed premises
to be licensed.  If the plans or design are on file with the building
official, no plans need be filed with the City Clerk.



      (9)   Federal permit.  Whether a permit from the federal
government is required by the laws of the United States, whether or not the
permit has been issued, and if so required, in what name issued and the
nature of the permit.



      (10)   Financial and interest criteria.



         (a)   Financial interest.  The names and addresses of
all persons, other than the applicant, who have any financial interest in the
business, buildings, premises, fixtures, furniture, stock in trade, the
nature of the interest, amount thereof, terms for payment or other
reimbursement.  This shall include, but not be limited to, any lessees,
lessors, mortgagees, mortgagors, lenders, lien holders, trustees, trustors
and persons who have co-signed notes or have otherwise loaned, pledged or
extended security for any indebtedness of the applicant.



         (b)   Amount of investment.  The amount of investment
that the applicant has in the business, building, premises, fixtures,
furniture and stock in trade, and proof of the source of the money.



         (c)   Value of fixtures.  The fair market value of the
fixtures and structures, exclusive of land, on the premises proposed to be
licensed.



      (11)   References.  The names, residences and business
addresses of three persons, residents of the state, of good moral character,
not related to the applicant or financially interested in the premises or
business, who may be referred to as to the applicant’s character or, in the
case where information is required of an operating officer, the operating
officer’s character.



      (12)   Taxes.  Whether or not all real estate taxes,
assessments or other financial claims of the city, state of federal
government for the business and premises to be licensed have been paid, and
if not paid, the years for which delinquent.



      (13)   Description of proposed business.  A detailed
narrative description of the proposed business for which the license is
sought including, but not limited to: type of clientele, type of
entertainment (if any), type of food menu (if any), and fixtures.



      (14)   Other information required.  Other information as the
City Council shall require.



(‘81 Code, § 3-34)  (Ord. 458, passed 9-21-89; Am. Ord. 624, passed
1-23-97; Am. Ord. 944, passed 4-25-13)



   (B)   Renewal applications.



      (1)   License period, expiration.  Each renewal license shall
be issued for a maximum period of one year.  All licenses, except temporary
licenses, expire on December 31 of each year.  Temporary licenses shall
expire according to their terms.



      (2)   Time of making application. Applications for renewal of
an existing license shall be made at least 90 days prior to the date of the
expiration of the license, and shall state that everything in the prior
applications remains true and correct except as otherwise indicated.  The
city will mail application forms to existing licensees approximately 120 days
prior to expiration of the licenses.  If, in the judgment of the Council,
good and sufficient cause is shown by any applicant for failure to file for a
renewal within the time period provided, the Council may, if the other
provisions of this chapter are complied with, grant the application.



      (3)   Statement of gross sales; when required. At the earliest
practicable time after application is made for a renewal of an on- sale
intoxicating liquor license and, in any event, prior to the time that the
application is approved by the Council, the applicant shall file with the
City Clerk a statement made by a certified public accountant that shows the
total gross liquor sales of the restaurant for the preceding 12-month period
beginning September 1 and ending on August 31. A foreign corporation shall
also file a current certificate of authority.



(‘81 Code, § 3-35)  (Ord. 458, passed 9-21-89)



   (C)   Application following denial of license application or
renewal.  No application for any license under this chapter may be made
earlier than six months after the date the City Council denies an initial
application or renewal application under this chapter for the same applicant.



(Ord. 944, passed 4-25-13; Am. Ord. 1010, passed 5-26-16)



§ 111.24  EXECUTION; GRANTING LICENSES.



   (A)   If application is by a natural person, it shall be signed and
sworn to by the person; if by a corporation, by an officer thereof; if by a
partnership, by one of the general partners; if by an incorporated
association, by the operating officer or managing officer thereof. If the
applicant is a partnership, the application, license and insurance policy
shall be made and issued in the name of all partners. Any false statement in
an application may result in denial of the application. Applications shall be
filed with the City Clerk.  (‘81 Code, § 3-36)  (Am. Ord. 933, passed
8-9-12)



   (B)   (1)   Investigation. At the time of making an initial
application, renewal application, or request for approval for a new operating
officer, or an amendment to the license due to a change in the ownership or
control or interest in the licensee, or a change in a licensed club’s board
of directors, club officers, or any member of any operating committee which
has decision-making authority for the club’s overall operation, the
applicant/licensee and each person required to be identified in a license
application or an amendment notice as set forth in § 111.23 and § 111.34
shall be subject to and shall authorize, in writing, the Apple Valley Police
Department to investigate all facts set out in the application and do a
personal background and criminal record check. The authorization shall
further authorize the Apple Valley Police Department to release information
received from the investigation to the City Council. The applicant/licensee
shall have an opportunity to review the information before it is released to
the City Council, if requested.



      (2)   Hearing requirements.



         (a)   Notice of hearing.  Upon receipt of the written
report and recommendation by the Police Department, the Council shall
instruct the Clerk to cause to be published in the official newspaper ten
days in advance, a notice of hearing held by the Council, setting forth the
day, time and place when the hearing will be held, the name of the applicant,
the premises where the business is to be conducted, the nature of the
business and other information as the Council may direct.



         (b)   Conduct of hearing.  At the hearing, opportunity
shall be given to any person to be heard for or against the granting of the
license.



         (c)   Hearing on renewal applications. Prior to granting
renewal applications, the Council shall hold a public hearing.  Notice of
the time and place of the meeting and the fact that renewal applications will
be considered shall be published in the official newspaper ten days in
advance of the hearing.  Opportunity shall be given to any person to be
heard for or against the granting of a renewal license.



         (d)   Costs.  The cost of all hearings, except
uncontested, routine renewal hearings shall be borne by the applicant.



         (e)   Applicability. The provisions of this section are
not applicable to applications for temporary licenses and off-sale 3.2% malt
liquor licenses.



      (3)   Vote required. After an investigation and hearing, where
applicable, the Council shall grant or refuse the application in its
discretion.



      (4)   Issuance to applicant only. Each license shall be issued
to the applicant only.



      (5)   Issuance for exact rooms and footage.  Each license
shall be issued only for the exact rooms and square footage described in the
application.



      (6)   Effective date. No special club license or on-sale wine
license shall become effective until it, together with the security furnished
by the applicant, has been approved by the State Commissioner of Public
Safety.



      (7)   Premises under construction. When a license is granted
for premises where the building is under construction or otherwise not ready
for occupancy, the Clerk shall not issue the license until notified by the
building official that the building is ready for occupancy and conforms to
the premises described in the application approved by the Council.



      (8)   Report to state.  The Clerk shall, within ten days
after the issuance of any license under this chapter, submit to the
Commissioner of Public Safety the full name and address of each person
granted a license, the true name, the effective license date and the date of
expiration of the license. He or she shall also submit to the Commissioner of
Public Safety any change of address, transfer, cancellation or revocation or
any license by the Council during the license period.



(‘81 Code, § 3-37)  (Ord. 458, passed 9-21-89; Am. Ord. 624, passed
1-23-97; Am. Ord. 954, passed 12-12-13)



§ 111.25  LICENSE FEES; PAYMENT.



   (A)   Fees.



      (1)   Annual fees.



         (a)   The annual fees for licenses required by this
chapter shall be in the amounts as specified in the appendix to Chapter 35.



         (b)   Computation of fees for on-sale intoxicating
liquor licenses shall be based upon the amount of liquor sales on which a
licensee is required to pay liquor tax as shown on the licensee’s Minnesota
Sales and Use Tax Returns for the most recent 12 months beginning September 1
and ending August 31.  Copies of the returns shall be verified by a
certified public accountant and shall be filed along with the renewal
application.  Until a liquor sales base is established, the fee for a new
license shall be the highest fee shown.



      (2)   Prorated fee.



         (a)   The fee for all licenses, except temporary
licenses, granted after the commencement of the license year shall be
prorated on a quarterly basis.



         (b)   The fee for licenses in connection with a seasonal
recreation facility may be prorated on a quarterly basis, to coincide with
operation of the facility, and issued for a term of less than one year.



      (3)   Investigation fees.  Investigation fees for other than
temporary and off-sale licenses shall be as follows:



         (a)   At the time of each original application for a
license, except in the case of a special license for Sunday liquor sales and
as provided in § 111.27 , the applicant shall pay, in full, an application
fee. The application fee shall be as specified in the appendix to Chapter 35
. If any investigation outside the state is required, the applicant shall be
charged the cost, not to exceed $10,000, which shall be paid by the
applicant, prior to issuance of a license, after deducting the initial
application fee, whether or not the license is granted.



         (b)   At any time an additional investigation is
required because of a change in the ownership of any licensee or in the
control or interest in the licensee within the meaning of § 111.34 (A), the
licensee shall pay an additional investigation fee. The investigation fee
shall be as specified in the appendix to Chapter 35 . If any investigation
outside the State of Minnesota is required, the applicant shall be charged
the cost, not to exceed $10,000, which shall be paid by the applicant after
deducting the initial investigation fee.



         (c)   At any time an additional investigation is
required because an amendment to the license is required, the licensee shall
pay an additional investigation fee as specified in the appendix to Chapter
35 .



         (d)   At any time an additional investigation is
required because of a change in the operating officer, proprietor or other
agent in charge, or in the case of a change in a licensed club’s board of
directors, club officers, or any member of any operating committee which has
decision-making authority for the club’s overall operation, the licensee
shall pay an additional investigation fee(s). The investigation fee(s) shall
be as specified in the appendix to Chapter 35 .



(‘81 Code, § 3-38)



   (B)   Payment of fees.



      (1)   Initial fees. The license and investigation fees for a
new license shall be paid in full before the application for the license is
accepted.  All fees shall be paid into the general fund of the city.  Upon
rejection of any application for a license or upon withdrawal of an
application before approval of the issuance by the Council, the license fee
only shall be refunded to the applicant except where rejection is for a
willful misstatement in the license application.



      (2)   Renewal fees.



         (a)   The annual license fee for renewal of all licenses
except on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses shall be paid in full at the time
the renewal application is filed with the Clerk.



         (b)   The annual license fee for renewal of on-sale
intoxicating liquor licenses shall be paid in full before a license will be
issued.  At least half of the fee shall be paid at the time the renewal
application is filed with the Clerk and the remaining half shall be paid by
December 15 and before any renewal license is issued.



(‘81 Code, § 3-39)



(Ord. 458, passed 9-21-89; Am. Ord. 954, passed 12-12-13)



§ 111.26  REFUNDS.



   No part of the fee paid for any license shall be refunded, except as
authorized under M.S. § 340A.408, subd. 5.



(‘81 Code, § 3-40)  (Ord. 458, passed 9-21-89)



§ 111.27  CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP; EXCEPTION.



   Where a new application is filed as a result of incorporation by an
existing licensee and the ownership control and interest in the license are
unchanged, no additional investigation fee will be required.



(‘81 Code, § 3-41)  (Ord. 458, passed 9-21-89)



§ 111.28  BOND AND LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   (A)   All applicants for any type of intoxicating liquor, 3.2% malt
liquor or wine license to be issued or renewed must, as a condition of the
issuance of the license, have general liability insurance providing a minimum
coverage of $500,000 combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury
and property damage.



   (B)   All applicants for any type of intoxicating liquor, 3.2% malt
liquor, or wine license to be issued or renewed must, as a condition of the
issuance of the license, demonstrate proof of financial responsibility with
regard to liability imposed by M.S. § 340A.801. Proof of financial
responsibility may be given by filing one of the following:



      (1)   A certificate that there is in effect for the license
period an insurance policy or pool providing minimum coverage of $300,000
combined single limit per occurrence;



      (2)   A bond of a surety company with the minimum coverages as
provided in division (B)(1) above; or



      (3)   A certificate of the Commissioner of Management and
Budget that the licensee has deposited with the Commissioner of Management
and Budget $300,000 in cash or securities which may legally be purchased by
savings banks or for trust funds having a market value of $300,000.



      (4)   This division does not prohibit an insurer from
providing the coverage required by this division in combination with other
insurance coverage.



   (C)   A liability insurance policy required by this section must
provide that it may not be canceled for:



 



 



2013 S-10




30   Apple Valley - Business Regulations



      (1)   Any cause, except for nonpayment of premium, by either
the insured or the insurer unless the canceling party has first given a
60-days notice to the city, in writing, addressed to the City Clerk, of
intent to cancel the policy;



      (2)   Nonpayment of premium unless the canceling party has
first given a ten-day notice to the city, in writing, addressed to the City
Clerk, of intent to cancel the policy; and



      (3)   In the event of a policy cancellation, the insurer shall
send written notice to the City Clerk the same time that a cancellation
request is received from or a notice is sent to the insured licensee.



   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter regarding
suspension of licenses, if the insurance or other evidence of financial
responsibility lapses during the term of any on-sale licenses issued under
this chapter, then the lapse shall act as an automatic suspension of the
license. Notice of cancellation of liquor liability insurance or other
evidence of financial responsibility shall serve as notice to the licensee of
the impending suspension. If evidence of compliance with the financial
responsibility requirement is not presented to the City Clerk or other
licensing authority before termination is effective, the license shall be
deemed suspended immediately upon lapse.



   (E)   Divisions (A) and (B) do not apply to on-sale 3.2% malt liquor
licensees who by affidavit establish that they had sales of less than $25,000
of 3.2% malt liquor for the preceding year, or off-sale 3.2% malt liquor
licenses with sales of less than $50,000 of 3.2% malt liquor for the
preceding year, or to holders of on-sale wine licenses with sales of less
than $25,000 of wine for the preceding year.



(‘81 Code, § 3-42)  (Ord. 458, passed 9-21-89; Ord. 468, passed 12-21-89;
Ord. 624, passed 1-23-97; Am. Ord. 735, passed 9-25-03; Am. Ord. 902, passed
9-23-10; Am. Ord. 933, passed 8-9-12)



§ 111.29  INELIGIBILITY.



   (A)   Persons ineligible for license.



      (1)   State law.  No license shall be granted to or held by
any person made ineligible for a license by state law.



      (2)   Manager required.  No license shall be granted to a
corporation that does not have an operating officer who is eligible, pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter.



      (3)   Real party in interest.  No license shall be granted to
a person who is the spouse of a person ineligible for a license pursuant to
the provisions of division (A) of this section or who, in the judgment of the
Council, is not the real party in interest or beneficial owner of the
business operated, or to be operated, under the license.



      (4)   Residency requirements renewal.  A license will not be
renewed if, in the case of an individual, the licensee is not a resident of
the state at the time of the date for renewal; if, in the case of a
partnership, the managing partner is not a resident of the state at the time
of the renewal; or in the case of a corporation, if the operating officer is
not a resident of the state at the time of the date of renewal.  The time
for establishing residency within the state may, for good cause, be extended
by the Council.



      (5)   “Interest” defined. 



         (a)   The term “interest” as used in this section
includes any pecuniary interest in the ownership, operation, management or
profits of a retail wine, intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor
establishment, but does not include: bona fide loans, bona fide fixed sum
rental agreements, bona fide open accounts or other obligations held with or
without security arising out of the ordinary and regular course of business
of selling or leasing merchandise, fixtures or supplies to the establishment,
or an interest of 5% or less in any corporation holding a city liquor
license.  A person who receives monies from time to time directly or
indirectly from a licensee in the absence of a bona fide consideration
therefor and excluding bona fide gifts or donations, shall be deemed to have
a pecuniary interest in the retail license. 



         (b)   In determining “bona fide” the reasonable
value of the goods or things received as consideration for the payment by the
licensee and all other facts reasonably tending to prove or disapprove the
existence of any purposeful scheme or arrangement to evade the prohibitions
of this section shall be considered.



(‘81 Code, § 3-43)



   (B)   Places ineligible for license.



      (1)   No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on
any premises on which real estate taxes, assessments or other financial
claims of the city or of the state are due, delinquent or unpaid.  If an
action has been commenced pursuant to the provisions of M.S. Chapter 278,
questioning the amount or validity of taxes, the Council may on application
by the licensee waive strict compliance with this provision; no waiver may be
granted, however, for taxes, or any portion thereof, which remain unpaid for
a period exceeding one year after becoming due unless the one-year period is
extended through no fault of the licensee.



      (2)   No license shall be issued for premises owned by a
person or entity who is not the applicant and to whom a license could not be
issued under the provisions of this Chapter.  This provision, however, does
not apply to and a license may be issued for premises owned by a person who
is under the age of 21, a noncitizen who is a resident (legal) alien, or a
person who has been convicted of a crime other than a violation of this
Chapter or M.S. Chapter 340A.



      (3)   No license shall be granted for any place which has a
common entrance or exit between any two establishments, except that a public
concourse or public lobby shall not be construed as a common entrance or exit.



(‘81 Code, § 3-44)



(Ord. 458, passed 9-21-89; Am. Ord. 624, passed 1-23-97; Am. Ord. 991, passed
6-11-15)



§ 111.30  CONDITIONS; SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Conditions for licenses.



      (1)   City and state laws.  Every license shall be granted
subject to the conditions of this chapter, any other applicable ordinance of
the city and/or state law.



      (2)   Consumption and display.  No person shall consume beer,
wine or mix or prepare intoxicating liquor for consumption in any public
place not licensed in accordance with the ordinances of the city and the laws
of the state.



      (3)   Area of license.  No license shall be effective beyond
the areas approved in the license for which it was granted.



      (4)   Demeanor of licensee.  No intoxicating liquor, wine or
3.2% malt liquor shall be sold or furnished or delivered to any obviously
intoxicated person, to any known habitual drunkard, to any minor or to any
person to whom a sale is prohibited by state law.



      (5)   Prohibited sale.  No person shall give, sell, procure
or purchase wine, intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor to or for any
person to whom the sale would be forbidden by law.



      (6)   Ownership of equipment.  No equipment or fixture in any
licensed place shall be owned in whole or in part by any manufacturer or
distiller, except such as shall be expressly permitted by state law.



      (7)   Display of liquor.  No “on-sale” liquor
establishment shall display liquor to the public during hours when the sale
of liquor is prohibited by this chapter.



      (8)   Prostitution.  No licensee shall knowingly permit the
licensed premises or any room in those premises or any adjoining building
directly under his or her control to be used by prostitutes.



      (9)   Controlled substances.  No licensee shall knowingly
permit the sale, possession or consumption of controlled substances on the
licensed premises in violation of M.S. Chapter 152.



      (10)   Posting license.  The license shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in the licensed establishment at all times.



      (11)   Licensee responsible for activity attributable to
business, etc.  Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of his
or her place of business including conduct and activity attributable to the
business on property owned or controlled by the licensee.  Every licensee
shall also cooperate with the city in controlling activity attributable to
the business in surrounding areas.



      (12)   Licensee liable for acts of employees. The act of any
employee on the licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as well,
and the licensee shall be liable to all penalties provided by this chapter
and the law equally with the employee.



      (13)   Additional licenses. Licensees who hold both an on-sale
wine license and an on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license may sell intoxicating
malt liquor (strong beer) at on-sale without an additional license.



      (14)   Certain sexual conduct prohibited.  The following acts
or conduct on licensed premises are unlawful and shall be punished as
provided by § 10.99 hereof and shall be grounds for revocation of any
license as provided by § 111.37:



         (a)   To employ or use any person in the sale or service
of alcoholic beverages in or upon the licensed premises while the person is
unclothed or in attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion
of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic
hair, anus, vulva or genitals;



         (b)   To employ or use the services of any hostess while
the hostess is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as described
in division (a) above;



         (c)   To encourage or permit any person on the licensed
premises to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, anus or genitals of any
other person;



         (d)   To permit any employee or person to wear or use
any device or covering exposed to view which simulates the breast, genitals,
anus, pubic hair or any portion thereof;



         (e)   To permit any person to perform acts of or acts
which simulate:



            1.   With or upon another person sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual act which is
prohibited by law;



            2.   Masturbation or bestiality;



            3.   With or upon another person the touching,
caressing or fondling on the anus, genitals or female breast; or



            4.   The displaying of the pubic hair, anus,
vulva, genitals or female breast below the top of the areola;



         (f)   To permit any person to use artificial devices or
inanimate objects to depict any of the prohibited activities described above;



         (g)   To permit any person to remain in or upon the
licensed premises who exposes to public view any portion of post-pubertal
human genitals, pubic areas, the post-pubertal human female breast below a
point immediately above the top of the areola, or the covered human male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state; and



         (h)   To permit the showing of film, still pictures,
electronic reproduction or other visual reproductions depicting:



            1.   Acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual
act which is prohibited by law;



            2.   Any person being touched, caressed or fondled
on the breast, anus or genitals;



            3.   Scenes wherein a person displays any portion
of post-pubertal human genitals, pubic areas, the post-pubertal human female
breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or the covered
human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state; or



            4.   Scenes wherein artificial devices or
inanimate objects are employed to depict, or drawings are employed to
portray, any of the prohibited activities described above.



      (15)   The Council may authorize the holder of an on-sale or
concessionaire on-sale intoxicating liquor license issued by the city to
dispense intoxicating liquor at any convention, banquet, conference, meeting
or social affair conducted on the premises owned by Dakota County located at
14955 Galaxie Avenue.  The licensee must be engaged to dispense intoxicating
liquor at an event held by a person or organization permitted to use the
premises and may dispense intoxicating liquor only to persons attending the
event. 



(‘81 Code, § 3-45)  (Am. Ord. 509, passed 4-25-91; Am. Ord. 561, passed
9-23-93; Am. Ord. 624, passed 1-23-97)



   (B)   Special conditions.  At the time a license or license renewal
is issued, the city may attach special conditions to the license to protect
the welfare of the community.  Violation of any of the conditions shall be
grounds for revocation of the license. 



(‘81 Code, § 3-45)  (Am. Ord. 509, passed 4-25-91; Am. Ord. 561, passed
9-23-93; Am. Ord. 624, passed 1-23-97; Am. Ord. 1010, passed 5-26-16)



§ 111.31  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   Definition.  “Restricted hours of operation,” as used
herein, shall mean the times when no sales or serving of intoxicating liquor,
wine or 3.2% malt liquor shall be made in any establishment in the city.



   (B)   Hours.  Restricted hours of operation shall be as follows:



      (1)   Monday through Saturday.  No sales between 12:45 a.m.
and 8:00 a.m.  No sales between 1:45 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. for establishments
holding an optional State 2:00 A.M. Closing License.



      (2)   Sunday.



         (a)   No sales between 12:45 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. for
establishments having both on-sale wine and 3.2% malt liquor licenses and
establishments having a special license for Sunday liquor sales.  No sales
between 1:45 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. for establishments holding an optional State
2:00 A.M. Closing License.



         (b)   No sales between 12:45 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. for
establishments having only an on-sale 3.2% malt liquor license.  No sales
between 1:45 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. for establishments holding an optional State
2:00 A.M. Closing License.



         (c)   No sales after 12:45 a.m. for on-sale intoxicating
liquor and club licensees and no sales after 1:45 a.m. for establishments
holding an optional state 2:00 a.m. Closing License.  All on-sale
intoxicating liquor and club licensees that hold a special license for Sunday
liquor sales may sell intoxicating liquor for consumption on premises between
8:00 a.m. Sunday and 12:45 a.m. Monday or between 8:00 a.m. Sunday and 1:45
a.m. Monday with an optional State 2:00 a.m. Closing License.



      (3)   Consumption.  No person shall consume nor shall any
licensee permit any consumption of intoxicating liquor, wine or 3.2% malt
liquor in the licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a
sale can legally occur.



      (4)   Removal of containers.  No licensee shall permit any
glass, bottle or other container containing intoxicating liquor, wine or 3.2%
malt liquor in any quantity to remain upon any table, bar, stool or other
place where customers are served, more than 30 minutes after the time when a
sale can legally occur.



      (5)   Closing.



         (a)   Restrictions.



            1.   Except as otherwise provided in this
division, no person, other than a licensee's bona fide employees actually
engaged in the performance of their duties shall be in the licensed premises
more than 35 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.  The
licensee's employees shall neither be in the licensed premises more than 75
minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur, nor permit any
non-employee person to be in the licensed premises more than 35 minutes after
the time when a sale can legally occur.  No person shall be in the licensed
premises until 4:00 a.m., next following the closing.



            2.   These provisions shall not apply to any
separate part of the premises which are open to the general public for
business purposes unrelated to the sale of intoxicating liquor, wine or 3.2%
malt liquor or to premises for which a concessionaire on-sale intoxicating
liquor license has been issued.



         (b)   Exception.



            1.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection
(a) above, the licensee or any employee, servant or agent thereof, may be
present in the licensed premises during the time period in which persons are
not permitted pursuant to subsection (a) for bona fide maintenance or
cleaning of or remodeling projects within the licensed premises.



            2.   Any violation of any condition of this
division may be grounds for revocation or suspension of the licensee's liquor
license.  Any person within the licensed premises at the time of the
violation shall immediately leave the premises upon order by a police officer.



(‘81 Code, § 3-46)  (Ord. 458, passed 9-21-89; Am. Ord. 561, passed
9-23-93; Am. Ord. 592, passed 2-9-95; Am. Ord. 624, passed 1-23-97; Am. Ord.
735, passed 9-25-03; Am. Ord. 872, passed 12-10-09; Am. Ord. 991, passed
6-11-15)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.32  EMPLOYMENT OF MINORS.



   No person under the age of 18 shall be employed in any rooms
constituting the place in which intoxicating liquors are sold at retail
“on-sale,” except that persons under the age of 18 may be employed as
musicians or to perform the duties of a bus person or dishwashing services in
places defined as a restaurant, hotel, motel or other multipurpose building
serving food in rooms in which intoxicating liquors are sold at retail
“on-sale.”



(‘81 Code, § 3-47)  (Ord. 458, passed 9-21-89)



§ 111.33  INSPECTION.



   (A)   Premises.  Any police officer, building inspector or any
properly designated officer or employee of the city shall have the
unqualified right to enter, inspect and search the premises of any licensee
hereunder at any time without a warrant.



   (B)   Records.  The business records of the licensee, including
federal and state tax returns, shall be available for inspection by the city
at all reasonable times.



(‘81 Code, § 3-48)  (Ord. 458, passed 9-21-89)



§ 111.34  CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP OR CHARACTER OF BUSINESS; VALIDITY.



   (A)   Ownership and officer changes.



      (1)   Licenses issued to corporations shall be valid only so
long as there is no change in the officers or ownership interest of the
corporation, within the meaning of § 111.29(A)(5) of this chapter unless the
change is approved by the Council, in which event the license shall continue
in force until the end of the then current license year.



      (2)   Licenses issued to associations or partnerships shall be
valid only so long as there is no change in the partnership or association
agreement or in the ownership of the partnership or association unless the
change is approved by the Council, in which event the license shall continue
in force until the end of the then current license year.



      (3)   Corporations, partnerships or associations holding
on-sale licenses shall submit written notice to the Clerk of any changes
described herein on or before 60 days prior to the effective date of any
change and pay any fee required by § 111.25(A)(3)(b).  Notwithstanding the
definition of “interest” as given in § 111.29(A)(5) of this chapter, in
the case of a corporation, the licensee shall submit written notice to the
Clerk when a person not listed in the application will be acquiring an
interest and shall give all information about the person as is required of a
person pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



      (4)   Corporations holding on-sale licenses shall submit
written notice to the Clerk of any change in operating officers within 10
days of the change. The written notice shall designate the interim operating
officer and shall contain all the information about the person as is required
of a single applicant in § 111.23(A)(3).  The operating officers shall be
subject to the investigation required by § 111.24(B)(1).  Investigation
fees shall be as determined by the City Council, pursuant to §
111.25(A)(3)(d).



      (5)   The designation of a new operating officer shall not
cause the corporation’s license to become invalid before a decision is
rendered by the City Council provided proper notice and application are made
pursuant to § 111.34(A)(4).  A proposed new operating officer shall be
referred to as the interim operating officer. In the event an interim
operating officer is rejected by the City Council, the corporation shall
designate another interim operating officer and make the required application
pursuant to § 111.34(A)(4) within 15 calendar days of the Council’s
decision.



(‘81 Code, § 3-49)



      (6)   Licenses issued to clubs shall be valid only so long as
there is no change in the club’s board of directors, club officers, members
of any operating committee which has decision-making authority for the
club’s overall operation, or the operating manager(s) unless the change is
approved by the Council in which event the license shall continue in force
until the end of the then current license year.  The notice requirements for
corporations and partnerships as set forth above shall be applicable to clubs
under this clause.



   (B)   Building, premises and character changes. An application for
approval of any proposed enlargement, change in character of the
establishment or extension of premises previously licensed shall be made to
the Clerk before the time application is made for a building permit for any
change.  The additional fee required by § 111.25 (A)(3)(c) shall be paid at
the time of application if the enlargement, substantial alteration or
extension requires an amendment to the license.  The change shall not be
allowed unless the Council approves an amendment to the license before the
time any authorization for a building permit is given. 



(‘81 Code, § 3-55)



(Ord. 458, passed 9-21-89; Am. Ord. 944, passed 8-25-13)



§ 111.35  PUBLIC CHARACTER OF LIQUOR SALES.



   No sales of wine, intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor shall be made
to or in guest rooms of hotels unless the rules of the hotel provide for the
service of meals in guest rooms; nor unless the sale of wine, intoxicating
liquor or 3.2% malt liquor is made in the manner on-sales are required to be
made; nor unless the sale accompanies and is incidental to the regular
service of meals to guests therein; nor unless the rules of the hotel and the
description, location and number of the guest rooms are fully set out in the
application for a license.



(‘81 Code, § 3-51)  (Ord. 458, passed 9-21-89; Am. Ord. 624, passed
1-23-97)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.36  UNDERAGE PERSONS; RESTRICTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Restrictions for underage persons.



      (1)   No licensee, its agent or employee shall serve or
dispense upon the licensed premises any wine, intoxicating liquor or 3.2%
malt liquors to a person under the legal drinking age; nor shall the
licensee, or its agent or employee, permit any person to be furnished or
consume any liquors on the licensed premises; nor shall the licensee, its
agent or employee, permit any person to be delivered any liquors.



      (2)   No person under the legal drinking age shall receive
delivery of wine, intoxicating or 3.2 malt liquor.



      (3)   No person shall consume wine, intoxicating liquor or
3.2% malt liquor or have in his or her possession any bottle or receptacle
containing wine, intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor which is open while
in the parking area of any shopping center or other commercial establishment
or property immediately adjacent thereto.



      (4)   No underage person shall misrepresent his or her age for
the purpose of obtaining wine, intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor, nor
shall he  or she enter any premises licensed for the retail sale of
intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor for the purpose of purchasing or
having served or delivered to him or her for consuming any intoxicating
liquor or malt beverage, nor shall any person purchase, attempt to purchase,
consume or have another person purchase for him or her any intoxicating
liquor or 3.2% malt liquor.



(‘81 Code, § 3-52)  (Am. Ord. 624, passed 1-23-97)



   (B)   Identification requirements.  Proof of age for purchasing or
consuming alcoholic beverages may be established only by a valid driver’s
license or Minnesota identification card, or in the case of a foreign
national by a valid passport. 



(‘81 Code, § 3-53)



(Ord. 458, passed 9-21-89)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.37  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   (1)   Upon a finding that the licensee has sold alcoholic
beverages to another retail licensee for the purpose of resale; purchased
alcoholic beverages from another retail licensee for the purposes of resale;
conducted or permitted the conduct of gambling on the licensed premises in
violation of the law; failed to remove or dispose of alcoholic beverages when
ordered by the commissioner to do so under Minnesota Statutes; or failed to
comply with any other applicable state statute or rule, or code provision
herein relating to alcoholic beverages, the city may revoke the license,
suspend the license for up to 60 days, or impose upon the licensee a civil
penalty up to $2,000 for each violation, or impose any combination thereof. 
A civil penalty imposed upon the licensee under this section shall be as
established in § 35.27 of this code.  A fourth or more violation within a
24-month period shall be subject to a civil penalty as determined by City
Council resolution.  The licensee shall pay the civil penalty within 30 days
of the date of a notice from the city.  If the licensee fails to pay the
civil penalty within 30 days of notice, the licensee’s license shall be
suspended until the civil penalty, plus any surcharge or interest for late
payment, is paid in full.  After the third offense within a 24-month period,
the license shall be suspended for not less than seven days.



      (2)   No suspension or revocation of a license or civil
penalty under this subparagraph shall take effect until the licensee has been
given an opportunity for a hearing under the Minnesota Administrative
Procedure Act.  If the licensee files a request for hearing with the City
Clerk within five business days of the date of the notice of the license
action or civil penalty, the City Clerk shall schedule a hearing before a
hearing officer duly appointed by the City Administrator.  In the event that
the licensee fails to timely request a hearing or fails to appear at a
scheduled hearing, the licensee shall be deemed to have waived his/her right
to a hearing and shall be subject to the license action or civil penalties
imposed hereunder.



   (B)   Inactive license.  The City Council may revoke the
intoxicating liquor, wine or 3.2% malt liquor license of any establishment
granted a license that is not under construction and exhibiting satisfactory
progress toward completion within six months from its issuance, or any
establishment that ceases operation for a period of six months.  A hearing
shall be held to determine what progress has been made toward opening or
reopening the establishment and, if satisfactory progress is not
demonstrated, the Council may revoke the license.



(‘81 Code, § 3-54)  (Ord. 458, passed 9-21-89; Am. Ord. 624, passed
1-23-97; Am. Ord. 695, passed 6-14-01)



§ 111.38  TEMPORARY ON-SALE LIQUOR LICENSES.



   The City Council may authorize issuance to: (1) a club or charitable,
religious or non-profit organization, in existence for at least three years,
a temporary license for the on-sale of intoxicating liquor; (2) a brewer that
manufactures less than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year and is licensed
by the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety a temporary license for the
on-sale of malt liquor produced by the brewer; and (3) a microdistillery as
defined herein and licensed by the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety
for a temporary license for the on-sale of distilled spirits manufactured by
the microdistillery, provided the on-sale is in connection with a social
event within the city sponsored by the licensee.  The temporary license
herein may not be for more than four consecutive days, and may authorize
on-sales on premises other than premises the licensee owns or permanently
occupies.  A license issued to a club or charitable, religious or non-profit
organization may provide that the licensee may contract for liquor catering
services with the holder of a full-year on-sale liquor license issued by a
municipality.  The licenses are subject to the terms, including the license
fee, normally imposed by the city.  The licenses issued under this Section
are subject to all laws and ordinances governing the sale of alcoholic
beverages, including furnishing a form of proof of financial responsibility
as provided in § 111.28(C).  Temporary licenses must first be approved by
the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety before they become valid.



(‘81 Code, § 3-56)  (Ord. 458, passed 9-21-89; Am. Ord. 999, passed
10-22-15)



§ 111.39  BREWPUB LICENSE AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person or entity, directly or
indirectly, to operate a brewpub without the appropriate license issued by
the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety in accordance with M.S. Chapter
340A, or to sell, barter, keep for sale or otherwise dispose of malt liquor
on or from the premises on which the malt liquor is manufactured or brewed
without an on-sale intoxicating liquor license or an off-sale license
therefor from the city as provided herein.  A brewer who holds a brewer
license issued by the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety for the
operation of a brewpub shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter,
all other applicable provisions of the City Code, and other state and local
laws relating to the operation of the licensee’s business.



   (B)   A licensed brewpub shall be subject to the following
regulations:



      (1)   The brewpub shall be operated in and as a part of a
restaurant establishment for which an on-sale intoxicating liquor license may
be, and has been, issued.



      (2)    An off-sale license may be issued solely for the malt
liquor produced and packaged on the licensed premises and only upon approval
of the license by the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety.  An off-sale
license issued hereunder shall be subject to the payment of an annual
off-sale malt liquor license fee as duly adopted and set forth in Chapter 35,
Appendix Fee Schedule.



      (3)   The off-sale of malt liquor from the licensed premises
shall be limited to the legal hours for off-sale intoxicating liquor and
shall be removed from the premises before the off-sale closing time
requirements.  Off-sale of malt liquor on Sundays between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m. may occur provided the licensee has a valid Sunday sale
permit from the city and only 64-ounce containers, commonly known as
“growlers”, of malt liquor that was manufactured and brewed on the
licensed premises may be sold.  Malt liquor sold off-sale shall be packaged
as required by state law set forth in M.S. Ch. 340A.



      (4)   Only malt liquor may be brewed or manufactured at the
licensed premises and no more than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year may
be brewed or manufactured at the licensed premises.



      (5)   The entire production of malt liquor is solely for
consumption on tap on the licensed premises or for off-sale for personal
consumption from the licensed premises.  No wholesale sale or sale for
re-sale of the malt liquor shall be conducted.



      (6)   The malt liquor manufactured or brewed on the licensed
premises and sold off-sale shall be packaged in 64-ounce containers, commonly
known as “growlers”, or 750 milliliter bottles with a twist-type closure,
cork, stopper, or plug as required by M.S. Chapter 340A.



      (7)   At the time of the sale, a paper or plastic adhesive
band, strip, or sleeve shall be applied to the container and extend over the
top of the twist-type closure, cork, stopper, or plug forming a seal that
must be broken upon opening of the container.



      (8)   The container shall be identified as malt liquor,
contain the name of the malt liquor, bear the name and address of the brewer
selling the malt liquor, and shall be considered intoxicating liquors unless
the alcohol content is labeled as otherwise in accordance with the provisions
of Minnesota Rules.



      (9)   The brewpub’s total retail sales at on- and off-sale
may not exceed 3,500 barrels per calendar year, provided that off-sales may
not total more than 500 barrels.  Commencing with a license renewal
immediately following the first year which the license was initially issued,
the licensee shall submit to the City Clerk a certified statement declaring
the number of barrels of malt liquor produced and sold off-sale for the most
recent preceding 12-month period beginning September 1 the preceding year and
ending August 31 of the current license year.



      (10)   A brewer operating a brewpub may hold or have an
interest in other retail on-sale licenses, but may not have an ownership
interest in whole or in part, or be an officer, director, agent or employee
of, any other manufacturer, brewer, importer, or wholesaler or be an
affiliate thereof, whether the affiliation is corporate or by management,
direction or control.  Notwithstanding this prohibition, a brewer licensed
under this provision may be an affiliate or subsidiary company of a brewer
licensed in Minnesota or elsewhere if that brewer’s only manufacture of
malt liquor is:



         (a)   As a brewpub as defined herein and limited to the
regulations of a brewpub by this chapter;



         (b)   Manufactured in another state for consumption
exclusively in a restaurant located in the place of manufacture or brewing; or



         (c)   Manufactured in another state for consumption
primarily in a restaurant located in or immediately adjacent to the place of
manufacture, if the brewer was licensed subject to the regulations herein on
January 1, 1995.



      (11)   A brewpub holding an on-sale intoxicating liquor
license shall be subject to all of the provisions and regulations for such
license.  A brewpub holding an off-sale license for the sale of malt liquor
brewed on the premises shall be subject to all of the provisions and
regulations for off-sale licenses set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 999, passed 10-22-15)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.40  BREWER TAPROOM ON-SALE LICENSE.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person or entity, directly or
indirectly, to operate a brewer taproom or to sell, barter, keep for sale or
otherwise dispose of malt liquor on or from the premises on which the malt
liquor is manufactured or brewed without an on-sale brewer taproom license or
an off-sale malt liquor license from the city.  This section does not apply
to the disposal of home brewed or manufactured of malt liquor which is
defined as brewed malt liquor in quantities of ten gallons or less. 



   (B)   An on-sale brewer taproom license may be issued only to a
brewer who holds a brewer license issued by the Minnesota Commissioner of
Public Safety under M.S. § 340A.301, subdivision 6, clause (c), (i) or
(j).  An on-sale brewer taproom license shall be subject to the following
requirements:



      (1)   Only malt liquor produced by the brewer on the licensed
premises may be sold or consumed on the licensed premises.



      (2)   The financial responsibilities required under this
chapter for on-sale intoxicating licenses shall apply to an on-sale brewer
taproom license issued under this section.



      (3)   All provisions of this chapter that apply to an on-sale
intoxicating liquor license shall apply to an on-sale brewer taproom license
issued under this section, unless the provision is explicitly inconsistent
with this section.



      (4)   An on-sale brewer taproom licensee may only have one
brewer taproom license under this section.



      (5)   An on-sale brewer taproom licensee may not have an
ownership interest in a brewpub brewery licensed under M.S. § 340A.301,
subdivision 6, clause (d).



      (6)   No on-sale brewer taproom license shall be issued to a
brewer if the brewer seeking the



license, or any person having an economic interest in the brewer seeking the
license or exercising control over the brewer seeking the license, is a
brewer that brews more than 250,000 barrels of malt liquor annually or a
winery that produces more than 250,000 gallons of wine annually.



      (7)   The license hereunder shall be subject to the payment of
an annual on-sale brewer taproom license fee as duly adopted and set forth in
Chapter 35, Appendix Fee Schedule.



      (8)   The license hereunder shall be subject to all the
provisions under M.S. Chapter 340A (2014 and as may be hereafter amended) as
applicable to brewer taproom licenses.



(Ord. 999, passed 10-22-15)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.41  BREWER OFF-SALE MALT LIQUOR LICENSE.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person or entity to sell, barter, keep
for sale or otherwise dispose of malt liquor, directly or indirectly, on or
from the premises on which the malt liquor is manufactured or brewed for
off-site consumption without an off-sale malt liquor license from the city. 
This section does not apply to the disposal of home brewed or manufactured of
malt liquor which is defined as brewed malt liquor in quantities of ten
gallons or less. 



   (B)   An off-sale malt liquor license may be issued only to a brewer
who holds a brewer license issued by the Minnesota Commissioner of Public
Safety under M.S. § 340A.301, subdivision 6, clause (c), (i) or (j).  An
off-sale malt liquor license shall be subject to the following requirements:



      (1)   An off-sale malt liquor license shall be issued
exclusively for the premises on which the malt liquor is brewed and packaged.



      (2)   Only malt liquor brewed and packaged by the brewer on
the licensed premises may be sold from the licensed premises.



      (3)   The off-sale malt liquor license issued by the city must
be approved by the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety to be valid and
effective.



      (4)   The amount of malt liquor sold at off-sale may not
exceed 500 barrels annually. Commencing with a license renewal immediately
following the year in which the license was initially issued, the licensee
shall submit to the City Clerk a certified statement declaring the number of
barrels of malt liquor sold off-sale for the most recent preceding 12-month
period beginning September 1 the preceding year and ending August 31 of the
current license year.



      (5)   The off-sale of malt liquor from the licensed premises
shall be limited to the legal hours for off-sale intoxicating liquor and
shall be removed from the premises before the off-sale closing time
requirements.  Off-sale of malt liquor on Sundays between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m. may occur provided the licensee has a valid Sunday sale
permit from the city.



      (6)   The malt liquor sold off-sale under the off-sale malt
liquor license shall be packed in 64-ounce containers, commonly known as
“growlers”, or in 750 milliliter bottles, except only “growlers” may
be sold off-sale on Sundays provided a Sunday sale permit has been issued. 
The containers or bottles shall bear a twist-type closure, cork, stopper, or
plug.  At the time of the sale, a paper or plastic adhesive band, strip, or
sleeve shall be applied to the container or bottle and extended over the top
of the twist-type closure, cork, stopper, or plug forming a seal that must be
broken upon opening of the container or bottle.  The adhesive band, strip,
or sleeve shall bear the name and address of the brewer.  The containers or
bottles shall be identified as malt liquor, contain the name of the malt
liquor, bear the name and address of the brewer selling the malt liquor, and
shall be considered intoxicating liquor unless the alcoholic content is
labeled as otherwise in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Rules,
part 7515.1100.



      (7)   A brewer may only have one license under this section.



      (8)   No off-sale malt liquor license may be issued to a
brewer if the brewer seeking the license, or any person having an economic
interest in the brewer seeking the license or exercising control over the
brewer seeking the license, is a brewer that brews more than 20,000 barrels
of its own brands of malt liquor annually or a winery that produces more than
250,000 gallons of wine annually.



      (9)   The license hereunder is subject to the payment of an
annual off-sale malt liquor license fee as duly adopted and set forth in
Chapter 35, Appendix Fee Schedule.



      (10)   The license hereunder shall be subject to all the
provisions under M.S. Chapter 340A (2015 and as may be hereafter amended) as
applicable to brewer off-sale malt liquor licenses.



(Ord. 999, passed 10-22-15)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.42  MICRODISTILLERY AND COCKTAIL ROOM.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person or entity, directly or
indirectly, to sell, barter, keep for sale or otherwise dispose of distilled
spirits on or from the premises on which the distilled spirits are
manufactured or produced without a microdistillery license from the Minnesota
Commissioner of Public Safety and a license issued by the city as provided
herein.



   (B)   Samples. A microdistillery with a valid license from the
Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety may provide to the public samples of
distilled spirits manufactured on its premises in an amount not exceeding 15
milliliters per variety per person or 45 milliliters per person per day.



   (C)   On-sale cocktail room.  An on-sale cocktail room license may
be issued only to a distiller who holds a microdistillery license issued by
the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety under M.S. Chapter 340A.  An
on-sale cocktail room license shall be subject to the following requirements:



      (1)   Only distilled spirits produced by the distiller on the
licensed premises may be sold or consumed on the licensed premises.



      (2)   The financial responsibilities required under this
chapter for on-sale intoxicating licenses shall apply to an on-sale cocktail
room license issued under this section.



      (3)   All provisions of this chapter that apply to on-sale
intoxicating liquor licenses shall apply to an on-sale cocktail room license
issued under this section, unless the provision is explicitly inconsistent
with this section.



      (4)   An on-sale cocktail room licensee may only have one
on-sale cocktail room license under this section.



      (5)   An on-sale cocktail room licensee may not have an
ownership interest in a distillery licensed under M.S. §340A.301,
subdivision 6, paragraph (a).



      (6)   No on-sale cocktail room license shall be issued to a
distiller if the distiller seeking the license, or any person having an
economic interest in the distiller seeking the license or exercising control
over the distiller seeking the license, is a distiller that produces more
than 40,000 proof gallons of distilled spirits in a calendar year.



      (7)   No single entity may hold both an on-sale cocktail room
and on-sale brewer taproom license, and a cocktail room and brewer taproom
shall not be co-located.



      (8)   The license hereunder shall be subject to the payment of
an annual on-sale microdistillery cocktail room license application and
license fees as duly adopted and set forth in Chapter 35, Appendix Fee
Schedule.



   (D)   Off-sale distilled spirits.  An off-sale distilled spirits
license may be granted to a microdistillery, subject to the limitations of
this chapter and the additional limitations as follows:



      (1)   The microdistillery may sell for off-sale only one (1)
375 milliliter bottle of distilled spirits per customer per day of product
manufactured on-site;



      (2)   The off-sale of distilled spirits from the licensed
premises shall be limited to the legal hours for off-sale intoxicating liquor
and shall be removed from the premises before the off-sale closing time
requirements and no off-sale sales shall occur on Sundays; and



      (3)   No brand may be sold at the microdistillery unless it is
also available for distribution by wholesalers.



      (4)   The license hereunder shall be subject to the payment of
an annual on-sale microdistillery cocktail room license fee as duly adopted
and set forth in Chapter 35, Appendix Fee Schedule.



      (5)   The license hereunder shall be subject to all the
provisions under M.S. Chapter 340A (2015 and as may be hereafter amended) as
applicable to microdistillery cocktail room licenses.



(Ord. 999, passed 10-22-15)  Penalty, see § 111.99



CONSUMPTION AND DISPLAY OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR



§ 111.50  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.



   The regulatory provisions of M.S. § 340A. 414, are hereby incorporated
and made a part of this subchapter as completely as if set out here in full.



(‘81 Code, § 3-113)  (Ord. 257, passed 8-13-81; Am. Ord. 295, passed
5-12-83; Am. Ord. 624, passed 1-23-97)



§ 111.51  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any private club or public place directly,
indirectly or upon any pretense or by any device to allow the consumption or
display of intoxicating liquor, or the serving of any liquid for the purpose
of mixing with intoxicating liquor without securing a permit from the
Commissioner of Public Safety after receiving the approval of the Council and
paying the fee specified in § 111.52(B).



(‘81 Code, § 3-110)  (Ord. 257, passed 8-13-81)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.52  APPLICATION; FEES.



   (A)   State permit required.



      (1)   The application for a state permit to allow consumption
and display of intoxicating liquor shall be in the form prescribed by the
Commissioner of Public Safety.



      (2)   Each application shall be submitted to the Council for
approval and shall be accompanied by a receipt from the Treasurer for payment
of the fee specified in the appendix to Chapter 35 before a permit may be
issued by the state.



(‘81 Code, § 3-111)



   (B)   Permit fees.



      (1)   Every private club, as defined in M.S. Chapter 340A, as
amended, desiring to allow the consumption or display of intoxicating liquor
shall on or before March 1 of each year pay to the City Treasurer a fee as
specified in the appendix to Chapter 35 and shall be issued a written receipt.



      (2)   Every public place, not meeting the definition of a
private club, desiring to allow the consumption or display of intoxicating
liquor shall on or before March 1 of each year pay to the City Treasurer a
fee as specified in the appendix to Chapter 35 and shall be issued a written
receipt.



      (3)   If a portion of the year has elapsed when payment is
made, the fee shall be prorated on a quarterly basis; but no pro rata fee
shall be accepted from any private club or public place which has violated §
111.51.



(‘81 Code, § 3-112) 



(Ord. 257, passed 8-13-81; Am. Ord. 317, passed 4-12-84; Am. Ord. 624, passed
1-23-97)



§ 111.53  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   Definition.  "Restricted hours of operation," as used herein,
shall mean the times when no consumption or display of intoxicating liquor or
the serving of any liquid for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquor
shall be permitted or made.



   (B)   Restricted hours of operation.  Restriction shall be as
follows:



      (1)   Monday through Saturday.  No sales between 12:45 a.m.
and 8:00 a.m.  No sales between 1:45 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. for establishments
holding an optional State 2:00 A.M. Closing License.



      (2)   Sunday.  No sales between 12:45 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
No sales between 1:45 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. for establishments holding an
optional State 2:00 a.m. Closing License.



      (3)   Consumption.  No person shall consume nor shall any
licensee permit any consumption of intoxicating liquor in the licensed
premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.



      (4)   Removal of containers.  No licensee shall permit any
glass, bottle or other container, containing intoxicating liquor in any
quantity to remain upon any table, bar, stool or other place where customers
are served, more than 30 minutes after the times specified in this section.



      (5)   Closing.



         (a)   Employee and sale restrictions.



            1.   No person, other than a licensee's bona fide
employees actually engaged in the performance of their duties shall be in the
licensed premises more than 35 minutes after the times specified in this
section.  The licensee's employees shall not be in the licensed premises
more than 75 minutes after the times specified in this section, unless prior
notification has been given to the Apple Valley Police Department nor permit
any non-employee to be in the licensed premises more than 35 minutes after
the time when a sale can legally occur.  No person shall be in the licensed
premises until 4:00 a.m., next following closing.



            2.   This provision shall not apply to any
separate part of the premises which are open to the general public for
business purposes unrelated to the consumption and display of intoxicating
liquor.



         (b)   Exception.



            1.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection
(a) above, the licensee or any employee, servant or agent thereof, may, be
present in the licensed premises during the time period in which persons are
not permitted pursuant to subsection (a) above for bona fide maintenance or
cleaning of or remodeling projects within the licensed premises.



            2.   Any violation of any condition of this
section may be grounds for revocation or suspension of the permit.  Any
person within the licensed premises at the time of the violation shall
immediately leave the premises upon order by a police officer.



(‘81 Code, § 3-114)  (Ord. 295, passed 5-12-83; Am. Ord. 326, passed
8-9-84; Am. Ord. 624, passed 1-23-97; Am. Ord. 735, passed 9-25-03; Am. Ord.
872, passed 12-10-09)



§ 111.54  EXEMPTIONS.



   This subchapter does not apply to any premises licensed for the sale of
intoxicating liquor.



(‘81 Code, § 3-115)  (Ord. 295, passed 5-12-83)



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty has been prescribed shall be subject to the fine in §
10.99.



   (B)   In addition to division (A), any employee of the municipal
liquor store willfully violating any provision hereof or any provision of the
laws of the state relating to gambling or the sale of intoxicating liquor or
beer shall be discharged. 



(‘81 Code, § 3-22)  (Ord. 76, passed 5-27-70)



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning the prosecution of violators, see M.S.§
340.38



CHAPTER 112:  AMUSEMENTS



Section



Coin-Operated Devices



   112.01   Purpose



   112.02   Definitions



   112.03   License required; exclusions and procedure



   112.04   Issuance and display



   112.05   License transfer prohibited



   112.06   Inspection



Bingo



   112.20   Licensing and control



Gambling Establishments



   112.30   Purpose



   112.31   Definitions



   112.32   Lawful gambling



   112.33   Regulations and licensing



   112.34   City approval required



   112.35   Investigation fee



   112.36   State exemptions; city review required



   112.99   Penalty



COIN-OPERATED DEVICES



§ 112.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to license and regulate coin-operated
amusement and children’s amusement devices pursuant to M.S. § 412.221,
subd. 25.



(‘81 Code, § 8-1)  (Ord. 343, passed 5-23-85)



§ 112.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AMUSEMENT DEVICE.  Any machine or electronic contrivance which, upon
insertion of a coin, token or slug, operates or may be operated or used for a
game, contest or amusement of any description and which contains no pay-off
in money, coins, checks or merchandise other than a free game(s) at the same
machine.  AMUSEMENT DEVICE includes pinball machines, miniature pool tables,
bowling machines, shuffleboard, electric rifle or gun games, miniature
mechanical or electrical games patterned after baseball, football,
basketball, hockey, soccer or similar games, electric word and test games and
electric video games of sports, words or aptitude used solely for amusement
and not as gambling devices.  This term does not include juke boxes, food
vending machines or children’s amusement devices.



   CHILDREN’S AMUSEMENT DEVICE.  Any device designed for and used
exclusively as a ride by children including, but not limited to, any kiddie
car, miniature airplane ride, mechanical horse and other miniature mechanical
devices not operated as a part of or in connection with any carnival, circus
show or other entertainment or exhibition.



(‘81 Code, § 8-2)  (Ord. 343, passed 5-23-85)



§ 112.03  LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCLUSIONS AND PROCEDURE.



   (A)   License required.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
maintain, keep, offer or furnish for use any amusement device or children’s
amusement device in the city without first having obtained a license from the
City Clerk in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter, except those
specifically excluded by division (B).



(‘81 Code, § 8-3)



   (B)   Exclusions.



      (1)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to require
licensing of coin-operated music boxes, more commonly known as “juke
boxes.”



      (2)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to require
licensing of any device owned by an individual as a collector’s item for
his or her private amusement within the confines of his or her residence.



(‘81 Code, § 8-4)



   (C)   Procedures for obtaining license.



      (1)   Application.  Application shall be made to the City
Clerk on a form prescribed by the city on which shall be listed the
applicant’s name and address; the name and address of the owner of the
machine or device; the proposed location of each machine or device, and other
information as requested by the city.  It shall be unlawful to make a false
representation on the application.  Any change in ownership or location
shall require a new license.



      (2)   Fee.  The annual license fees for coin- operated
devices shall be as specified in § 35.27 and shall be paid at the time
application for a license is submitted.



      (3)   Insurance.  If the device to be licensed is a
“children’s amusement device,” the applicant shall also submit with its
application proof of a public liability insurance policy covering operation
of the device for the sum of at least $300,000 combined single limit
coverage.  The policy shall provide that it may not be cancelled by the
insurer, except after ten days’ written notice to the city, and if the
insurance is so cancelled and the licensee fails to replace the same with
another policy conforming to the provisions of this section, the license
shall automatically be suspended until the insurance shall have been replaced.



      (4)   Term.  Licenses shall cover an annual period from
January 1 through December 31 for each year except:



         (a)   The initial license fee for each applicant shall
be prorated on a quarterly basis if a portion of the license year has elapsed
when the application is made for devices classified as “amusement device;”



         (b)   The license fee for devices classified as
“amusement device” which will be located in a seasonal recreation
facility may be prorated on a monthly basis and issued for a specified term;



         (c)   The license fee for devices classified as
“children’s amusement device” shall not be prorated; and



         (d)   No fee for any license shall be refunded once the
license has been issued.



(‘81 Code, § 8-5)



(Ord. 343, passed 5-23-85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.04  ISSUANCE AND DISPLAY.



   (A)   Upon finding that applicant has provided all of the required
information and complies with all applicable ordinances and other laws, the
license shall be issued by the City Clerk.  The license thereafter may be
renewed by the payment by the applicant of the annual license fee for the
ensuing year for each device. 



(‘81 Code, § 8-6)



   (B)   The license shall be displayed prominently on the premises on
which the device is located. 



(‘81 Code, § 8-7)



(Ord. 343, passed 5-23-85)



§ 112.05  LICENSE TRANSFER PROHIBITED.



   Licenses are issued for one location only and the licenses are not
transferable between locations.  The license may be transferred from one
machine or device to another similar device if the licensed device is
replaced with a newly acquired device.



(‘81 Code, § 8-8)  (Ord. 343, passed 5-23-85)



§ 112.06  INSPECTION.



   The city shall have the authority to investigate the location wherein
it is proposed to operate any device and may ascertain whether the applicant
and location comply with this subchapter, all applicable ordinances and other
laws.  Every licensee shall allow any peace officer or properly designated
officer or employee of the city to enter, inspect and search the premises of
the licensee during business hours without a warrant.



(‘81 Code, § 8-9)  (Ord. 343, passed 5-23-85)



BINGO



§ 112.20  LICENSING AND CONTROL.



   Licensing and control of the game of bingo are regulated by the
provisions of M.S. §§ 349.11 through 349.22, effective March 1, 1985.



(‘81 Code, § 14-30)  (Ord. 338, passed 3-14-85)



GAMBLING ESTABLISHMENTS



§ 112.30  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to closely regulate and control the
conduct of gambling activities within the city, to ensure that the proceeds
are used primarily for the betterment of the community and to prohibit the
commercialization of these activities.



(‘81 Code, § 14-50)  (Ord. 397, passed 8-13-87)



§ 112.31  DEFINITIONS.



   The terms used herein shall have the meanings set forth in M.S. §§
349.11 through 349.22 and in the rules adopted pursuant to the authority
contained in the statutes.



(‘81 Code, § 14-51)  (Ord. 397, passed 8-13-87)



§ 112.32  LAWFUL GAMBLING.



   There shall be no gambling in the city, except in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter and the provisions of M.S. §§ 349.11 through
349.22 and rules adopted pursuant thereto.



(‘81 Code, § 14-52)  (Ord. 397, passed 8-13-87)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.33  REGULATIONS AND LICENSING.



   In addition to the requirements of M.S. §§ 349.11 through 349.22 and
rules adopted pursuant thereto, the following regulations must be complied
with for licensing:



   (A)   Lawful gambling may be conducted only by a qualified Apple
Valley area non-profit organization licensed by the charitable gambling
control board;



   (B)   To establish that an organization is qualified, the
organization must provide adequate proof that it has at least 15 active
members and that at least 15 of the active members live within the city;



   (C)   A qualified organization may conduct gambling activities only
on the licensed premises or adjoining rooms of on-sale liquor or 3.2% malt
liquor establishments, except that bingo events and raffles may be held
anywhere within the city.  The City Council may authorize organizations to
conduct lawful gambling activities at various locations, for a limited
period, in connection with an annual civic celebration;



   (D)   Gambling activities are permitted only during the hours of
operation permitted to the licensed on-sale establishment;



   (E)   All information and reports required to be submitted to the
Minnesota Charitable Gambling Control Board shall also be submitted to the
city, both with the application and on an annual basis; and



   (F)   Upon receipt of a new or renewal gambling license from the
state, and before conducting any gambling activities, organization shall
provide a copy of the license to the City Clerk.



(‘81 Code, § 14-53)  (Ord. 397, passed 8-13-87; Am. Ord. 459, passed
9-21-89; Am. Ord. 631, passed 8-21-97)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.34  CITY APPROVAL REQUIRED.



   Nothing herein shall be deemed to be an automatic approval of a license
applied for with the Charitable Gambling Control Board.  The city reserves
the right to disapprove licenses.



(‘81 Code, § 14-54)  (Ord. 397, passed 8-13-87)



§ 112.35  INVESTIGATION FEE.



   Upon submitting an application for issuance or renewal of a license,
the organization shall pay an investigation fee to the city.  The amount of
the investigation fee shall be as specified in the appendix to Chapter 35. 
Failure to promptly pay the required investigation fee shall be grounds for
disapproval of a license.



(‘81 Code, § 14-55)  (Ord. 397, passed 8-13-87)



§ 112.36  STATE EXEMPTIONS; CITY REVIEW REQUIRED.



   No organization may conduct a gambling event which would otherwise be
allowed, pursuant to the exemptions set forth in M.S. § 349.214, without
first submitting an application for exemption to the city. Nothing herein
shall be deemed to be an automatic approval of an exemption applied for with
the Charitable Gambling Control Board.  The city reserves the right to
disapprove the activity.



(‘81 Code, § 14-56)  (Ord. 397, passed 8-13-87)



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is provided shall be subject to the fine in § 10.99.



   (B)   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a
misdemeanor.



   (C)   A license shall be revoked upon conviction of any violation of
this chapter.



(‘81 Code, § 8-10)  (Ord. 343, passed 5-23-85)



CHAPTER 113:  LODGING; OPERATION TAXES



Section



   113.01   Purpose; definitions



   113.02   Imposition of tax



   113.03   Payment and returns



   113.04   Examination of returns, demands and the like



   113.05   Refunds



   113.06   Failure to file a return or remit payment



   113.07   Extension for filing or payment



   113.08   Use of proceeds



   113.09   Appeals



   113.10   Violations and interest



§ 113.01  PURPOSE; DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Purpose.  In order to fund a local convention or tourism
bureau for the purpose of marketing and promoting the city as a tourist or
convention center it is in the best interest of the city to impose a local
lodging tax in accordance with Minnesota Statutes.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   LODGING.  The furnishing, for consideration, of accommodations at a
hotel, motel, rooming house, tourist court or resort; other than the renting
or leasing of it for a continuous period of 30 days or more.



   OPERATOR.  Any person, corporation, partnership or association who
provides lodging to others.



(‘81 Code, § 9-20)  (Ord. 618, passed 6-27-96)



§ 113.02  IMPOSITION OF TAX.



   All operators shall impose and collect a tax of 3% on the gross
receipts from the furnishing of lodging at the time the lodging fee is
paid.  The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the lodging
charges.  The lodging operator shall hold in trust for the city all taxes
collected hereunder.



(‘81 Code, § 9-21)  (Ord. 618, passed 6-27-96)



§ 113.03  PAYMENT AND RETURNS.



   (A)   The operator shall remit to the city all taxes collected
hereunder not later than 45 days after the end of the month in which the
taxes were collected.  At the time the taxes are remitted to the city, the
operator shall file a tax return, on a form furnished by the city, containing
the following information and other information as the city may require:



      (1)   The gross receipts from furnishing lodging during the
period covered by the return;



      (2)   The amount of tax imposed and collected as required
hereunder for the return period;



      (3)   The signature of the person filing the return or that of
his or her agent duly authorized in writing;



      (4)   The period covered by the return; and



      (5)   The amount of uncollectible lodging receipts subject to
the lodging tax.



   (B)   The operator may offset, against the taxes payable and due
with respect to any reporting period, the amount of taxes imposed previously
paid hereunder, as a result of any transaction, the consideration for which
became uncollectible during the reporting period; but only in proportion to
the portion of consideration which became uncollectible.



(‘81 Code, § 9-22)  (Ord. 618, passed 6-27-96; Am. Ord. 922, passed
7-28-11)



§ 113.04  EXAMINATION OF RETURNS, DEMANDS AND THE LIKE.



   After a return is filed, the city shall examine it and may make any
investigation or examination of the records and accounts of the operator
making the return as deemed necessary for determining its correctness.  The
operator shall provide to the city, for inspection and examination, its
records and accounts within 15 days of the city’s request.  If after any
investigation or examination hereunder, it is determined that the tax due is
greater than that paid, the excess shall be paid to the city within ten days
after receipt of a notice thereof given either personally or sent by
certified mail to the address shown on the return.  If the tax paid is
greater than the tax found to be due, the excess shall be refunded to the
person who paid the tax to the city within ten days after determination of
the refund.  Whenever any tax due has a 10% or more discrepancy, the
operator shall reimburse the city for any costs incurred by the city in
reviewing the operator’s return.



(‘81 Code, § 9-23)  (Ord. 618, passed 6-27-96)



§ 113.05  REFUNDS.



   Any operator may apply to the city for a refund of taxes paid in excess
of the amount legally due for that period, provided that no application for
refund shall be considered unless filed within one year after the tax was
paid, or within one year from the filing of the return, whichever period is
the longer.  The city may deny or allow the claim, in whole or in part, and
shall issue and file written findings of the decision.  The city shall
notify the operator, at the address stated upon the refund claim application,
by registered mail of its decision on the claim.  If the claim is allowed,
in whole or in part, the city shall credit the amount of the refund against
any taxes due and owing hereunder by the operator.  Any balance of the
refund shall be promptly paid by the city to the operator.



(‘81 Code, § 9-24)  (Ord. 618, passed 6-27-96)



§ 113.06  FAILURE TO FILE A RETURN OR REMIT PAYMENT.



   (A)   Any operator, who fails to file a return, as required
hereunder, or files an incorrect, false, or fraudulent return shall, upon
written notice and demand by the city, file the return or corrected return,
together with any tax due, within 30 days of receipt of the written notice. 
Whenever any person fails to file the appropriate return, under this
provision, and the tax due, after the notice and demand, the city may
determine the appropriate tax from the knowledge and information as the city
is able to obtain and assess the tax accordingly.  Any tax determined to be
due and owing under this provision shall be paid by the operator within five
days of the receipt of written notice and demand for the payment.  Any
assessment made by the city hereunder shall be prima facie correct and valid,
and the operator shall have the burden of establishing the incorrectness or
invalidity of the assessment in any action or proceeding in respect thereto. 



(‘81 Code, § 9-25)



   (B)   If any portion of a tax required hereunder, including
penalties thereon, is not paid within 30 days after it is required to be
paid, the city may certify the tax as a lien against the real property on
which the lodging establishment is located and the city attorney may
institute the legal action as may be necessary to recover the amount due,
plus any interest, penalties, costs, disbursements and all attorney fees, as
a result of the action. 



(‘81 Code, § 9-26) 



(Ord. 618, passed 6-27-96)



§ 113.07  EXTENSION FOR FILING OR PAYMENT.



   Upon a showing of good cause, the city may grant an operator a 30-day
extension period within which to file a return or make payment of taxes as
required under this chapter, provided that interest shall accrue during the
extension period at the rate of 8% per annum.



(‘81 Code, § 9-27)  (Ord. 618, passed 6-27-96)



§ 113.08  USE OF PROCEEDS.



   Ninety-five percent of the gross proceeds from the collection of taxes
pursuant to this section shall be used to fund a local convention or tourism
bureau for the purpose of marketing and promoting the city as a tourist or
convention center.



(‘81 Code, § 9-30)  (Ord. 618, passed 6-27-96)



§ 113.09  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any operator who is aggrieved by any notice, order or
determination made by the city under this chapter, may file a petition for
administrative review of the notice, order or determination detailing the
operator’s reasons for contesting the order, notice or determination. 



   (B)   The petition shall contain the name of the operator, the
operator’s address and the location of the lodging establishment subject to
the order, notice or determination.  The petition for review shall be filed
with the City Clerk within 30 days after the notice, order or determination
has been served upon the operator.  Upon receipt of the petition, the City
Administrator, or the Administrator’s designees, shall set a date for a
hearing and give the operator at least 14 days prior written notice of the
date, time and place of the hearing.



   (C)   At the hearing, the operator has the burden to prove that the
notice, order or determination is in error.  The operator may be represented
by counsel of operator’s choosing at operator’s own expense. The hearing
shall be conducted by the City Administrator or Administrator’s designee,
provided only that person conducting the hearing shall not have participated
in the drafting of the notice, order or determination for which review is
sought.  The notice, order or determination made by the city, may be
affirmed, reversed or modified.  Any decision rendered by the City
Administrator, pursuant to this section, shall be supported by written
findings of fact and conclusions based upon the applicable sections of this
chapter and have the evidence presented. 



   (D)   The operator shall have the right to appeal to the City
Council, upon filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within
ten days after the Administrator’s decision has been served upon the
operator.  The matter will thereupon be placed on the Council agenda, as
soon as is practical, and the operator shall be given 14 days notice of
Council hearing.  The Council’s standard of review of the
Administrator’s decision shall be on the record and the operator shall have
the burden to prove the city’s notice, order or determination is in
error.  The Council may modify, reverse or affirm the decision of the City
Administrator.



(‘81 Code, § 9-31)  (Ord. 618, passed 6-27-96)



§ 113.10  VIOLATIONS AND INTEREST.



   (A)   Interest.



      (1)   If any tax required under this chapter is not paid
within the time herein specified or within the approved extension period
thereof, the operator shall pay a penalty equal to 10% of the amount unpaid,
in addition to the tax due and owing.



      (2)   Any tax, required under this chapter, not paid within
the 45 days after the end of the month in which the taxes were collected,
together with any penalty provided herein, shall bear interest at the rate of
8% per annum to begin accrual at the time the tax was required to be paid. 
Any interest and penalty shall be added to the tax and be collected as part
thereof.



(‘81 Code, § 9-28)



   (B)   Violations.  It shall be unlawful for any operator to fail to
comply with any provision of this chapter, or make any false, or fraudulent
return.



(‘81 Code, § 9-29)



(Ord. 618, passed 6-27-96; Am. Ord. 922, passed 7-28-11)  Penalty, see §
10.99



CHAPTER 114:  PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



Section



General Provisions



   114.01   Definitions



   114.02   Exceptions to definitions



   114.03   Licensing; exemptions



   114.04   License ineligibility



   114.05   License/registration suspension and revocation



   114.06   License transferability



   114.07   Registration



   114.08   Prohibited activities



   114.09   Exclusion by placard



Christmas Tree Sales Lots



   114.20   Purpose and definitions



   114.21   License required; fees



   114.22   Conditions of license



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 114.01  DEFINITIONS.



   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all
terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions.  For the purpose
of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PEDDLER.  A person who goes from house-to- house, door-to-door,
business-to-business, street-to- street, or any other type of place-to-place,
for the purpose of offering for sale, displaying or exposing for sale,
selling or attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the
goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal property that the
person is carrying or otherwise transporting.  The term “peddler” shall
mean the same as the term “hawker.”



   PERSON.  Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation,
partnership or association.  As applied to groups, organizations,
corporations, partnerships and associations, the term shall include each
member, officer, partner, associate, agent or employee.



   REGULAR BUSINESS DAY.  Any day during which the City Hall is normally
open for the purpose of conducting public business.  Holidays defined by
state law shall not be counted as regular business days.



   SOLICITOR.  A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door,
business-to-business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place,
for the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares,
products, merchandise, other personal property or services of which he or she
may be carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a
catalog or by other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur
at a later time.  The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a
person from the scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the
person’s activity is to obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed
above.  The term shall mean the same as the term “canvasser.”



   TRANSIENT MERCHANT.  A person who temporarily sets up business out of
a vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter, or empty store
front for the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or
attempting to sell, and delivering, goods, wares, products, merchandise or
other personal property and who does not remain or intend to remain in any
one location for more than 14 consecutive days.



§ 114.02  EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of the requirements of this chapter, the terms
PEDDLER, SOLICITOR, and TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not apply to any person
selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods, wares, products,
merchandise or other personal property to a retailer of the items being sold
by the wholesaler.  The terms also shall not apply to any person who makes
initial contacts with other people for the purpose of establishing or trying
to establish a regular customer delivery route for the delivery of perishable
food and dairy products such as baked goods and milk, nor shall they apply to
any person making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products to the
customers on his or her established regular delivery route.



   (B)   In addition, persons conducting the type of sales commonly
known as garage sales, rummage sales or estate sales, as well as those
persons participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or flea market,
shall be exempt from the definitions of PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, and TRANSIENT
MERCHANTS, as shall be anyone conducting an auction as a properly licensed
auctioneer, or any officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale. 
Exemption from the definitions for the scope of this chapter shall not excuse
any person from complying with any other applicable statutory provision or
local ordinance.



   (C)   This chapter does not apply to the mere distribution of flyers
or other advertising material from house to house or place to place where
personal contact is not made.



§ 114.03  LICENSING; EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   County license required.  No person shall conduct business as
a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant within the city limits without
first having obtained the appropriate license from the county as required by
M.S. Chapter 329 as amended.



   (B)   City license required.  Except as otherwise provided for by
this chapter, no person shall conduct business as either a peddler or a
solicitor without first having obtained a license from the city.  Solicitors
for nonprofit organizations need not be licensed, but are still required to
register pursuant to § 114.07.



   (C)   Application.  Application for a city license to conduct
business as a peddler or solicitor shall be made before the applicant desires
to begin conducting business.  Application for a license shall be made on a
form available from the office of the City Clerk.  All applications shall be
signed by the applicant.  All applications shall include the following
information:



      (1)   Applicant’s full legal name;



      (2)   All other names under which the applicant conducts
business or to which applicant officially answers;



      (3)   A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye
color, height, weight, distinguishing marks and features, and the like);



      (4)   Full address of applicant’s permanent residence;



      (5)   Telephone number of applicant’s permanent residence;



      (6)   Full legal name of any and all business operations
owned, managed or operated by applicant, or for which the applicant is an
employee or agent;



      (7)   Full address of applicant’s regular place of business
(if any);



      (8)   Any and all business related telephone numbers of the
applicant;



      (9)   The type of business for which the applicant is applying
for a license;



      (10)   Whether the applicant is applying for an annual or
temporary license;



      (11)   The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct
business, and if the applicant is applying for a temporary license, the
number of days he or she will be conducting business in the city (maximum 14
consecutive days);



      (12)   Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the
applicant can be reached while conducting business within the city;



      (13)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been
convicted within the last five years of any felony, gross misdemeanor, or
misdemeanor for violation of any state or federal statute or any local
ordinance, other than traffic offenses;



      (14)   A list of the three most recent locations where the
applicant has conducted business as a peddler;



      (15)   Proof of any required county license;



      (16)   A general description of the items to be sold or
services to be provided;



      (17)   All additional information deemed necessary by the City
Council;



      (18)   The applicant’s driver’s license number or other
acceptable form of identification; and



      (19)   The license plate number, registration information and
vehicle identification number for any vehicle to be used in conjunction with
the licensed business and a description of the vehicle.



   (D)   Fee.  All applications for a license under this chapter shall
be accompanied by the fee established in the city’s fee schedule as adopted
from time to time by an ordinance passed by the City Council.  Solicitors
engaged in interstate commerce are exempt from payment of the fee, but are
not exempt from other licensing requirements.



   (E)   Procedure.  Upon receipt of the completed application and
payment of the license fee, the City Clerk shall forward the application to
the Chief of Police.  An application shall be determined to be complete only
if all required information is provided. If the City Clerk determines that
the application is incomplete, the City Clerk shall inform the applicant of
the required necessary information which is missing.  The Chief of Police
shall review the application and order any investigation, including
background checks, necessary to verify the information provided with the
application.



      (1)   The license may be issued by the City Clerk when the
foregoing investigation is completed or within seven business days of
application, whichever is earlier.



      (2)   The license shall be denied if it appears that the
applicant is ineligible for a license pursuant to § 114.04.



   (F)   Duration.  An annual license granted under this chapter shall
be valid until December 31 from the date of issue.  All other licenses
granted under this chapter shall be valid only during the time period
indicated on the license.



   (G)   License exemptions.



      (1)   No license shall be required for any person to sell or
attempt to sell, or to take or attempt to take orders for, any product grown,
produced, cultivated, or raised on any farm.



      (2)   No license shall be required of any person going from
house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or
other type of place-to-place when the activity is for the purpose of
exercising that person’s State or Federal Constitutional rights such as the
freedom of speech, press, religion and the like, except that this exemption
may be lost if the person’s exercise of Constitutional rights is merely
incidental to a commercial activity.



      (3)   Professional fund raisers working on behalf of an
otherwise exempt person or group shall not be exempt from the licensing
requirements of this chapter.



      (4)   Any canvassing, soliciting, or fund raising for the
purpose of charitable organizations if such organization is registered with
the attorney general pursuant to the provisions of M.S. § 309.52 as a
charitable organization or exempted pursuant to the provisions of M.S. §
309.515 provided the organization registers as required by § 114.07.



      (5)   Transient merchants operating within a building in an
area zoned for retail sales or where permitted by Chapter 155.



      (6)   Peddling, selling, or soliciting in a park as provided
by § 95.03(T).



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.04  LICENSE INELIGIBILITY.



   The following shall be grounds for denying a license under this chapter:



   (A)   The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of
having obtained any required county license;



   (B)   The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the
information requested by the city as a part of the application, or the
failure to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee at
the time of application;



   (C)   The conviction of the applicant within the past five years
from the date of application for any violation of any federal or state
statute or regulation, or of any local ordinance, which adversely reflects on
the person’s ability to conduct the business for which the license is being
sought in an honest and legal manner.  Violations shall include but not be
limited to burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business
practices, and any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another
person;



   (D)   The revocation within the past five years of any license
issued to the applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler,
solicitor or transient merchant;



   (E)   The applicant is found to have a bad business reputation. 
Evidence of a bad business reputation shall include, but not be limited to,
the existence of more than three complaints against the applicant with the
Better Business Bureau, the Attorney General’s Office, or other similar
business or consumer rights office or agency, within the preceding 12 months,
or three complaints filed against the applicant within the preceding five
years.



§ 114.05  LICENSE/REGISTRATION SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   Generally.  Any license or registration issued under this
section may be suspended or revoked at the discretion of the City Council for
violation of any of the following:



      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statements on the
application form;



      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during
the course of the licensed activity;



      (3)   Conviction of any offense for which granting of a
license or registration could have been denied under § 114.04;



      (4)   Violation of any provision of this chapter; or



      (5)   Violation of any state law, county or city regulation
committed during the course of the licensed/registered activity.



   (B)   Multiple persons under one license.  Suspension or revocation
of any license or registration issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple
persons to conduct business on behalf of the licensee/registrant shall serve
as a suspension or revocation of each authorized person's authority to
conduct business on behalf of the licensee/registrant whose
license/registration is suspended or revoked.



   (C)   Notice.  Prior to revoking or suspending any license or
registration issued under this chapter, the city shall provide the license
holder/registrant with written notice of the alleged violations and inform
the licensee/registrant of his or her right to a hearing on the alleged
violation.  Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the permanent
residential address listed on the application, or if no residential address
is listed, to the business address provided on the application.



   (D)   Public hearing.  Upon receiving the notice provided in
division (C) of this section, the licensee/registrant shall have the right to
request a public hearing.  If no request for a hearing is received by the
City Clerk within ten regular business days following the service of the
notice, the city may proceed with the suspension or revocation.  For the
purpose of mailed notices, service shall be considered complete as of the
date the notice is placed in the mail.  If a public hearing is requested
within the stated time frame, a hearing shall be scheduled within 20 days
from the date of the request.  Within three regular business days of the
hearing, the City Council shall notify the licensee/registrant of its
decision.



   (E)   Emergency.  If the licensee/registrant violates any state law
or county or city regulation in the course of conducting business under the
license/registration, the Chief of Police may immediately suspend the
license/registration. Additionally, if in the discretion of the Chief of
Police, imminent harm to the health or safety of the public may occur because
of the actions of a person licensed/registered under this chapter, the Chief
may immediately suspend the person's license. Upon the suspension under this
clause, the Police Chief shall provide to the licensee/registrant notice of
the right to a subsequent public hearing before the City Council as
prescribed in division (C) of this section.



   (F)   Appeals.  Any person whose license is suspended or revoked
under this section shall have the right to appeal that decision in court.



   (G)   Definitions.  The term VIOLATION or VIOLATES as used in this
section shall mean to have committed an act contrary to any state law or
county or city regulation, regardless if any criminal charges are filed.  A
criminal conviction in connection with or for the violating act is not
required for purposes of the term as used herein and determining whether a
violation occurred.
(Am. Ord. 870, passed 11-5-09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.06  LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY.



   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person
other than the person to whom the license was issued.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.07  REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Charitable organizations exempt from the licensing
requirements of this chapter under § 114.03, shall be required to register
with the city, but no fee shall be required.  Registration shall be made on
a form provided by the city and shall include the following information:



      (1)   Name and address of the organization;



      (2)   Name and address of the person seeking to register on
behalf of the organization;



      (3)   Names and addresses of all of the officers and no more
than four directors of the organization;



      (4)   Period during which canvassing, solicitation, or fund
raising is to be carried on, not to exceed five years;



      (5)   Purpose of the cause for which registration is sought;
and



      (6)   Evidence of registration with the Minnesota Attorney
General or exemption from registration pursuant to M.S. §§ 309.515 or
309.52.



   (B)   Upon completion of the registration form, the City Clerk shall
issue to the registrant a Certificate of Registration as proof of the
registration.  Certificates of Registration shall be non-transferable and
state the date of issuance and length of time, not to exceed five years from
the date of issuance, that the same shall be operative.



   (C)   Each time during said five-year period that a solicitation is
conducted, such organization shall furnish all of its members, agents, or
representatives who are conducting solicitations on behalf of the
organization, solicitation credentials, in writing, stating the name of the
organization, name and address of the person issuing credentials on behalf of
the organization, name of agent to whom the credentials are issued, purpose
of solicitation and period during which solicitation is to be carried on, not
to exceed the period of time during which the registration certificate issued
to the organization is operative.  The organization shall also notify the
Police Department of the period during which the solicitation is to be
carried on in the city.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.08  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall conduct business in
any of the following manners:



   (A)   Calling attention to his or her business or items to be sold
by means of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by
any other noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed
structure;



   (B)   Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian
traffic on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way;



   (C)   Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the
health, safety and welfare of any individual or the general public;



   (D)   Conducting business before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.;



   (E)   Failing to provide proof of license or registration, and
identification, when requested; or using the license or registration of
another person;



   (F)   Making any false or misleading statements about the product or
service being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement.  No peddler,
solicitor or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the
city solely based on the city having issued a license or certificate of
registration to that person;



   (G)   Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave,
or to otherwise conduct business in a manner a reasonable person would find
obscene, threatening, intimidating or abusive.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.09  EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.



   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant, unless invited to do so by
the property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another for the
purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant
when the property is marked with a sign or placard at least four inches long
and four inches wide with print of at least 48 point in size stating “No
Peddlers, Solicitors or Transient Merchants,” or “Peddlers, Solicitors,
and Transient Merchants Prohibited,” or other comparable statement.  No
person other than the property owner or tenant shall remove, deface or
otherwise tamper with any sign or placard under this section.



Penalty, see § 10.99



CHRISTMAS TREE SALES LOTS



§ 114.20  PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate and control the
operation of open sales lots for Christmas trees, within the city, to ensure
that they are safely operated in a manner which will not impede public
rights-of-way and that all debris is removed from the premises. 



(‘81 Code, § 15-20)



   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   DECORATIVE TREES or CHRISTMAS TREES.  Pines, spruce, balsam, cedar,
evergreen or coniferous trees, bushes, saplings, seedlings, shrubs, boughs or
branches, including the tops cut from any of the foregoing, intended to be
sold or used for decorative purposes.  Nursery stock shall not be included
in this definition.



   SALES LOTS.  Area, not enclosed within a building, used for temporary
display of Christmas trees for sale, for a period not to exceed 60 days,
which is not the principal use of the property.



(‘81 Code, § 15-21)  (Ord. 460, passed 9-21-89)



§ 114.21  LICENSE REQUIRED; FEES.



   (A)   No person shall operate a temporary Christmas tree sales lot
without first having received a license.  A license is not required for
commercial greenhouses, nurseries or open sales lots operating under a
previously authorized conditional use permit where the sales are conducted
within the area established by the conditional use permit.



   (B)   The fee for a license shall be as specified in the appendix to
Chapter 35 and shall be paid at the time application is made.  No license
fee will be charged if applicant is a qualified Apple Valley area non-profit
organization.



   (C)   A deposit in the amount as specified in the appendix to
Chapter 35 shall be paid at the time of application which will be refunded if
the license is not issued or upon removal and clean up of all debris.  Clean
up must be completed by the January 5 following issuance of the license.



(‘81 Code, § 15-22)  (Ord. 460, passed 9-21-89)



§ 114.22  CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.



   (A)   A minimum of eight off-street parking spaces, free of snow and
ice, shall be provided on the site.  This shall not reduce the number of
parking spaces required for other uses on the property.



   (B)   Lighting shall be provided as is necessary for security,
safety and traffic circulation.



   (C)   The lot must be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the public
right-of-way.



   (D)   Signage, exclusive of posted license requirements, shall be as
permitted by § 154.04.



   (E)   (1)   Where a license is issued to a non-profit
organization, the organization must prominently post the following
information on the licensed premises:  name of the licensed organization,
name and address of any entity jointly involved in the operation and dollar
amount or percentage amount of the sales price per tree which the
organization receives from the sale.



      (2)   The sign shall be adequately lighted, shall be legible,
shall not be less than 24 by 36 inches in size and shall be displayed at the
main entrance to the sales lot.



   (F)   The application shall include a detailed site plan of the
premises and the area proposed for the lot including temporary shelter
structures if any.



   (G)   The applicant shall represent and warrant adequate liability
insurance and shall provide proof upon request of the city.



   (H)   Licenses shall not be issued to premises on residentially
zoned property.



(‘81 Code, § 15-23)  (Ord. 460, passed 9-21-89)



CHAPTER 115:  TOBACCO REGULATIONS



Section



   115.01   Purpose



   115.02   Definitions



   115.03   License



   115.04   Application



   115.05   Issuance of license



   115.06   Duration of license



   115.07   Revocation or suspension of license



   115.08   Termination of license



   115.09   Moveable place of business



   115.10   Display of license



   115.11   Renewals



   115.12   License fees



   115.13   Unlawful sales



   115.14   Unlawful sale, purchase or possession



   115.15   Self-service sales



   115.16   Responsibility



   115.17   Compliance checks and inspections



   115.18   Exceptions and defenses



   115.19   Electronic delivery devices and nicotine and lobelia
delivery products



 



   115.99   Penalty



§ 115.01  PURPOSE.



   The city recognizes that many persons under the age of 18 years
purchase or otherwise obtain, possess and use tobacco, tobacco products, and
tobacco related devices, and such sales, possession, and use are violations
of both state and federal laws.  Thus the city intends to regulate the sale,
possession and use of tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco related devices
for the purpose of enforcing and furthering existing laws, to prevent and
protect minors against the illegal use of tobacco, tobacco products and
tobacco related devices, and to further the official public policy of the
State of Minnesota, as stated in M.S. § 144.391, in regard to preventing
minors from starting to smoke.



(Ord. 657, passed 6-10-99)



§ 115.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all
terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions.  For the purpose
of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMPLIANCE CHECKS.  The enforcement system the city uses to
investigate and ensure that those authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco
products, and tobacco related devices are following and complying with the
requirements of this chapter.  Compliance checks shall involve the use of
minors, as authorized by this chapter, whereby the authorized minor attempts
to purchase tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices for the
purpose of enforcement of this chapter, as well as educational, research and
training purposes as authorized by state and federal laws.



   ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE.  Any product, including any component part
of a product whether marketed or sold together or separately, containing or
delivering nicotine, lobelia, or any other substance intended for human
consumption that can be used by a person to simulate smoking in the delivery
of nicotine or any other substance through inhalation of vapor from the
product.  The term ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE excludes any product that has
been approved or certified by the United States Food and Drug Administration
for sale as a tobacco-cessation product, as a tobacco-dependence product, or
for other medical purposes, and is marketed and sold for such an approved
purpose.



   HEARING OFFICER.  The Community Development Director or his/her
designee.



   INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED.  The practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco
product wrapped individually for sale.  Individually wrapped tobacco and
tobacco products shall include but not be limited to single cigarette packs,
single bags or cans of loose tobacco in any form, and single cans or other
packaging of snuff or chewing tobacco.  Cartons or other packaging
containing more than a single pack or other container as described in this
definition shall not be considered individually packaged.



   LOOSIES.  The common term used to refer to a single or individually
packaged cigarette.



   MINOR.  Any person under the age of 18 years.



   MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS.  Any form of business operated by which
sales are made by U.S. mail or other courier service or online (Internet)
services or out of a truck, van, automobile or other type of vehicle or
transportable shelter and not a fixed address store front or other permanent
type of structure authorized for sales transactions.



   NICOTINE AND LOBELIA DELIVERY PRODUCT.  Any product containing or
delivering nicotine or lobelia intended for human consumption, or any part of
such a product, that is not tobacco or an electronic delivery device.



   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT.  Any place of business where tobacco, tobacco
products or tobacco related devices are available for sale to the general
public.  Retail establishments shall include, but not be limited to, grocery
stores, convenience stores, and restaurants.



   SALE or SELL.  Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter, or
other consideration.



   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING.  Open displays of tobacco, tobacco
products or tobacco related devices for sale in any manner which any person
may have access to the tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices,
without the assistance or intervention of the licensee or the licensee’s
employee.  Assistance or intervention for tobacco, tobacco product, or
tobacco related device between the customer and the licensee or employee. 
For purposes of this definition, self-service merchandising does not include
vending machines.



   TOBACCO or TOBACCO PRODUCTS.  Any substance, item, or product
containing, made or derived from tobacco that is intended for human
consumption whether chewed, smoked, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted,
sniffed or ingested by any other means or any component, part, or accessory
of a tobacco product, including but not limited to:  cigarettes; cigars;
pipe tobacco; snuff; fine cut or other chewing tobacco; cheroots; stogies;
perique; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed, and other smoking
tobacco; snuff flowers; cavendish; shorts; plug and twist tobacco; dipping
tobacco; refuse scraps; clippings, cuttings, and sweepings of tobacco; and
other kinds and forms of tobacco.  The term TOBACCO or TOBACCO PRODUCTS
excludes any tobacco product that has been approved by the United States Food
and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco
dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and
sold solely for an approved purpose.



   TOBACCO RELATED DEVICES.  Any product intentionally designed or
intended to be used in connection with chewing, sniffing, smoking or using
tobacco or tobacco products, including a pipe, rolling papers, tobacco or
tobacco product carrying case or lighter.



   VENDING MACHINE.  Any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other
type of device which dispenses tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related
devices upon the insertion of money, tokens or other form of payment directly
into the device by the person seeking to purchase or otherwise obtain the
tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco related device.



(Ord. 657, passed 6-10-99; Am. Ord. 903, passed 9-23-10; Am. Ord. 974, passed
7-10-14)



§ 115.03  LICENSE.



   No person shall sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco related device without first having obtained a license therefor from
the city.



(‘81 Code, § 14-9)  (Ord. 657, passed 6-10-99)



§ 115.04  APPLICATION.



   An application for a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco related devices hereunder shall be made on a form provided by the
city.  The application shall contain the full name, address, and telephone
number of the applicant; the name of the business at the proposed licensed
premises and its address and telephone number; the name, date of birth,
residential address, and telephone number of the operating manager or other
agent in charge of the premises, if different than the applicant; and any
additional information the city deems necessary.  Upon receipt of the
completed application and license fee, the City Council shall take action on
the license application at a regularly scheduled City Council meeting.  If
the City Clerk determines that an application is incomplete, he or she shall
return the application to the applicant with notice of the information
necessary to make the application complete.



(‘81 Code, § 14-10)  (Ord. 657, passed 6-10-99)



§ 115.05  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The completed application shall be forwarded to the Police
Department for investigation.  Upon completion of the investigation, the
City Council may either approve or deny the license, or it may delay action
for such reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any additional
investigation of the application or the applicant it deems necessary. 



   (B)   If the City Council approves the license, a license shall be
immediately issued to the applicant. 



   (C)   If the City Council denies the license, notice of the denial
shall be given to the applicant. 



   (D)   The City Council may deny a license on any of the following
grounds:



      (1)   The applicant is under the age of 18 years;



      (2)   The applicant has been convicted within the past five
years of any violation of a federal, state, or local law, ordinance
provision, or other regulation relating to tobacco or tobacco products, or
tobacco related devices;



      (3)   The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco
products, or tobacco related devices revoked within the preceding 12 months
of the date of application;



      (4)   The applicant fails to provide any information required
on the application, or provides false or misleading information; and



      (5)   The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or other
local law, ordinance, or other regulation from holding a license.



(Ord. 657, passed 6-10-99)



§ 115.06  DURATION OF LICENSE.



   All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on December 31 of
odd-numbered years.  Any license issued during an odd-numbered year will
expire on December 31 of that year, but the license fee shall be prorated on
a quarterly basis as provided in this chapter.



(‘81 Code, § 14-11)  (Ord. 657, passed 6-10-99)



§ 115.07  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.



   Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended for
any violation of this chapter or for any violation of any federal, state, or
other law, ordinance, or regulation relating to tobacco products or tobacco
related device.



(‘81 Code, § 14-14)  (Ord. 657, passed 6-10-99)



§ 115.08  TERMINATION OF LICENSE.



   All licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid only for the
premises for which the license was issued and only for the person to whom the
license was issued.  No license may be transferred to another location or
person and any transfer or change of ownership of the licensed premises shall
terminate the license.



(Ord. 657, passed 6-10-99)



§ 115.09  MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS.



   No license shall be issued to a moveable place of business.



(‘81 Code, § 14-13)  (Ord. 657, passed 6-10-99)



§ 115.10  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



   All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of the general
public on the licensed premises.



(‘81 Code, § 14-12)  (Ord. 657, passed 6-10-99)



§ 115.11  RENEWALS.



   The renewal of a license issued under this chapter shall be made in
accordance with this chapter and the original application.  The license
renewal application, and payment of the license fee, shall be submitted to
the City Clerk before the expiration of the current license and the current
license will remain in effect as provided in § 115.06.  No license shall be
renewed in the absence of payment of the full license fee.



(Ord. 657, passed 6-10-99)



§ 115.12  LICENSE FEES.



   No license shall be issued under this chapter until the license fee is
paid in full.  The fee for a license under this chapter shall be established
in the city’s schedule of fees.



(‘81 Code, § 14-11)  (Ord. 657, passed 6-10-99)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.13  UNLAWFUL SALES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell any
tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device:



   (A)   To any person under the age of 18 years;



   (B)   By means of any type of vending machine;



   (C)   By means of self-service merchandising, unless the licensee is
granted an exemption under the licensee's license as provided herein; or



   (D)   Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna,
strychnos, cocaine, marijuana, or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic or
controlled substances except nicotine and other substances found naturally in
tobacco or added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process.



   (E)   A licensee under this chapter may be exempt from the
self-service merchandising prohibition set forth above if:



      (1)   The licensee's establishment derives 90% or more of its
total revenues from tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco related device
sales;



      (2)   The licensee prohibits any person under the age of 18
from entering the licensed premises at all times; and



      (3)   The licensee's license authorizes self-service
merchandising and is subject to the condition that no person under the age of
18 shall be permitted within the licensed premises at any time.



(‘81 Code, § 14-13)  (Ord. 657, passed 6-10-99; Am. Ord. 903, passed
9-23-10)



§ 115.14  UNLAWFUL SALE, PURCHASE OR POSSESSION.



   Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be unlawful.



   (A)   Illegal possession.  It is unlawful for any person under the
age of 18 to have in his or her possession any tobacco, tobacco product, or
tobacco related device.  This division shall not apply to persons under the
age of 18 lawfully involved in a compliance check or fulfilling his or her
duties as an employee of the licensee in making a retail sale.



   (B)   Illegal purchase by minor.  It shall be unlawful for any
person under the age of 18 to purchase or attempt to purchase or otherwise
obtain any tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco related device.  It shall be
unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to purchase, attempt to purchase
or possess a product containing or delivering nicotine or lobelia intended
for human consumption, or any part of such a product, that is not tobacco as
defined herein.  This division shall not apply to minors lawfully involved
in a compliance check.



   (C)   Illegal purchase or procurement for minor. It shall be
unlawful for any person to purchase or otherwise obtain for or provide to any
person under the age of 18 any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related
device.  It shall further be unlawful for any person to coerce or attempt to
coerce a person under the age of 18 to illegally purchase or otherwise obtain
or use any tobacco, tobacco product, or tobacco related device.  This
division shall not apply to person under the age of 18 lawfully involved in a
compliance check.



   (D)   Use of false identification. It shall be unlawful for any
person under the age of 18 to attempt to disguise his or her true age by the
use of a false form of identification, whether the identification is that of
another person or one on which the age of the person has been modified or
tampered with to represent an age older than the actual age of the person.



   (E)   Illegal sale to minor. It shall be unlawful for any person to
sell, obtain for or otherwise provide to any person under the age of 18
tobacco or a product containing or delivering nicotine or lobelia intended
for human consumption, or any part of such product, that is not tobacco as
defined in this chapter.  This section shall not apply to a parent or legal
guardian of a person under the age of 18 who obtained or provided to the
person under the age of 18 such product if the product has been approved or
otherwise certified for legal sale by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for tobacco use cessation, harm reduction or for other medical
purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for the approved purpose.



   (F)   Child resistant packaging required.  It is unlawful for a
licensee hereunder to sell or offer to sell any liquid, whether or not such
liquid contains nicotine, which is intended for human consumption and use in
an electronic delivery device, that is not contained in "child-resistant
packaging" as the term is defined and as is required in M.S. § 461.20.



(Ord. 657, passed 6-10-99; Am. Ord. 903, passed 9-23-10; Am. Ord. 983, passed
2-12-15)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.15  SELF-SERVICE SALES.



   All tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco related devices shall either
be stored behind a counter or other area, including a case or other storage
unit, which is not freely accessible and not left open or accessible by the
general public. This section shall not apply to any licensee that was granted
an exemption under its license to the self-service merchandising prohibition.



(Ord. 657, passed 6-10-99; Am. Ord. 903, passed 9-23-10)



§ 115.16  RESPONSIBILITY.



   All licensees under this chapter shall be responsible for the actions
of their employees in regard to the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or
tobacco related devices on the licensed premises, and the sale of an item by
an employee shall be considered a sale by the licensee.  Nothing in this
section shall prohibit the city from subjecting a licensee or licensee’s
employee to any administrative or criminal penalties appropriate under this
chapter, state or federal law, or other applicable law or regulation.



(Ord. 657, passed 6-10-99)



§ 115.17  COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the city
during regular business hours.  From time to time, but at least once per
calendar year, the city shall conduct unannounced compliance checks to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.  Such compliance checks
shall involve minors who are over the age of 15 years, but less than 18
years, and with the written consent of their parent or guardian, enter the
licensed premises and purchase or attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco
products, or tobacco related devices.



   (B)   Minors used for the purpose of compliance checks shall be
supervised by city designated law enforcement officers or other designated
city personnel.  Minors used for compliance checks shall not be in violation
of any law prohibiting the purchase or attempted purchase, or the unlawful
possession of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices by a
minor when such items are obtained as a part of the compliance check.  No
minor used in compliance checks shall attempt to use a false identification
misrepresenting the minor’s age, and shall answer all questions about the
minor’s age asked by the licensee or licensee’s employee and shall
produce any identification, if any exists, for which he or she is asked. 
Nothing in this section shall prohibit other or additional compliance checks
authorized by state or federal laws for educational, research, or training
purposes, or required for the enforcement of a particular state or federal
law.



(Ord. 657, passed 6-10-99)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.18  EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES.



   (A)   Religious, spiritual, or cultural ceremony.  Nothing in this
chapter shall prevent the providing of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco
related devices to a minor as part of a lawfully recognized religious,
spiritual, or cultural ceremony with the consent of the minor’s parent or
legal guardian.



   (B)   Reliance of proof of age.  It shall be an affirmative defense
to a violation of this chapter for a person to have reasonably relied on
proof of age as described by state law.



(Ord. 657, passed 6-10-99)



§ 115.19  ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICES AND NICOTINE AND LOBELIA DELIVERY
PRODUCTS.



   All of the license, sale, purchase, possession, use and enforcement
provisions in this chapter relating to tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco
related devices shall apply fully and to the same extent to electronic
delivery devices and nicotine and lobelia delivery products.



(Ord. 974, passed 7-10-14)



§ 115.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Notice.  Upon discovery of a violation of this chapter, a
citation that sets forth the alleged violation and which shall inform the
alleged violator of his or her right to be heard on the accusations shall be
issued, either personally or by mail, upon the violator.



   (B)   Hearings.  If a person accused of violating this chapter
requests a hearing within ten days of the issuance of the citation, a hearing
shall be scheduled.  Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be
published and provided to the accused violator.  The hearing shall be held
not more than 21 days after the violator’s request for a hearing.



   (C)   Hearing officer.  Such hearing shall be held before the
hearing officer and shall be open to the public.



   (D)   Decision.  Upon conclusion of the hearing, the hearing
officer shall issue written findings of fact and conclusions detailing
whatever violation has occurred and whether the alleged violator committed
it.  A copy of the hearing officer’s written findings of fact and
conclusions shall be provided to the accused violator.  Likewise, if the
hearing officer finds that no violation occurred or finds grounds for not
imposing any penalty, the findings shall be recorded and a copy provided to
the acquitted accused violator.



   (E)   Appeals.  The violator may appeal the decision made by the
hearing officer to the district court.



   (F)   Continued violation.  Each day which a violation occurs or
continues, shall constitute a separate offense.



   (G)   Penalties.



      (1)   Licensees.  Any licensee found to have violated this
chapter, or whose employee shall have violated this chapter, shall be charged
an administrative fine of $75 for a first violation of this chapter; $200 for
a second offense at the same licensed premises within a 24-month period; and
$250 for a third or subsequent offense at the same location within a 24-month
period.  In addition, after the third offense, the license shall be
suspended for not less than seven days.



      (2)   Other individuals.  Other individuals who sell tobacco
to a minor shall be charged an administrative fee of $50.



   (H)   Misdemeanor prosecution.  A violation of any provision of
this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor.  If the violator is criminally
charged, no administrative penalty shall be imposed.



(Ord. 657, passed 6-10-99)



CHAPTER 116:  FUEL DISPENSING FACILITIES



Section



   116.01   Definitions



   116.02   Permit required; application and fees



   116.03   General regulations; inspection



   116.04   Curb stations prohibited



§ 116.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FUEL.   Any flammable or combustible liquid(s), including but not
limited to carbon bisulphide, gasoline, acetone, naphtha, benzole,
hydrocarbon (gas drips), liquefied petroleum gas (propane), kerosene,
turpentine, or other flammable liquids having a flash point below 165° F.



   FUEL DISPENSING FACILITY.   Any property or any portion of property on
which  container(s) or tank(s), either portable or stationary, equipment,
wells or terminals, or fuel dispensing devices are located and fuel is, or
intended to be, transported, stored or dispensed on the property.  A FUEL
DISPENSING FACILITY is any facility that is either open to the public for
sale of fuel or for private operations of or use in connection with any
commercial, industrial, business, or governmental establishment, or for
both.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any place where
such flammable liquids are kept or sold for medicinal purposes only or for
personal residential use with containers of not more than five gallons
capacity.



   FUEL DISPENSING STATION.   The designated area where hoses and nozzles
are provided for the purpose of transferring and dispensing any fuel from a
container or tank or similar vessel to any motorized vehicle or portable
container.



   FUEL DISPENSING DEVICE.   Any container, pump or other device for
supplying any fuel to vehicles or container; and every hose or pipe for
transmitting fuel passing over or under the ground.



(‘81 Code, § 10-40)  (Ord. 352, passed 11-26-85; Am. Ord. 542, passed
8-27-92; Am. Ord. 869, passed 10-22-09)



§ 116.02  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION AND FEES.



   (A)   No person shall manage or operate a fuel dispensing facility
without first having obtained a permit therefor from the Council as
hereinafter provided.



(‘81 Code, § 10-41)



   (B)   The application for a permit for a fuel dispensing facility
shall be in writing on a form supplied by the City Clerk and shall specify
the location of the building, structure, premises, enclosure or other place
in which it is proposed to operate the fuel dispensing facility, the location
and capacity or capacities in gallons of the container(s) or tank(s) and fuel
dispensing stations, and the location and number of dispensing devices to be
maintained.  Every application shall be made to the City Clerk and shall be
approved by the Fire Chief before a permit is issued.



(‘81 Code, § 10-42)  (Am. Ord. 542, passed 8-27-92)



   (C)   (1)   The fee charged for the permit shall be as specified
in § 35.27 per fueling position, per year. The required fee shall be paid to
the Clerk with the application for the permit.



      (2)   A similar fee shall be charged for the storage of
liquids as described hereinabove for dispensing the same by any other method
than by designated fuel dispensing device, the amount of the fee to be
determined upon receipt of an application for a permit.



      (3)   The fee for permits granted after commencement of the
permit year shall be prorated on a quarterly basis.



(‘81 Code, § 10-43)  (Am. Ord. 542, passed 8-27-92)



   (D)   All permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall
expire on December 31 following the date of issue. 



(‘81 Code, § 10-44)



   (E)   No permit granted under the provisions of this chapter shall
be assigned or transferred, nor shall any permit authorize a fuel dispensing
facility on any other premises than the premises designated on the permit. 



(‘81 Code, § 10-45)



(Ord. 352, passed 11-26-85; Am Ord. 869, passed 10-22-09)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 116.03  GENERAL REGULATIONS; INSPECTION.



   Each fuel dispensing facility shall be conducted and maintained in
accordance with the provisions of the city code and the Minnesota State Fire
Code and shall not constitute a hazard to or nuisance in the city. Each fuel
dispensing facility shall be subject to not less than two inspections per
year by the Fire Chief or some person duly authorized by the Fire Chief to
make an inspection.  A permit issued under thischapter may be suspended or
revoked for any violation of this chapter or Minnesota State Fire Code.



(‘81 Code, § 10-46)  (Ord. 352, passed 11-26-85; Am. Ord. 869, passed
10-22-09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.04  CURB STATIONS PROHIBITED.



   No fuel dispensing facility shall be permitted hereunder to operate
within the boundaries of any street, sidewalk or public ground for the
purposes of dispensing any motor fuel to vehicles or for any other purpose;
and every permitted facility shall be so arranged that when receiving any
service as aforesaid, no portion of any vehicle shall remain outside of the
property upon which the fuel dispensing facility is situated.



(‘81 Code, § 10-47)  (Ord. 352, passed 11-26-85; Am. Ord. 869, passed
10-22-09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 117:  PAWNBROKERS AND PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS



Section



   117.01   Definitions



   117.02   License required



   117.03   Initial license application



   117.04   Renewal application



   117.05   Execution of application



   117.06   Granting licenses



   117.07   License fees established



   117.08   Payment of fees



   117.09   Bond required



   117.10   Persons and places ineligible for license



   117.11   Conditions of license



   117.12   Restrictions on operations



   117.13   Inspection



   117.14   Corporations, partnerships or associations



   117.15   Refusal, suspension or revocation



   117.99   Penalty



§ 117.01  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words and terms when used in this chapter shall have the
following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.



   LICENSEE.  The person to whom a license is issued under this chapter
including any agents or employees of the person.



   MINOR.  Any natural person under the age of 18 years.



   PAWNBROKER. 



      (1)   A person, corporation or partnership who loans money on
deposit or pledge of personal property or other valuable things or who deals
in the purchasing of personal property or other valuable things on condition
of selling the same back again at a stipulated price or who loans money
secured by chattel mortgage on personal property or any part thereof so
mortgaged.



      (2)   A PAWNBROKER shall not mean any bank regulated by the
State of Minnesota, the comptroller of a current of the United States, the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, or any other federal or state authority or their affiliates;
any bank or savings association whose deposits or accounts are eligible for
insurance by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, or any successor to
it, and all affiliates of those banks and savings associations; any state or
federally-chartered credit unions; and any industrial loan and thrift company
or regulated lender subject to licensing and regulation by the Department of
Commerce.



   PAWN SHOP.   The location at which or premises in which a pawnbroker
regularly conducts business.



   PRECIOUS METAL DEALER.   Any person, corporation or partnership
engaging in the business of buying precious metals or gem stones or
secondhand items containing precious metal or gem stones including, but not
limited to: jewelry, watches, eating utensils, candlesticks and religious and
decorative objects.



   PRECIOUS METALS.   Any item made in whole or in part of metal and
containing more than 1% by weight of silver, gold, platinum or palladium.



(‘81 Code, § 15-25)  (Ord. 508, § 1, 4-25-91; Am. Ord. 842, passed
8-14-08)



§ 117.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Requirement.  No person shall exercise, carry on or be
engaged in the trade or business of pawnbroker or precious metal dealer
without first obtaining a license from the city as provided in this chapter.



   (B)   Exceptions.  Precious metal dealers conducting the following
transactions are not required to obtain a license under this chapter:



      (1)   Transactions at occasional "garage" or "yard" sales, or
estate sales or farm auctions held at the decedent's/owner's residence or
auction house, except that precious metal dealers must comply with the
requirements of M.S. §§ 325F.734 through 325F.742, for these transactions;



      (2)   Transactions regulated by M.S. Chapter 80A;



      (3)   Transactions regulated by Federal Commodity Futures
Commission Act;



      (4)   Transactions involving the purchase of precious metal
grindings, filings, slag, sweeps or dust from an industrial manufacturer,
dental lab, dentist or agent thereof;



      (5)   Transactions involving the purchase of photographic
film, such as lithographic and x-ray film or silver residue or flake
recovered in lithographic and x-ray film processing;



      (6)   Transactions in which the secondhand item containing
precious metal is exchanged for a new item containing precious metal and the
value of the new item exceeds the value of the secondhand item, except that a
person who is a precious metal dealer by engaging in a transaction which is
not exempted by this section must comply with the requirements of M.S. §§
325F.734 through 325F.742;



      (7)   Transactions between precious metal dealers if both
dealers are licensed under M.S. § 325F.733, or if the seller’s business is
located outside the state and the item is shipped from outside the state to a
dealer licensed under M.S. § 325F.733; or



      (8)   Transactions in which precious metal dealer or the other
party is engaged primarily in the business of buying and selling antiques,
and the items are resold in an unaltered condition except for repaid, and the
items are resold at retail, and the buyer paid less than $2,500 for
secondhand items containing precious metals purchased within any period of 12
consecutive months.



      (9)   Transactions involving the purchase of precious metal
which are extracted from recycled consumer products, such as electronics, by
a solid waste or recycling business or facility.



(‘81 Code, § 15-26)  (Ord. 508, § 1, 4-25-91; Am. Ord. 842, passed
8-14-08)



§ 117.03  INITIAL LICENSE APPLICATION.



   (A)   General.  Applications for a pawnbroker or precious metal
dealer license to be issued under this chapter shall contain information as
required on forms prescribed by the City Clerk. Applications shall be filed
with the City Clerk.



   (B)   Nature of application.  The application shall state whether
the applicant is a natural person, corporation, partnership or other form of
organization.



   (C)   Natural person.  If applicant is a natural person, the
following information shall be furnished:



      (1)   True name, place and date of birth and street residence
address, and length of time at that address, of applicant;



      (2)   Whether applicant has ever used or been known by a name
other than his or her true name and, if so, what was such name or names, and
information concerning dates and places where used;



      (3)   The name of the business if it is to be conducted under
a designation, name or style other than the full individual name of the
applicant;



      (4)   Kind, name and location of every business or occupation
applicant has been engaged in during the preceding five years;



      (5)   Names and addresses of applicant’s employers and
partners, if any, for the preceding five years;



      (6)   Whether applicant has ever been convicted of a felony,
gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor including violation of a municipal
ordinance, but excluding traffic violations, and if so, the date and place of
conviction and the nature of the offense; and



      (7)   If applicant has not resided in the city for three years
last preceding the date of application, at least four character references
from persons who are residents of the State of Minnesota.



   (D)   Partnership.  If applicant is a partnership, the names and
addresses of all partners and all information concerning each partner as is
required of a single applicant in division (C) of this section.  A managing
partner, or partners, shall be designated.  The interest of each partner in
the business shall be disclosed.



   (E)   Corporation.  If applicant is a corporation or other
association, the following information shall be required:



      (1)   Name and, if incorporated, the state of incorporation;



      (2)   A true copy of the certificate of incorporation,
articles of incorporation or association agreement and by-laws and, if a
foreign corporation, a certificate of authority as described in Minnesota
Statutes;



      (3)   The name of the operating officer or proprietor or other
agent in charge of the premises to be licensed, giving all the information
about said person as is required of a natural person/applicant in division
(C) of this section.  As used in this chapter, the term "operating officer"
shall mean the person responsible for the day-to-day operating decisions of
the licensed premises; and



      (4)   A list of all persons who, singly or together with their
spouse, or a parent, brother, sister or child or either of them, own or
control an interest in said corporation or association in excess of 5% or who
are officers or directors of said corporation or association, together with
their addresses and all information as is required of a single applicant in
division (C) of this section.



   (F)   Description of premises.



      (1)   Legal description.  The exact legal description of the
premises to be licensed, together with a plot plan of the area for which the
license is sought showing dimensions, location of buildings, and street
access parking facilities.



      (2)   Street address.  The street address of the premises for
which application is made.



   (G)   Taxes.  Whether or not all real estate taxes, assessments, or
other financial claims of the city, state or federal government for the
business and premises to be licensed have been paid, and if not paid, the
years for which delinquent.



   (H)   For all applicants.



      (1)   Statement by the applicant as to whether the applicant
holds a current pawnbroker or precious metal dealer license from any other
governmental unit and whether the applicant is licensed under either M.S. §
471.924, or M.S. §§ 325F.731 through 325F.744.



      (2)   Statement by the applicant as to whether the applicant
has previously been denied a pawnbroker or precious metal dealer license from
any other governmental unit.



      (3)   The names, street residence and business addresses of
three residents of Hennepin, Ramsey, Anoka, Carver, Dakota, Washington or
Scott Counties who are of good moral character and are not related to the
applicant or not holding any ownership in the premises or business, who may
be referred to as to the applicant's character.



      (4)   Statement identifying any pawnbroker or precious metal
business operated by the applicant in the preceding ten years, including the
name, location, address, business mailing address and all owners of each
business identified.



   (I)   Other information required.  Such other information as the
City Council shall require.



(‘81 Code, § 15-27)  (Ord. 508, § 1, 4-25-91; Am. Ord. 842, passed
8-14-08)



§ 117.04  RENEWAL APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   License period expiration.  Each license shall be issued for
a maximum period of one year.  All licenses shall expire on December 31 of
each year.



   (B)   Time of making application.  Applications for renewal of an
existing license shall be made at least 90 days prior to the date of the
expiration of the license, and shall state that everything in the prior
applications remains true and correct except as otherwise indicated.  The
city will mail application forms to existing licensees approximately 120 days
prior to expiration of the licenses.  If, in the judgment of the Council,
good and sufficient cause is shown by any applicant for failure to file for a
renewal within the time period provided, the Council may, if the other
provisions of this chapter are complied with, grant the application.



(‘81 Code, § 15-28)  (Ord. 508, § 1, 4-25-91; Am. Ord. 842, passed
8-14-08)



§ 117.05  EXECUTION OF APPLICATION.



   If application is by a natural person, it shall be signed and sworn to
by such person; if by a corporation, by an officer thereof; if by a
partnership, by one of the general partners; if by an incorporated
association, by the operating officer or managing officer thereof.  If the
applicant is a partnership, the application, license and bond, if required,
shall be made and issued in the name of all partners.  Any false statement
in an application shall result in denial of the application.



(‘81 Code, § 15-29)  (Ord. 508, § 1, 4-25-91; Am. Ord. 842, passed
8-14-08; Am. Ord. 934, passed 8-9-12)



§ 117.06  GRANTING LICENSES.



   (A)   Investigation.  At the time of making an initial or renewal
application, the applicant shall, in writing, authorize the Apple Valley
Police Department to investigate all facts set out in the application and do
a personal background and criminal record check on the applicant.  The
applicant shall further authorize the Apple Valley Police Department to
release information received from such investigation to the City Council. 
The applicant shall have an opportunity to review such information before it
is released to the City Council.



   (B)   Vote required.  After such investigation, the Council shall
grant or deny the application.



   (C)   Restrictions on licenses.



      (1)   Each license shall be issued to the applicant only and
shall not be transferable.



      (2)   Each license shall be issued only for the premises
described in the application and shall not be transferable to a different
location.



      (3)   No change in ownership, control or location of a license
shall be permitted except by amendment to the license which amendment must be
approved by the City Council.  Any change in ownership of the licensee shall
terminate the license.



      (4)   Any change in the operating officer of the business
shall require the licensee to submit a complete application for change of
operating officers as required by the city.  The city may revoke the license
if the operating officer change would be grounds to deny the license
otherwise.



      (5)   No more than two pawnbroker licenses in the city shall
be issued by the city at any time and priority shall be given to qualified
applicants for renewal of existing license.



(‘81 Code, § 15-30)  (Ord. 508, § 1, 4-25-91; Am. Ord. 842, passed
8-14-08)



§ 117.07  LICENSE FEES ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   Annual fees.  The annual license fee for licenses required by
this article shall be in the amounts as specified in Chapter 35, Appendix.



   (B)   Investigation fees.  At the time of each original application
for a license, applicant shall pay, in full, the deposit on the investigation
fee.  The deposit on the investigation fee shall be as specified in Chapter
35, Appendix.  If investigation outside the seven-county Twin City
Metropolitan Area is required, the applicant shall be charged the actual cost
which shall be paid by the applicant, prior to City Council acting on the
application and the issuance of a license, after deducting the initial
deposit, whether or not the license is granted.



(‘81 Code, § 15-31)  (Ord. 508, § 1, 4-25-91; Am. Ord. 842, passed
8-14-08)



§ 117.08  PAYMENT OF FEES.



   (A)   Initial fees.  The annual license and the deposit on the
investigation fee for a new license shall be paid in full before the
application for a license is accepted.  Upon rejection of any application
for a license or upon withdrawal of an application before approval of the
issuance by the Council, the license fee only, less than any unreimbursed
investigation fee expense, shall be refunded to the applicant.  Where
rejection is for a willful misstatement in the license application no fees
will be refunded.



   (B)   Renewal fees.  The annual license fee for renewal of a
license shall be paid in full at the time the renewal application is filed
with the Clerk.



   (C)   Transaction record fee.  The licensee shall be charged and
the licensee shall pay on a monthly basis a record transaction fee charged
for each transaction record which is required to be provided to the city in
this chapter.  The record transaction fee shall be an amount specified in
Chapter 35, Appendix herein.  The licensee shall pay the charges by the due
date shown on the city's billing.  Any charges unpaid at the close of
business on the due date shall be deemed delinquent and the licensee shall be
charged interest on all delinquent charges.  Interest charges shall be added
to, or become a part of, the delinquent balances.  Whenever any charges are
more than 30 days delinquent, the city may suspend or revoke the licensee's
license until all delinquent charges are paid in full.



   (D)   Reporting failure fee.  In the event the licensee is unable
to successfully transfer each transaction record through the Automated Pawn
System (APS), as provided elsewhere herein, and the licensee provides the
printed paper copies of all reportable transactions as required herein, the
licensee shall pay a reporting failure fee in an amount as set forth in
Chapter 35, Appendix herein.  The reporting failure fee shall be imposed for
each day that the licensee is unable to report via an automated pawn
reporting system designated and approved by the city.  Licensee shall also
be assessed a photograph failure fee for any photograph or video required
under this code to be sent digitally or electronically to the city, but
unable to do so.  The licensee shall pay a fee for each day the licensee is
unable to provide the photos electronically.  If the licensee fails to pay
any and all reporting failure fees or photograph failure fee within 30 days
of the billing date, the city may suspend or revoke the licensee's license.



(‘81 Code, § 15-32)  (Ord. 508, § 1, 4-25-91; Am. Ord. 842, passed
8-14-08)



§ 117.09  BOND REQUIRED.



   At the time of filing an application for a pawnbroker license, the
applicant shall file a bond in the amount of $10,000 with the City Clerk. 
The bond, with a duly licensed surety thereon, must be approved as to form by
the City Attorney.  Said bond must be conditioned that the licensee shall
observe the ordinances of the city in relation to the business of pawnbroker,
and that the licensee will account for and deliver to any person legally
entitled thereto any articles which may have come into the possession of the
licensee as pawnbroker or in lieu thereof such licensee shall pay the person
or persons the reason value thereof.



(‘81 Code, § 15-33)  (Ord. 508, § 1, 4-25-91; Am. Ord. 842, passed
8-14-08; Am. Ord. 934, passed 8-9-12)



§ 117.10  PERSONS AND PLACES INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   No license shall be granted to or held by any person, or to
any corporation, partnership or other entity of which the operating officer
or managing partners:



      (1)   Is under the age of 18 at the time the application is
filed;



      (2)   Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the
occupation licensed, as prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, subd. 2, and has not
shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to
perform the duties of a pawnbroker or precious metal dealer as prescribed by
M.S. § 364.03, subd. 3;



      (3)   Is not a citizen of the United States or a resident
alien;



      (4)   Holds an intoxicating liquor license under this code; or



      (5)   In the judgment of the Council, is not the real party in
interest or beneficial owner of the business operated, or to be operated,
under the license.



   (B)   No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any
premises on which real estate taxes, assessments or other financial claims of
the city or the state are due, delinquent, or unpaid.  If an action has been
commenced pursuant to the provisions of M.S. Chapter 278, questioning the
amount or validity of taxes, the Council may on application by the licensee
waive strict compliance with this provision; no waiver may be granted,
however, for taxes, or any portion thereof, which remain unpaid for a period
exceeding one year after becoming due unless such one year is extended
through no fault of the licensee.



(‘81 Code, § 15-34)  (Ord. 508, § 1, 4-25-91; Am. Ord. 842, passed
8-14-08)



§ 117.11  CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Records.  Every licensee, at the time of receipt of an
article deposited, left, sold, purchased, pledged or pawned, shall
immediately record, in English, on forms or in an electronic data storage and
retrieval system as approved by the Chief of Police, the following
information:



      (1)   An accurate and complete description of the article and
any numbers written, stamped, impressed or engraved thereon, together with
the name of the manufacturer, model, and serial number, if any, on the
article;



      (2)   The amount of money received by the person pawning,
pledging or selling the article, and the annual rate of interest and amount
required to redeem the article if pawned or pledged;



      (3)   The date, time and place of receipt of the article;



      (4)   The full name, residence address, date of birth, and
reasonably accurate description (including gender, height, weight, race, eye
color, hair color) of the person from whom the article was received; and



      (5)   The form of identification, including the
identification  number and governmental agency that issued the
identification, and a legible photocopy of the identification card that the
licensee obtained from the person pawning, pledging or selling the article. 
The  following forms of identification are the only forms of identification
that are acceptable and no other identification shall be accepted by the
licensee for purposes of meeting this division:



         (a)   A valid driver's license issued by Minnesota or
another state;



         (b)   A valid identification card issued by Minnesota or
another state;



         (c)   A valid driver's license or identification card
issued by a providence of Canada, provided the form of identification has a
photograph and date of birth of the identified person;



         (d)   A valid military identification card issued by the
U.S. Department of Defense; or



         (e)   A valid passport issued by the United Stated or
other country in the case of a foreign national.



   (B)   Disposition of articles.  When any article is sold or
disposed of by the licensee, the records shall contain an account of such
sale with the date thereof, interest and charges accrued, the amount for
which the article was sold, and identification of the person to whom the
article was sold as specified in divisions (A)(4) and (5) of this section.



   (C)   Inspection of records.  The records referred to in this
section shall be open for inspection by the city Police Department at all
reasonable times and shall be retained by the licensee for at least four
years.



      (1)   The maturity date of the pawn or pledge transaction and
the amount due, if any;



      (2)   The full name of the licensee or licensee's employee or
agent who conducted the transaction;



      (3)   A color photograph, color video recording, or a
digitally-captured photo-image of the following:



         (a)   Of the person from whom the article was received;
and



         (b)   The article received by the licensee if the
article does not have a unique serial or other identification number
permanently engraved or affixed to the article.



      (4)   If a digital color photograph is taken, it must be of
quality resolution, to be determined by the Police Department and must be
maintained in such a manner that the photograph can be readily matched and
correlated with all of the records of the transaction to which it relates. 
Such photographs must be available to the Police Department upon request. 
The photograph must include an identifiable front facial close-up of the
person from whom the article is received and items photographed must be
accurately depicted.  The licensee, or his or her employee/agent must inform
the customer that he or she is being photographed by displaying a sign of
sufficient size in a conspicuous place on the premises.



      (5)   If a video recording is taken, the video camera must
zoom in on the customer's face in order that the video recording provides an
identifiable front facial close-up of the person from whom the article was
received.  Articles received must be accurately depicted in all video
recordings.  Video recordings must be electronically referenced by time and
date so that it can be readily matched and correlated with all of the records
of the transaction to which it relates.  The licensee must inform the person
that he or she is being videotaped orally and by displaying a sign of
sufficient size in a conspicuous place on the premises. The licensee shall
keep and maintain the recorded video with all other records as required for
the transaction and shall surrender it to the Police Department upon request.



      (6)   A label shall be attached to every article at the time
it is received by the licensee.  Permanently recorded on this label must be
the number or name that identifies the transaction in the licensee's records,
transaction date, the name of the item and the description or model and
serial number of the article as reported to the city, whichever is
applicable, and the date the article can be sold, if applicable.  The label
shall not be reused.



   (D)   Receipt.  The licensee shall provide a receipt to the seller
or pledger of any article of property received, which shall include:



      (1)   The name, address and phone number of the licensee;



      (2)   The date on which the item was received by the licensee;



      (3)   A description of the item received and amount paid to
the pledger or seller in exchange for the article pawned or sold;



      (4)   The signature of the licensee;



      (5)   The last regular business day by which the article must
be redeemed by the pledger without risk that the article will be sold and the
amount necessary to redeem the pawned item on that date;



      (6)   The annual rate of interest charged on pawned items
received; and



      (7)   The name and address of the seller or pledger.



   (E)   Reports to police.



      (1)   The licensee shall prepare and deliver to the Chief of
Police, or an appointed designee, at the close of business on each day that
the licensee is opened for and operating business, the correct and complete
records required herein, and a true and correct account of all property or
other articles received, deposited, purchased, pledged, pawned, sold or
otherwise disposed of during the preceding day.  The licensee shall submit
to the Police Department all records as required herein via computerized
transmission, utilizing an automated pawn data reporting system designated
and approved by the city or other electronic format in accordance with the
standards and procedures established by the Chief of Police.  In the event
that the APS central server or the licensee's system is temporarily
inoperable, the licensee shall provide its records data to the Police
Department by printed copies of all recorded transactions.  If the
transmission is due to the licensee's inoperable system, the licensee shall
be charged for and pay a reporting failure penalty fee as provided herein. 
A fee shall be due and payable for each day that the licensee's system is
inoperable.  Immediately upon the licensee's system becoming operable, the
licensee shall provide the records to the APS central server for the days in
which the records were not transmitted.



      (2)   The licensee shall display a sign of sufficient size and
in a location which makes it visible to all patrons that informs all patrons
that all transactions are reported to the Apple Valley  Police Department.



      (3)   Each licensee must immediately report to the police any
article pledged, received or purchased or sought to be pledged, received or
purchased if the licensee has reason to believe that the article was stolen
or lost.



      (4)   If  licensee is unable to capture, digitize or transmit
the photographs as required herein, the licensee must immediately take all
required photographs with a still camera, immediately develop the pictures,
cross-reference the photographs to the correct transaction, and deliver them
to the Police Department as required for all other records.  The licensee
may be subject to a photo record failure for each day the licensee is unable
to electronically transmit the photograph to the Police Department.



   (F)   Exceptions to reports.  No person shall be required to
furnish descriptions of any property purchased from manufacturers and
wholesale dealers having an established place of business or of any goods
purchased at an open sale from any bankrupt stock or from any other person
doing business and having an established place of business.  Any goods
referred to in this section must be accompanied by a bill of sale or other
evidence of open or legitimate purchase and must be shown to the city Police
Department when demanded.



   (G)   Ninety-day redemption period.  Any person pledging, pawning
or depositing an article for security shall have a minimum of 90 days from
the date when the loan or pledge becomes due and payable to redeem the
article before the article becomes forfeitable.  Any pawnbroker licensed
under this chapter shall not refuse to disclose to the pledger, after having
sold pledged goods, the name of the purchaser or the price for which the item
sold.  During the 90-day holding period, no articles shall be removed from
the licensed premises.



   (H)   Minimum period before redemption or sale.  No articles on
deposit with any licensee nor property purchased by or sold to, or in any
other way coming into the possession and under the control of any licensee in
the due course of business, shall be permitted to be redeemed from the place
of business of the licensee for a period of 72 hours, nor shall the property
be sold within ten days after the copy and statement required to be delivered
to the Chief of Police has been delivered.



   (I)   Police restrictions on sale.  Whenever the Chief of Police or
any designee of the Chief of Police  notifies the licensee not to sell or
permit to be redeemed any articles received on deposit or purchased by the
licensee, the articles shall not be permitted to be redeemed or sold until
such time as may be determined by the Chief of Police.  Such time shall in
no case exceed the period of six months from the date of such notification.



   (J)   Payment by check.  Payment by licensee for any article
deposited, left, purchased, pledged or pawned shall be made only by a check,
draft or other negotiable or nonnegotiable instrument or order of withdrawal
which is drawn against funds held by a financial institution.



   (K)   Posting of prices; weighing.  Every precious metal dealer
shall prominently post, in a conspicuous place and in letters exceeding one
inch in height, the minimum prices per ounce or pennyweight that are
currently being paid by the dealer for precious metals and a warning notice
that unless otherwise informed, the prices offered are based on the melt down
value of the precious metal rather than the value of the item in its existing
form.  Precious metal items shall be weighed in plain sight of the
prospective seller on scales approved by the division of weights and measures
of the department of public service in accordance with M.S. § 239.08.



   (L)   Posting license.  All licensees shall post their licenses, in
a conspicuous place, in the licensed premises near the licensed activity.



   (M)   Responsibility of licensee.  The conduct of agents or
employees of a licensee, while engaged in performance of their duties for
their principal or employer under such license, shall be deemed the conduct
of the licensee.



   (N)   Penalty for property owner.  It is unlawful for any person
who owns or controls any real property to knowingly permit it to be used for
pawnbroking or precious metal dealer without a license required by this
chapter.



(‘81 Code, § 15-35)  (Ord. 508, § 1, 4-25-91; Am. Ord. 842, passed
8-14-08)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.12  RESTRICTIONS ON OPERATIONS.



   (A)   No licensee shall be open for the transaction of business on
any day of the week before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m.



   (B)   No licensee shall purchase, accept or receive personal
property any article, of any nature, from any person under the age of 18 or
any person who is under the influence of alcohol or drugs.



   (C)   No licensee shall purchase, accept, or receive any article
which contains an altered or obliterated serial number or an article for
which the serial number has been removed.  The licensee shall notify the
Police Department immediately at the time that any person attempts to pawn,
pledge or sell any article that has its serial number removed.



   (D)   No licensee shall purchase, accept or receive any article
which is encumbered by a security interest.



   (E)   No licensee shall purchase, accept or receive any article from
any person who is not the true or correct owner of the article.



   (F)   No licensee shall purchase, accept or receive any article from
any person who does not have an acceptable form of identification.



   (G)   No licensee shall purchase, accept or receive any article from
any person who the licensee should have reason to know has been convicted of
theft or has a history of selling/pawning stolen property to the licensee or
other pawnbroker or precious metal businesses.



   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any person to pawn, pledge, sell,
leave, or deposit any article of another, regardless of whether the person
has the owner's permission, with any licensee.



   (I)   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to pawn,
pledge, sell, leave, or deposit, or attempt to pawn, pledge sell, leave, or
deposit any article with any licensee.



   (J)   The licensee shall post a sign, not less than 4 square feet in
surface area, comprising of lettering not less than ¾ inch in height, in a
conspicuous place on the licensed premises which shall be visible to all
patrons entering the licensed premises which provides the following:



   To pawn or sell property:  You must be at least 18 years of age.  You
must be true owner of the property.  The property must be free of all claims
and liens.  You must present valid photo identification.  Violation of
these requirements is a crime.



(‘81 Code, § 15-36)  (Ord. 508, § 1, 4-25-91; Am. Ord. 842, passed
8-14-08)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.13  INSPECTION.



   (A)   Goods/Records.  Any licensee shall, at all times during the
term of the license, allow any city police officer to enter or inspect the
premises, where the licensee is carrying on business, and all records
pertinent to the operation of the business for the purpose of locating goods
suspected or alleged to have been stolen.  No licensee shall conceal any
article in his or her possession from any city police officer.



   (B)   Inspection by claimed owner.  All goods, wares or merchandise
coming into the possession of any licensee, under the terms hereof, shall at
all times be open to inspection and right of examination of any person
claiming to have been the owner thereof or claiming to have had any interest
therein when such person is accompanied by a city police officer.



(‘81 Code, § 15-37)  (Ord. 508, § 1, 4-25-91; Am. Ord. 842, passed
8-14-08)



§ 117.14  CORPORATIONS, PARTNERSHIPS OR ASSOCIATIONS.



   (A)   Licenses issued to corporations shall be valid only so long as
there is no change in the officers or ownership interest of the corporation
unless such change is approved by the Council, in which event said license
shall continue in force until the end of the then current license year.



   (B)   Licenses issued to associations or partnerships shall be valid
only so long as there is no change in the partnership or association
agreement or in the ownership of said partnership or association unless such
change is approved by the Council, in which event said license shall continue
in force until the end of the then current license year.



   (C)   Corporations, partnerships or associations shall submit
written notice to the Clerk of any such changes described herein on or before
60 days prior to the effective date of any such change and pay any fee
required by § 35.27 for an amendment to the license.  In the case of a
corporation, the licensee shall submit written notice to the Clerk when a
person not listed in the initial application will be acquiring an interest
and shall give all information above said person as is required of a person
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



(‘81 Code, § 15-38)  (Ord. 508, § 1, 4-25-91; Am. Ord. 842, passed
8-14-08)



§ 117.15  REFUSAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any applicant to make a false statement or
omission upon any application form.  Any false statement in such
application, or any omission to state any information called for on such
application form, shall, upon discovered of such falsehood, work an automatic
refusal of license, or if already issued, shall render any license issued
pursuant thereto, void.  Prior issuance is no effect to protect the
applicant from prosecution for violation of this section or any part hereof.



   (B)   The City Council may suspend or revoke a license issued under
this chapter for operation on any premises on which real estate taxes,
assessments or other financial claims of the city or of the state are due,
delinquent or unpaid.  If an action has been commenced pursuant to the
provisions of M.S. Chapter 278, questioning the amount or validity of taxes,
the Council may on application by the licensee waive strict compliance with
this provision; no waiver may be granted, however, for taxes, or any portion
thereof, which remain unpaid for a period exceeding one year after becoming
due unless such one-year period is extended through no fault of the licensee.



   (C)   The City Council may suspend or revoke a licence issued under
this chapter upon a finding of a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter or any state statute regulating pawnbrokers or precious metal
dealers.  Any conviction by the pawnbroker or precious metal dealer for
theft, receiving stolen property or any other crime or violation involving
stolen property shall result in the immediate suspension pending a hearing on
revocation of any license issued hereunder.



   (D)   Except in the case of a suspension pending a hearing on
revocation, a revocation or suspension of a license by the Council shall be
preceded by a public hearing conducted in accordance with M.S. §§ 15.0418
through 15.0426.  The City Council may appoint a hearing examiner or may
conduct a hearing itself.  The hearing notice shall be given at least ten
days prior to the hearing, include notice of the time and place of the
hearing, and shall state the nature of the charges against the licensee.



(‘81 Code, § 15-39)  (Ord. 508, § 1, 4-25-91; Am. Ord. 842, passed
8-14-08)



§ 117.99  PENALTY.



   Violation of any provision of this article shall be a misdemeanor
punishable as provided in § 10.99.



(‘81 Code, § 15-40)  (Ord. 508, § 1, 4-25-91; Am. Ord. 842, passed
8-14-08)



CHAPTER 118:  VENDING CARTS



Section



   118.01   License required



   118.02   Definitions



   118.03   License application



   118.04   License is nontransferable



   118.05   License period and renewal



   118.06   Number of available licenses



   118.07   Conditions of operation of vending carts



   118.08   Requirements for vending carts



   118.09   Permitted locations for vending carts



   118.10   Liability insurance



   118.11   Operation without license; misdemeanor



   118.12   Revocation, suspension, nonrenewal



§ 118.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall operate a mobile vending cart without first obtaining a
license from the city as provided in this chapter.  Each vending cart must
be separately licensed and a person may operate only at the location
specified in the license.



(‘81 Code, § 15-41)  (Ord. 574, § 3, 5-12-94)



§ 118.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this article, certain terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise.



   LICENSEE.  The word “licensee” shall mean the person to whom the
license is issued and all of that person’s employees, agents, or
representatives.



   PERSON.  The word “person” shall be as defined in § 10.04 of this
code.



   VENDING CART.  The phrase “vending cart” shall mean any structure
used for the purpose of selling or giving away food and beverages outdoors.



(‘81 Code, § 15-42)  (Ord. 574, § 3, 5-12-94)



§ 118.03  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   (A)   Choice of location.  Applicant must determine the requested
location for the vending cart in accordance with the standards described in
§ 118.09 hereof.  No location which has been chosen in a previous
application shall be available for selection.  A list of previously chosen
locations will be available from the office of the Community Development
Director.  A licensee currently holding a license for a specific location
shall have until the end of the renewal period described in § 118.05 hereof
to reapply for that location.  Any license not renewed by January 15 shall
cause that location to become available to other applicants.



   (B)   Fee.  The fee for the annual license, except as provided in
section § 118.07(D), shall be as provided in § 35.27 of this code.



   (C)   Application. 



      (1)   Each applicant shall file an application with the
Department of Community Development on forms provided by the department. 



      (2)   The Community Development Director may require such
information on the application as the Director deems reasonable and
necessary.  The application must be accompanied by:



         (a)   Plans and specifications for the vending cart;



         (b)   Proof that the plans and specifications for the
vending cart have been approved by the Minnesota Department of Health; and



         (c)   Proof of application for a food distributor
license from the Minnesota Department of Health. 



      (3)   A vending cart license may be issued conditioned on the
licensee obtaining a food distributor license from the Department of Health,
upon subsequent inspection and approval of the vending cart by city staff, or
upon such other conditions as imposed by the City Council.



   (D)   Inspection of vending cart.  Unless the vending cart is
available for inspection by the city within 60 days after the application is
filed, the license shall be revoked and the applicant’s proposed operating
location shall be available to other applicants.



(‘81 Code, § 15-43)  (Ord. 574, § 3, 5-12-94)



§ 118.04  LICENSE IS NONTRANSFERABLE.



   No license for a vending cart shall be transferable to any other person.



(‘81 Code, § 15-44)  (Ord. 574, § 3, 5-12-94)



§ 118.05  LICENSE PERIOD AND RENEWAL.



   A vending cart license is valid from February 1 through January 31 and
may be renewed annually.  Applications for renewal will be accepted January
1 through January 15.  Any license not renewed by January 15 shall cause
that location to become available to other applicants.



(‘81 Code, § 15-45)  (Ord. 574, § 3, 5-12-94)



§ 118.06  NUMBER OF AVAILABLE LICENSES.



   A maximum of four vending cart licenses shall be granted.  The City
Council may alter this number at it sole discretion.



(‘81 Code, § 15-46)  (Ord. 574, § 3, 5-12-94)



§ 118.07  CONDITIONS OF OPERATION OF VENDING CARTS.



   A vending cart must be operated in accordance with the following
conditions:



   (A)   Each vending cart must be separately licensed;



   (B)   A vending cart may only be operated at the location specified
in the license but if a licensee holds licenses for more than one location,
the licensee may place any of his or her licensed vending carts at any
location for which the licensee holds a license;



   (C)   No licensee may trade vending carts or locations with another
licensee of any other person;



   (D)   If a licensee is granted a different location for a vending
cart during the licensing year, and the licensee surrenders the original
location for the vending cart, the fee for the mid-season license shall be
one-half the annual fee.



   (E)   Vending carts shall be operated only for the sale of food and
nonalcoholic beverage items as listed in the license application.  The sale
of any other merchandise is expressly prohibited;



   (F)   Vendors may not use lights or noisemakers such as bells, horns
or whistles, to attract customers.  Lights with protective shielding may be
used for the purpose of illuminating food, utensils and equipment;



   (G)   No vending cart shall be operated before 7:00 a.m. or after
10:00 p.m. on any day;



   (H)   No vending cart shall be operated or permitted to part, stand
or stop in any street except to cross at designated street crossings;



   (I)   Operation of vending carts shall comply with relevant state
and local health regulations and policies;



   (J)   Every licensee shall maintain a permanent location within the
district of the Minnesota Department of Health or Department of Agriculture
Inspector that inspects food or beverage facilities within Apple Valley. 
The permanent location shall be for the storage and preparation of food and
beverages carried by the licensee’s vending carts, and for the cleaning and
servicing of those vending carts.  Such permanent location shall comply in
all respects with the requirements of the State of Minnesota food and
beverage regulations, and shall be separately licensed as a food
distributor.  Each vending cart shall return to the permanent location at
least once daily for cleaning and servicing;



   (K)   All waste liquids, garbage, litter and refuse shall be kept in
leakproof, nonabsorbent containers which shall be kept covered with
tightfitting lids and properly disposed of at the permanent location.  No
waste liquids, garbage, litter or refuse shall be dumped or drained into
sidewalks, streets, gutters, drains, trash receptacles or any other place
except at the permanent location.  When leaving the sales area, the licensee
or licensee’s employees shall pick up all litter resulting from the
business and shall deposit such litter in an approved container located on
the vending cart;



   (L)   No sale may be made to a person in a motor vehicle that is
parked or stopped in a public street; and



   (M)   All persons involved in preparing, handling, or selling food
or beverages must wear shirts.



(‘81 Code, § 15-47)  (Ord. 574, § 3, 5-12-94)



§ 118.08  REQUIREMENTS FOR VENDING CARTS.



   (A)   No vending cart shall have dimensions exceeding four feet in
width, eight feet in length and eight feet in height.  However, a vending
cart may be equipped with an awning which overhangs by not more than 12
inches in any direction.  Each vending cart shall be capable of being moved
and kept under control by one person traveling on foot.



   (B)   Each vending cart shall meet National Sanitation Foundation
(NSF) standards for food storage, preparation and dispensing.  Toilet
facilities shall be required at the permanent location but not on each
vending cart.



   (C)   Each vending cart shall carry adequate hand-washing facilities
for the employees of the licensee.  A waste retention tank with 15% larger
capacity than water supply tank shall be provided.



   (D)   There shall be issued to each licensee a suitable decal for
each licensed vending cart.  Every vending cart licensed under this chapter
shall at all times have the decal permanently and prominently fastened on the
vending cart.



   (E)   Affixed permanently and prominently to each vending cart shall
be a sign no smaller than 12 inches by 12 inches displaying the name, address
and telephone number of the vending cart owner and the licensee.



(‘81 Code, § 15-48)  (Ord. 574, § 3, 5-12-94)



§ 118.09  PERMITTED LOCATIONS FOR VENDING CARTS.



   (A)   The proposed location for a vending cart shall be referred to
the Community Development Director for approval or disapproval.



   (B)   Vending carts shall be permitted only along the following
streets: 147th Street from Galaxie to Pennock Avenues; Pennock Avenue from
147th to 153rd Streets; 153rd Street from Pennock to Galaxie Avenues; and
Galaxie Avenue from 153rd to 147th Streets.  A vending cart may be operated
on privately or publicly owned property within the boundaries described above
with the express written consent of the private property owner and the
approval of the Community Development Director.



   (C)   No vending cart shall be permitted to operate in a location
that would substantially impair the movement of pedestrians, vehicles or
handicap access, or pose a hazard to public safety.  No vending cart shall
be permitted to operate in a location within 50 feet of an intersection or
driveway entrance, within three feet of a curb, directly in front of a
commercial entryway, nor within 50 feet of another vending cart.



(‘81 Code, § 15-49)  (Ord. 574, § 3, 5-12-94)



§ 118.10  LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   No license or renewal shall be granted, nor be effective until the
applicant files with the community development director, proof of a public
liability insurance policy covering all operations of such applicant
hereunder for the sum of at least $300,000 combined single limit coverage. 
Said policy shall provide that it may not be canceled by the insurer except
after a 30-day written notice to the city, and if such insurance is so
canceled and the licensee fails to replace the same with another policy
conforming to the provisions of this section, the license shall be
automatically suspended until such insurance shall have been replaced.  The
city shall be named an additional insured.



(‘81 Code, § 15-50)  (Ord. 574, § 3, 5-12-94)



§ 118.11  OPERATION WITHOUT LICENSE; MISDEMEANOR.



   Operating a vending cart without a license as required by this chapter
or causing operation of a vending cart without a license as required by this
chapter, is a misdemeanor.



(‘81 Code, § 15-51)  (Ord. 574, § 3, 5-12-94)



§ 118.12  REVOCATION, SUSPENSION, NONRENEWAL.



   (A)   Reasons for revocation, suspension, nonrenewal.  A license
may be suspended, revoked or not renewed for the following reasons:



      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained
in the application for license;



      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the
course of carrying on the licensee’s activity;



      (3)   Any violation of this article;



      (4)   Conducting the activity in an unlawful manner or in a
manner so as to constitute a nuisance or to constitute a menace to the
health, morals, safety, or general welfare of the public;



      (5)   Violation of any special conditions under which the
license was granted;



      (6)   Violation of any state or federal law regulating the
sale of food or beverages; or



      (7)   Decision by the City Council to discontinue granting
vending cart licenses.



   (B)   Hearing.  There shall be a hearing on the alleged violation
or staff-recommended nonrenewal.  The City Council shall conduct the hearing
or the City Council may appoint a hearing officer to hold the hearing.  The
hearing officer need not be an administrative law judge.  Such hearing shall
be held upon written notice to the licensee served by certified mail not less
than 15 days before the hearing date, stating the date, time and purpose
thereof.  In all cases, only the City Council may determine the penalty.



   (C)   Penalties.  If the City Council finds there has been a
violation of the conditions of operation and decides license suspension is
appropriate, the following penalties shall be imposed:



      (1)   First offense: license suspension for 15 days;



      (2)   Second offense within 24 months: license suspension for
30 days; and



      (3)   Three or more offenses within 24 months: license
revocation.



(‘81 Code, § 15-52)  (Ord. 574, § 3, 5-12-94)



CHAPTER 119:  FRANCHISE REGULATIONS



Section



Electricity Franchise



   119.01   Definitions



   119.02   Grant of franchise



   119.03   Location; other regulations



   119.04   Relocations



   119.05   Indemnification and liability



   119.06   Vacation of public rights-of-way



   119.07   Change in form of government



   119.08   Franchise fee



   119.09   Abandoned facilities



   119.10   Provisions of subchapter



   119.11   Amendment procedure



Cable Television Franchise



   119.20   Intent and purpose



   119.21   Findings



   119.22   Title and definitions



   119.23   Grant of authority; general provisions



   119.24   Construction standards



   119.25   Design provisions



   119.26   Service provisions



   119.27   Access channel provisions



   119.28   Operation and administration provisions



   119.29   Financial provisions; insurance



   119.30   Sale, abandonment and transfer



   119.31   Protection of individual rights



   119.32   Renewal and amendments



   119.33   Publication and acceptance



Cable System Franchise-Frontier Communications



   119.40   Cable system franchise



Gas Energy Franchise



   119.45   Definitions



   119.46   Grant of franchise



   119.47   Location, other regulations



   119.48   Relocations



   119.49   Indemnification and liability



   119.50   Vacation of public rights-of-way



   119.51   Change in form of government



   119.52   Franchise fee



   119.53   Abandoned facilities



   119.54   Provisions of ordinance



   119.55   Amendment procedure



   119.99   Penalty



ELECTRICITY FRANCHISE



§ 119.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED FACILITY.  As defined in § 97.02, as amended from time to
time.



   CITY.  The City of Apple Valley, County of Dakota, State of Minnesota.



   CITY UTILITY SYSTEM.  Facilities used for providing public utility
service owned or operated by the city or agency thereof including sanitary
sewer, storm sewer, water service, street lighting and traffic signals, but
excluding facilities for providing heating, electric, gas, or other forms of
energy.



   COMMISSION.  The Minnesota Public Utilities Commission, or any
successor agency or agencies, including an agency of the federal government,
which preempts all or part of the authority to regulate electric retail rates
now vested in the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission.



   COMPANY.  Dakota Electric Association, a Minnesota cooperative, its
successors and assigns, including all successors or assigns that own or
operate any part of parts of the electric facilities subject to this
franchise.



   ELECTRIC FACILITIES.  Anything tangible, including equipment, which is
required to provide utility electric service.



   NOTICE.  A written notice personally delivered or mailed by United
States Mail to the proper addressee.




   Notice to the company shall be addressed to:





   Dakota Electric Association





   4300 West 220th Street




   Farmington, MN  55024




   Notice to the city shall be addressed to:





   City of Apple Valley





   Attn: City Clerk





   7100 West 147th Street




   Apple Valley, MN  55124




   With a copy to: 





   Severson, Sheldon, Dougherty & Molenda, P.A.





   Attn: Michael G. Dougherty, Esq.





   7300 West 147th Street, Suite 600




   Apple Valley, MN  55124



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.  As defined in  § 97.02, as amended from time
to time.



   TOTAL COST OF OWNERSHIP.  The cost to the company for owning and
maintaining an overhead or underground line.  The cost is based on
statistical data and includes design, labor, material, maintenance, locating,
taxes and the life expectancy of the line.



   UTILITY SERVICE.  As defined in § 97.02, as applicable to the
electric utility service.



(Ord. 753, passed 6-24-04)



§ 119.02  GRANT OF FRANCHISE .



   (A)   Grant of franchise.  The city hereby grants the company, for
a period of 20 years from the effective date of this chapter, the right to
import, generate, distribute and sell electricity for public and private use
within and through the territorial limits of the city as its boundaries now
exist or as they may be extended in the future.  For these purposes, the
company may construct, operate, repair and maintain electric facilities in,
on, over, under and across the public right-of-ways, subject to the
provisions of this chapter and the public right-of-way regulations as
applicable to utility services as set forth in the Code of Ordinances.  The
company may do all reasonable things necessary or customary to accomplish
these purposes, subject however, to such reasonable regulations as may be
imposed by the city pursuant to ordinance or permit requirements and to the
further provisions of this franchise agreement.



   (B)   Effective date; written acceptance.  This franchise shall be
in force and effect from and after the effective date of this subchapter. 
If the company does not file a written acceptance with the city by the
acceptance deadline, which shall be 60 days after the effective date, or
otherwise informs the city, at any time, that the company does not accept
this franchise, the City Council by resolution may revoke this franchise or
seek its enforcement in a court of competent jurisdiction.



   (C)  Service, service territory and electric rates.  The service to
be provided, the service territory and the rates to be charged by company for
electric service within the city are subject to the jurisdiction of the
Commission.



   (D)  Publication expense.  The company shall pay the expense of
publication of this ordinance.



   (E)  Dispute resolution.  If the city or company asserts that the
other is in default in the performance of any obligation hereunder, the
complaining party shall notify the other party of the default and the desired
remedy.  The notification shall be written.  Representatives of the parties
must promptly meet and attempt in good faith to negotiate a resolution of the
dispute.  If the dispute is not resolved within 30 days of the written
notice, the parties shall jointly select a mediator to facilitate further
discussion.  Mediation must occur within 90 days after selection of the
mediator.  The parties will equally share the fees and expenses of the
mediation.  If the parties are unable to agree on the selection of a
mediator or are unable to resolve the dispute within 90 days after first
meeting with the selected mediator, either party may commence an action in
Dakota County District Court to interpret and enforce this franchise or for
such other relief as may be permitted by law or equity. The mediator shall
not be permitted to testify and no evidence of statements or documents used
in the mediation shall be admitted in the district court action.



   (F)  Continuation of franchise.  If the city and the company are
unable to agree on the terms of a new franchise by the time this franchise
expires, this franchise will remain in effect until a new franchise is agreed
upon, or until 90 days after the city or the company serves written notice to
the other party of its intention to terminate the franchise.  However, in no
event shall this franchise continue for more than one year after expiration
of the 20-year term set forth in § 119.02(A).



(Ord. 753, passed 6-24-04)



§ 119.03  LOCATION; OTHER REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Location of facilities.  Electric facilities shall be
located, constructed, and maintained so as not to interfere with the safety
and convenience of ordinary travel along and over public rights-of-way and so
as not to disrupt normal operation of any city utility system.  Electric
facilities shall be located on public rights-of-way as determined by the
city.  Company's construction, reconstruction, operation, repair,
maintenance, location and relocation of electric facilities shall be subject
to the public right-of-way regulations set forth in the Apple Valley Code of
Ordinances and other reasonable regulations of the city consistent with
authority granted the city to manage its public rights-of-way under state law.



   (B)   Street openings.  Company shall not open or disturb the
surface of any public rights-of-way for any purpose except in accordance with
the public right-of-way regulations as set forth in the Code of Ordinances.



   (C)   Restoration.  After undertaking any work requiring the
opening of any public right-of-way, the company shall restore the public
right-of-way in accordance with Minnesota Rules, part 7819.1100 and the
public right-of-way regulations set forth in the Apple Valley Code of
Ordinances and other applicable Code of Ordinances provisions.



   (D)   Avoid damage to electric facilities.  The company shall take
reasonable measures to prevent the electric facilities from causing damage to
persons or property. The company shall take reasonable measures to protect
the electric facilities from damage that could be inflicted on the facilities
by persons, property, or the elements.  The company shall take protective
measures when the city performs work near the electric facilities, if given
reasonable notice by the city of such work prior to its commencement.



   (E)   Notice of improvements to streets. 



      (1)   The city shall give company reasonable written notice of
plans for improvements to public rights-of-way where the city has reason to
believe that electric facilities may affect or be affected by the
improvement.  The notice will contain: 



         (a)   The nature and character of the improvements;



         (b)   The public rights-of-way upon which the
improvements are to be made;



         (c)   The extent of the improvements;



         (d)   The time when the city will start the work; and



         (e)   If more than one public right-of-way is involved,
the order in which the work is to proceed.



      (2)   The notice provided to company shall set forth a
reasonable length of time, considering seasonal working conditions and the
city's need to complete its public improvement projects in a timely manner,
in advance of the actual commencement of the work to permit company to make
any additions, alterations or repairs to its electric facilities the company
or city deems necessary.



   (F)  Mapping information.  The company must promptly provide complete
and accurate mapping information for any of its electric facilities in
accordance with the requirements of Minnesota Rules Parts 7819.4000 and
7819.4100 and Apple Valley Code of Ordinances public right-of-way regulations.



   (G)   Shared use of poles and underground trenches.  The company
shall make space available on its poles and towers or in its underground
trenches for city communications circuits whenever the use will not interfere
with the use of poles, towers or underground trenches by the company, by
another electric utility, by a telephone utility, or by any cable television
company or other form of communication company.  In addition, the city shall
pay for any added cost incurred by the company because of the use by the
city.  Any city facilities shall be installed and maintained in accordance
with the National Electrical Safety Code (NESC).



   (H)   Building relocations.  The company, at the request of any
person holding a building moving permit and with not less than five days
advance notice, shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its wires, conduits
and cables.  The expense of temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires,
conduits and cables shall be paid by person(s) requesting the same, and the
company shall have the authority to require payment in advance.



   (I)   Tree trimming.  The company may trim all trees and shrubs in
the public ways and public grounds of the city interfering with the proper
construction, operation, repair and maintenance of any electric facilities
installed hereunder, provided that the company shall indemnify and hold the
city harmless from any liability arising therefrom, and subject to permit or
other regulation by the city. 



(Ord. 753, passed 6-24-04)



§ 119.04  RELOCATIONS .



   (A)   Relocation in public rights-of-way. 



      (1)   The company shall comply with Minnesota Rules and Apple
Valley Code of Ordinances public right-of-way regulations and other Code of
Ordinances provisions.  Pursuant to Minnesota Rules 7819.3100, the company
shall promptly and at its own expense, with due regard for seasonal working
conditions, permanently remove and relocate its facilities in the
right-of-way when it is necessary to prevent interference, and not merely for
convenience of the city, in connection with: 



         (a)   A present or future local government use of the
right-of-way for a public project;



         (b)   The public health or safety; or



         (c)   The safety and convenience of travel over the
right-of-way.



      (2)   If the relocation is ordered within five years of a
prior relocation of the same electric facilities which was made at company
expense, the city shall reimburse the company for nonbetterment expenses
based on the Total Cost of Ownership at the time of the city's notice to
vacate.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, company is not required to remove or
relocate its facilities from a right-of-way that has been vacated in favor of
a nongovernmental entity unless and until the reasonable costs to do so are
first paid to company.



   (B)   Relocation of electric facilities in public ground.  Except
as may be provided in division (C) below, the city may require the company to
relocate or remove its electric facilities from public ground upon a finding
by the city that the electric facilities have become or will become a
substantial impairment of the public use to which the public ground is or
will be put.  The relocation or removal shall be at the company's expense. 
The provisions of this section apply only to electric facilities constructed
on public ground in reliance on a franchise and the company does not waive
its rights under an easement held by the company.



   (C)   Projects with federal funding.  Relocation, removal, or
rearrangement of any company electric facilities made necessary because of
the extension into or through the city of a federally-aided highway project
shall be governed by the provisions of M.S. § 161.46, as amended from time
to time.



   (D)   Change to underground.  The City Council may direct the
company to convert its overhead utility lines of 35 KV or less to underground
in any area of the city under the following conditions:



      (1)   The conversion is required as part of a public
improvement project in the area; and



      (2)   The city grants the company a reasonable amount of time
in which to make the conversion.



(Ord. 753, passed 6-24-04)



§ 119.05  INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.



   (A)  Limitation of liability.  The city does not assume any liability
for injuries to persons, damage to property or loss of service claims by
parties other than the company or the city, or for claims or penalties of any
sort resulting from the installation, presence, maintenance or operation of
equipment or facilities by the company or its agents.



   (B)  Indemnification.  The company shall indemnify and keep and hold
the city, its officials, employees and agents, free and harmless from any and
all costs, liabilities, and claims for damages of any kind arising out of the
construction, presence, installation, maintenance, repair or operation of its
equipment and facilities, or out of any activity undertaken in or near a
public right-of-way, or out of any delay thereof, whether or not any act or
omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by permit.  The
foregoing does not indemnify the city for its own negligence except for
claims arising out of or alleging the city's negligence in issuing any permit
or in failing to properly or adequately inspect or enforce compliance with a
term, condition, or purpose of a permit.



   (C)  Defense of city.  In the event a suit is brought against the
city under circumstances where this agreement to indemnify applies, the
company, at its sole cost and expense, shall defend the city in such suit if
written notice thereof is promptly given to the company within a period
wherein the company is not prejudiced by lack of such notice.  If the
company is required to indemnify and defend, it will thereafter have control
of such litigation, but the company may not settle such litigation without
the consent of the city, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
This section is not, as to third parties, a waiver of any defense or immunity
otherwise available to the city.  The company, in defending any action on
behalf of the city, shall be entitled to assert in any action every defense
or immunity that the city could assert in its own behalf.  This franchise
agreement shall not be interpreted to constitute a waiver by the city of any
of its defenses of immunity or limitations on liability under M.S. Chapter
466.



   (D)  Delay damage fee.  The city may establish and impose a damage
fee for unreasonable delays in completion of any right-of-way excavation,
obstruction, patching, restoration, removal, or relocation.  The delay
damage fee shall be established from time-to-time by a resolution of the City
Council based upon its reasonable estimation of the actual costs that would
be incurred due to any delay, the actual amount being undeterminable.  The
company shall be advised in writing by facsimile, with the original to follow
by U.S. mail, of the perceived delay and of the period within which the work
must be completed to avoid a delay damage fee.  Disputes shall be handled in
accordance with § 119.02(E), dispute resolution, hereof.  A delay damage
fee shall not be imposed if the delay in project completion is due to
circumstances beyond the control of the company, including without limitation
inclement weather, acts of God, or civil strife.



(Ord. 753, passed 6-24-04)



§ 119.06  VACATION OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   The city shall give the company at least two weeks prior written notice
of a proposed vacation of a public right-of-way.  The city and the company
shall comply with Minnesota Rules and applicable provisions of the Apple
Valley Code of Ordinances right-of-way regulations and other city ordinances
consistent with law.



(Ord. 753, passed 6-24-04)



§ 119.07  CHANGE IN FORM OF GOVERNMENT.



   Any change in the form of government of the city shall not affect the
validity of this subchapter.  Any governmental unit succeeding the city
shall, without the consent of company, succeed to all of the rights and
obligations of the city provided in this subchapter.



(Ord. 753, passed 6-24-04)



§ 119.08  FRANCHISE FEE.



   (A)  Form. 



      (1)   During the term of the franchise hereby granted, and in
addition to permit fees being imposed or that the city has a right to impose,
the city may charge the company a franchise fee.  The fee may be:



         (a)   A percentage of gross revenues received by the
company for its operations within the city; or



         (b)   A flat fee per customer based on metered service
to retail customers within the city, or on some other similar basis; or



         (c)   A fee based on units of energy delivered to any
class of retail customers within the corporate limits of the city. 



      (2)   The method of imposing the franchise fee, the percentage
of revenue rate, or the flat rate based on metered service may differ for
each customer class or combine the methods described in divisions (1) through
(3) above in assessing the fee.  The city shall use a formula that provides
a stable and predictable amount of fees.



   (B)  Separate ordinance.  The franchise fee shall be imposed by
separate ordinance duly passed and adopted by the City Council, which
subchapter  shall not be adopted until at least 30 days after written notice
enclosing the proposed ordinance has been served upon the company.  The
effective date of the franchise fee shall be specified in the proposed
ordinance.



   (C)   Conditions of fee.  The city may impose a franchise fee on
the company to recover the cost of specific public projects which it orders
from time to time that involve electric utility work of the company.  Any
franchise fee imposed for a specific project after the effective date of this
subchapter shall expire upon the date that the cost of the company's electric
utility work associated with the project has been paid for. A franchise fee
for any other purpose shall not be imposed on the company, unless the same
franchise fee is also imposed on all other energy suppliers providing service
within the city.  This § 119.08(C) shall not apply to any franchise fee
existing or hereinafter imposed in connection with the Johnny Cake Ridge Road
and 140th Street substation and related facilities.



   (D)  Collection of fee.  The franchise fee shall be payable not less
than quarterly during complete billing months of the period for which payment
is to be made.  The franchise fee formula may be changed from time to time,
however, the change shall meet the same notice requirements and the fee may
not be changed more often than annually.  Such fee shall not exceed any
amount that the company may legally charge to its customers prior to payment
to the city.  Such fee is subject to subsequent reductions to account for
uncollectibles and customer refunds incurred by the company.  The company
agrees to make available for inspection by the city at reasonable times all
records necessary to audit the company's determination of the franchise fee
payments.



   (E)   Continuation of franchise fee.  If this franchise expires and
the city and the company are unable to agree upon terms of a new franchise,
the franchise fee, if any being imposed by the city at the time this
franchise expires, will remain in effect until a new franchise is agreed upon.



(Ord. 753, passed 6-24-04)



§ 119.09  ABANDONED FACILITIES.



   The company shall provide advance written notice to the city when
facilities are to be abandoned by the company.  The company shall comply
with applicable provisions of the Apple Valley Code of Ordinances public
right-of-way regulations, as well as other city ordinances, Minnesota
Statutes, and Minnesota Rules, as they may be amended from time to time in
connection with any abandoned facilities.  The company shall maintain
records describing the location of all abandoned facilities within the city,
produce such records at the city's request and comply with the location
requirements of M.S. § 216D.04 with respect to all facilities.  In
addition, upon request by the city to the company, the company shall indicate
the location of abandoned facilities in the road right-of-way and in city
easements.  The company shall indemnify the city for costs incurred by the
city as a result of the company's failure to reasonably indicate the location
of the abandoned facilities.  The company must remove the abandoned
facilities at the company's expense if required in conjunction with any
repair, excavation or construction in the road right-of-way or in city
easements.  If the company does not remove the abandoned facilities pursuant
to this section, the city may remove the abandoned facilities and the company
shall promptly reimburse the city for all costs incurred in connection with
removal of the abandoned facilities.



(Ord. 753, passed 6-24-04)



§ 119.10 PROVISIONS OF SUBCHAPTER.



   (A)   Controlling ordinance.  Company's construction,
reconstruction, operation, repair, maintenance, location and relocation of
electric facilities shall be subject to the city's right-of-way management
ordinance.  Where a provision of any city ordinance conflicts with the
provisions of this subchapter, the provisions of this subchapter shall
prevail.



   (B)   Severability.  Every section, provision, or part of this
subchapter is declared separate from every other section, provision, or part;
and if any section, provision, or part shall be held invalid, it shall not
affect any other section, provision, or part.



   (C)   Limitation on applicability.  This subchapter constitutes a
franchise agreement between the city and company as the only parties and no
provision of this franchise shall in any way inure to the benefit of any
third person (including the public at large) so as to constitute any such
person as a third party beneficiary of the agreement or of any one or more of
the terms hereof, or otherwise give rise to any cause of action in any person
not a party hereto.



(Ord. 753, passed 6-24-04)



§ 119.11  AMENDMENT PROCEDURE.



   Either party to this franchise agreement may at any time propose that
the agreement be amended.  This subchapter may be amended at any time by the
city passing a subsequent ordinance declaring the provisions of the
amendment, which amendatory ordinance shall become effective upon the filing
of company's written consent thereto with the City Clerk within 60 days after
the effective date of the amendatory ordinance.



(Ord. 753, passed 6-24-04)



CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE



§ 119.20  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   The city intends, by the adoption of this franchise, to bring
about the further development of a cable system, and the continued operation
of it.  Such a development can contribute significantly to the communication
needs and desires of residents of the city.  Further, the city may achieve
better utilization and improvement of public services with the development
and operation of a cable system.



   (B)   Past studies by the city have led the way for organizing a
means of procuring and securing a cable system which, in the judgment of the
city, is best suited to meet the needs of the community. This has resulted in
the preparation and adoption of this franchise.



(Ord. 660, passed 4-22-99)



§ 119.21  FINDINGS.



   In the review of the request and proposal for renewal by Marcus Cable
Partners, L.L.C., (grantee) and negotiations related thereto, and as a result
of a public hearing, the city makes the following findings:



   (A)   The grantee’s technical, financial, legal qualifications and
ability, and character were considered and approved in a full public
proceeding after due notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard;



   (B)   Grantee’s plans for constructing, upgrading and operating
the system were considered and found adequate and feasible in a full public
proceeding after due notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard;



   (C)   The franchise granted to grantee by the city complies with the
existing applicable Minnesota Statutes, federal laws and regulations; and



   (D)   The franchise granted to grantee is nonexclusive.



(Ord. 660, passed 4-22-99)



§ 119.22  TITLE AND DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Short title.  This franchise subchapter shall be known and
cited as the Cable Communications Ordinance.



   (B)   Definitions. 



      (1)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      (2)   When not inconsistent with the context, words in the
singular number include the plural number.  The words “shall” and
“must” are always mandatory and not merely directory.  The word
“may” is directory and discretionary and not mandatory.



   BASIC CABLE SERVICE.  Any service tier which includes the lawful
retransmission of local television broadcast signals and any public,
educational and governmental access programming required by the franchise to
be carried on the basic tier.  BASIC CABLE SERVICE as defined herein shall
not be inconsistent with 47 USC 543 (b)(7).



   CABLE PROGRAMMING SERVICE. 



      (1)   Any video programming provided over a cable system,
regardless of service tier, including installation or rental of equipment
used for the receipt of the video programming, other than:



         (a)   Basic cable service;



         (b)   Video programming offered on a pay-per-channel or
pay-per-program basis; or



         (c)   A combination of multiple channels of
pay-per-channel or pay-per-program video programming offered on a multiplexed
or time- shifted basis so long as the combined service:



            1.   Consists of commonly- identified video
programming; and



            2.   Is not bundled with any regulated tier of
service.



      (2)   CABLE PROGRAMMING SERVICE.  Shall not be inconsistent
with the definition as set forth in 47 USC 543 (l)(2) and 47 CFR 76.901(b).



   CABLE SERVICE or SERVICE.  The one-way transmission to subscribers of
video programming or other programming service pursuant to M.S. §§ 238.01
et seq., and 47 USC 521 et seq., as may be amended from time to time.



   CABLE SYSTEM or SYSTEM.  A system of antennas, cables, wires, lines,
towers, waveguides, or other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities
located in the city and designed and constructed for the purpose of
producing, receiving, transmitting, amplifying or distributing audio, video
and data.  SYSTEM, as defined herein, shall not be inconsistent with the
definitions set forth in M.S. § 238.02, subd. 3 and 47 USC 522(7).



   CITY.  The City of Apple Valley, Minnesota.



   CLASS IV CHANNEL.  A signaling path provided by a cable system to
transmit signals of any type from a subscriber terminal to another point in
the system.



   CONVERTER.  An electronic device which converts signals to a frequency
acceptable to a television receiver of a subscriber and by an appropriate
selector permits a subscriber to view all subscriber signals included in the
service.



   DROP.  The cable that connects the ground block on the subscriber’s
residence to the nearest feeder cable of the system.



   FCC.  The Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed,
designated or elected agent or successor.



   FRANCHISE or CABLE FRANCHISE.  This subchapter and the contractual
relationship established hereby.



   FRANCHISE FEE.  Includes any tax, fee or assessment of any kind
imposed by a franchising authority or other governmental entity on a cable
operator or cable subscriber, or both, solely because of their status as
such.  FRANCHISE FEE does not include:



      (1)   Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability,
including any tax, fee or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable
operators or their services but not including a tax, fee or assessment which
is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers;



      (2)   In the case of any franchise granted after October 30,
1984, any payments which are required by the franchise to be incurred by the
cable operator for public, educational or governmental access facilities;



      (3)   Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or
enforcing of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds,
letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties or liquidated
damages; or



      (4)   Any fee imposed under Title 17.



   GRANTEE.  Marcus Cable Partners, L.L.C., its agents and employees,
lawful successors, transferees or assignees.



   GROSS REVENUES.  All revenue received directly or indirectly by the
grantee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parent or person in which grantee has
financial interest of 5% or more, from the operation of its system, including
but not limited to cable service fees, interest, installation and
reconnection fees, upgrade and downgrade fees, advertising revenue, franchise
fee receipts, revenues generated by sales on home shopping channel(s), leased
channel fees, converter rental fees, lockout device fees or fees for any
other cable services provided via the system.  GROSS REVENUES shall not
include bad debt, or any taxes on services furnished by grantee which are
imposed by any municipality, state or other governmental unit and collected
by grantee for governmental unit.



   INSTALLATION.  The connection of the system from feeder cable to the
point of connection with the ground block.



   LOCKOUT DEVICE.  An optional mechanical or electrical accessory which
inhibits the viewing of a certain program, certain channel or certain
channels provided by way of the cable communication system.



   NODE.  The demarcation point in the system where fiber optic
components and signals are converted to coaxial or non-optical components and
all related equipment.



   NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS.  At least 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.  In all cases,
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS must include some evening hours at least one night per
week and/or some weekend hours.



   NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS.  Those service conditions which are
within the control of the grantee.  Those conditions which are typically not
within the control of grantee include, but are not limited to, natural
disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages and
severe or unusual weather conditions.  Those conditions which are typically
within the control of grantee include, but are not limited to, special
promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal
demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the system.



   PAY TELEVISION.  The delivery over the system of pay-per-channel or
pay-per-program audio-visual signals to subscribers for a fee or charge, in
addition to the charge for basic cable service or cable programming services.



   PEG ACCESS or PEG.  Public, educational and governmental programming
channels, equipment, facilities, funding or operations as the context may
require.



   PEG FEE.  A fee to subscribers for support of PEG access.



   PERSON.  Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or other legal entity.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY.  The area on, below or above any real
property in the city in which the city has an interest including, but not
limited to any street, road, highway, alley, sidewalk, parkway, park, skyway
or any other place, area or real property owned by or under the control of
the city, including any otherRIGHTS-OF-WAY dedicated for travel purposes and
utility easements.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY ORDINANCE.  The ordinance adopted by the city creating
requirements regarding regulation, management and use of rights-of-way,
including registration and permitting requirements.



   SERVICE INTERRUPTION.  The loss of picture or sound on one or more
cable channels for longer than a momentary period.



   STANDARD INSTALLATION.  Any residential installation which can be
completed using a drop of 200 feet or less.



   SUBSCRIBER.  Any person who lawfully receives service via the system.



(Ord. 660, passed 4-22-99)



§ 119.23  GRANT OF AUTHORITY; GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Grant of franchise.  This franchise is granted pursuant to
the terms and conditions contained herein.



   (B)   Franchise required.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
construct, operate or maintain a system or provide service in the city unless
the person shall first obtain and hold a valid franchise.



   (C)   Grant of nonexclusive authority.



      (1)   The grantee shall have the right and privilege pursuant
to this franchise, subject to the requirements of any applicable ordinance,
rule or procedure, to construct, erect, maintain and operate a cable system
in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the rights-of-way in the city
and shall have the right and privilege to provide cable service.  The system
constructed and maintained by grantee or its agents shall not interfere with
other uses of the rights-of-way.  The grantee shall make use of existing
poles and other above and below-ground facilities available to the grantee to
the extent it is technically and economically feasible to do so.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the above grant to use rights-of-way,
use of rights-of-way shall not be inconsistent with the terms and conditions
by which the rights-of way were created or dedicated and with all legal
requirements related to the use of the rights-of-way, including the terms and
conditions of any applicable right-of-way ordinance.  This provision in no
way limits the grantee’s rights pursuant to M.S. § 838.35.



      (3)   This franchise shall be nonexclusive. Additional
franchises granted by the city shall be substantially similar substantive
terms and conditions.



   (D)   Lease or assignment prohibited.  No person may lease
grantee’s system for the purpose of providing service until and unless the
person shall have first obtained and shall currently hold a valid franchise.



   (E)   Franchise term.  This franchise shall be in effect for a
period of 15 years from the date of acceptance by grantee.



   (F)   Previous franchises.  Upon acceptance by the grantee, as
required herein, this franchise shall supersede and replace the previous
ordinance granting a franchise to grantee.



   (G)   Compliance with applicable laws, resolutions and ordinances. 
The grantee shall at all times during the term of this franchise be subject
to all lawful exercise of the police power, statutory rights, local
ordinance-making authority and eminent domain rights of the city.  This
franchise shall comply with Minnesota franchise standards contained in M.S.
§§ 238.01 et seq.



   (H)   Territorial area involved.  This franchise is granted for the
corporate boundaries of the city as it exists from time to time.  In the
event of annexation by the city, or as development occurs, any new territory
shall become part of the territory for which this franchise is granted
provided, however, that grantee shall not be required to extend service
beyond its present system boundaries unless there is a minimum of 30 homes
per cable mile.  Grantee shall extend service to any other areas or persons
requesting service at a cost equal to the construction costs, including
material, labor and any necessary easements, per mile multiplied by a
fraction whose numerator equals the actual number of homes per mile, and
whose denominator equals 30 homes.  Those persons wishing to become
subscribers and requesting service will bear the remainder of the
construction costs on a pro rata basis.  The grantee may require that the
payment of these costs by the potential subscribers be made in advance. 
Access to cable service shall not be denied to any group of potential
residential cable subscribers because of the income of the residents of the
area in which the group resides.  The grantee shall be given a reasonable
period of time to construct and activate cable plant to service annexed or
newly developed areas but in no event not to exceed 12 months from notice
thereof by the city to the grantee.



   (I)   Written notice. 



      (1)   All notices, reports or demands required to be given in
writing under this franchise shall be deemed to be given when delivered
personally to any officer of grantee or city’s administrator of this
franchise or 48 hours after it is deposited in the United States mail in a
sealed envelope, with registered or certified mail postage prepaid thereon,
addressed to the party to whom notice is being given, as follows:



         (a)   If to city:



            City of Apple Valley



            c/o City Administrator



            14200 Cedar Avenue



            Apple Valley, MN 55124



         (b)   With copies to:



            Thomas D. Creighton, Esq.



            Robert J. V. Vose, Esq.



            Bernick and Lifson



            Suite 1200, The Colonnade



            5500 Wayzata Boulevard



            Minneapolis, MN 55416



         (c)   If to grantee:



            Marcus Cable Partners, L.L.C.



            16900 Cedar Avenue South



            Rosemount, MN 55068



         (d)   With copies to:



            Jane E. Bremer, Esq.



            Larkin, Hoffman, Daly & Lindgren, Ltd.



            1500 Norwest Financial Center



            7900 Xerxes Avenue South



            Bloomington, MN 55431



      (2)   The addresses may be changed by either party upon notice
to the other party given as provided in this section.



   (J)   Drops to public buildings.  The grantee shall provide, free
of charge, installation of one two-way activated cable drop which does not
include upstream transmission equipment, one cable outlet, and monthly basic
cable service without charge to the institutions identified in Exhibit A
attached and such other public or educational institutions within the cable
service territory which the city may designate and which are within 200 feet
of the system.



   (K)   Redistribution of service.  Redistribution of the free basic
cable service provided pursuant to this section shall be allowed with the
grantee’s prior written consent or for educational purposes. Additional
drops and/or outlets in any of the above locations shall be provided by
grantee at the cost of grantee’s time and material.  Alternatively, at the
city or institution’s request, the institution may add outlets at its own
expense, as long as the installation meets applicable FCC technical
standards.  Drops to subsequently designated institutions in excess of 200
feet shall be provided by the grantee at the cost of the grantee’s time and
materials less the cost of the 200 feet closest to the building.  The
grantee shall have one year from the date of the city designation of
additional institution(s) to complete construction of the drop and outlet.



(Ord. 660, passed 4-22-99)



§ 119.24  CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   (A)   Registration, permits and construction codes.



      (1)   The grantee shall strictly adhere to all state and local
laws and building and zoning codes currently or hereafter applicable to
location, construction, installation, operation or maintenance of the system
in the city.



      (2)   The city shall have the right to inspect all
construction or installation work performed pursuant to the provisions of the
franchise and to make the tests as it shall find necessary to ensure
compliance with the terms of the franchise and applicable provisions of
local, state and federal law.



   (B)   Repair of rights-of-way and property.  Any and all
rights-of-way or public property or private property, which are disturbed or
damaged during the construction, repair, replacement, relocation, operation,
maintenance or reconstruction of the system shall be promptly and fully
restored by the grantee, at its expense, to the same condition as that
prevailing prior to grantee’s work, as approved by city in the case of
rights-of-way and other public property.  If, after reasonable notice,
grantee fails to promptly perform the restoration required herein, city may
perform the restoration of the rights-of-way, public or private property as
required herein at the grantee’s expense.



   (C)   Conditions on right-of-way use. 



      (1)   Nothing in this franchise shall be construed to prevent
the city from adopting and enforcing requirements for the usage of
rights-of-way or from constructing, maintaining, repairing or relocating
sewers; grading, paving, maintaining, repairing, relocating and/or altering
any right-of-way; constructing, laying down, repairing, maintaining or
relocating any water mains; or constructing, maintaining, relocating or
repairing any sidewalk or other public work.



      (2)   All system transmission and distribution structures,
lines and equipment erected by the grantee shall be located so as not to
obstruct or interfere with the use of right-of-way and to cause minimum
interference with the rights of property owners who abut any of the
right-of-way and not to interfere with existing public utility
installations.  The grantee shall furnish to and file with the city the
maps, plats and permanent records of the location and character of all
facilities constructed, including underground facilities, and grantee shall
file with the city updates of the maps, plats and permanent records annually
if changes have been made in the system.



      (3)   If at any time during the period of this franchise city
shall elect to, alter or change the grade or location of any right-of-way,
the grantee shall, upon reasonable notice in a manner consistent with
applicable ordinances, remove and relocate its poles, wires, cables,
conduits, manholes and other fixtures of the system.  If the city enters
into an agreement to reimburse other occupants of the right-of-way for the
relocation or removal, grantee shall be likewise reimbursed.



      (4)   The grantee shall not place poles, conduits or other
fixtures of system above or below ground where the same will interfere with
any gas, electric, telephone, water or other utility fixtures and all poles,
conduits or other fixtures placed in any right-of-way shall be so placed as
to comply with all requirements of the city.  The grantee shall utilize
existing poles, conduits or other wire-holding structures of existing
utilities to the extent technically and economically feasible.  The city
shall have no obligation to assist grantee in obtaining the consent for use
of existing facilities from any utility company.



      (5)   The grantee shall, upon request of any person holding a
moving permit issued by the city, temporarily move its wires or fixtures to
permit the moving of buildings with the expense of the temporary removal to
be paid in advance by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall
be given not less than a ten-day advance notice to arrange for temporary
changes.



      (6)   The grantee shall have the authority to trim any trees
upon and overhanging the rights-of- way only to the extent necessary to
prevent the branches of the trees from coming in contact with the wires and
cables of the grantee.



      (7)   Nothing contained in this franchise shall relieve any
person from liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care
to avoid injuring grantee’s facilities.



   (D)   Undergrounding of cable.  The grantee must place newly
constructed facilities underground in areas of the city where all other
utility lines are placed underground.  Amplifier boxes and pedestal mounted
terminal boxes may be placed above ground if existing technology reasonably
requires, but shall be of a size and design and shall be so located as not to
be unsightly or unsafe, all as may be approved by the city in accordance with
applicable requirements.



   (E)   Drop burial.  The grantee shall bury all drops in a
reasonable time period which shall not exceed ten business days, subject to
weather conditions and the completion of required utility locates.  In the
event the ground is frozen, grantee shall be permitted to delay burial until
the ground is suitable for burial which in no event shall be later than June
30.



   (F)   Erection, removal and joint use of poles.  No poles,
conduits, amplifier boxes, pedestal mounted terminal boxes, similar
structures or other wire-holding structures shall be erected or installed by
the grantee without prior approval of the city with regard to location,
height, type and other pertinent aspects.



   (G)   Safety requirements.



      (1)   The grantee shall at all times employ ordinary and
reasonable care and shall install and maintain in use nothing less than
commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents
which are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the public.



      (2)   The grantee shall install and maintain its system and
other equipment in accordance with all federal, state and local laws and
regulations, and the requirements of the National Electric Safety Code and in
such manner that they will not interfere with private radio, police and fire
communications or any installations of the city or of any public utility
serving the city.



      (3)   All system structures, and lines, equipment and
connections in, over, under and upon the rights-of-way, wherever situated or
located, shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order
and repair so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life or property
of the city or any person.



   (H)   Emergency use of facilities.  In the case of any emergency or
disaster, the grantee shall, upon request of the city, make available its
facilities to city during the period of emergency or disaster.



(Ord. 660, passed 4-22-99)



§ 119.25  DESIGN PROVISIONS.



   (A)   System upgrade; minimum channel capacity.



      (1)   The grantee shall develop, construct and continue for
the term of this franchise to provide a 750 MHz fiber/coaxial hybrid system
which is engineered and activated so as to be capable of delivering a minimum
of 80 video programmed channels.  The system shall be designed with an
average 500 homes per fiber node configuration.



      (2)   All programming decisions remain the discretion of
grantee; provided, however, that any change in the broad categories of video
programming or other information services shall require the approval of the
city consistent with 47 USC 544 (b), which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld, and further provided that grantee notifies the city and subscribers
in writing 30 days prior to any channel additions, deletions or realignments,
and further subject to grantee’s signal carriage obligations hereunder and
pursuant to 47 USC § 531 through 536, and further provided that grantee may
not eliminate, move or renumber any PEG access or other community programming
channel required hereunder without prior approval of the city.  The grantee
shall conduct programming surveys from time to time to obtain input on
programming decisions from subscribers.



      (3)   The grantee shall interconnect with any adjoining cable
system at such time as consent from the adjoining operator is received. 
Nothing herein shall require grantee to interconnect unless the operator of
the adjoining system agrees to pay a pro rata share of the interconnection
costs.



   (B)   Reserved capacity for institutional services.  In the event
public institutions within the city elect to utilize the system for
non-commercial applications, they shall be offered service on terms and
conditions substantially similar to those contained in the agreement between
Marcus Fiberlink and the City of Lakeville, dated November 1, 1998.  The
grantee shall not be required to provide any particular service or
application which grantee lacks technological ability or regulatory approval
to provide.  A requesting institution may provide equipment or seek
regulatory approval independent of grantee in order to provide the service or
application via reserved capacity.



   (C)   Construction timetable.  The grantee shall complete
construction related to the system upgrade required herein and activate the
upgrade within 18 months of the effective date of this franchise.  Failure
to timely complete the construction shall be a violation of this franchise.



   (D)   Operation and maintenance of system.  The grantee shall
render effective service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only
for good cause and for the shortest time possible.  The interruption, to the
extent feasible, shall be preceded by notice in accordance with section §
119.23(I) herein and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system.



   (E)   Technical standards.  The technical standards used in the
operation of the system shall comply, at minimum, with the technical
standards promulgated by the FCC relating to cable systems pursuant to 47 CFR
76.601 to 76.617, as may be amended or modified from time to time, which
regulations are expressly incorporated herein by reference.



   (F)   Special testing.



      (1)   The city may require testing of a location or locations
within the system or the system as a whole.  Demand for the special tests
may be made on the basis of complaints received or other evidence indicating
an unresolved controversy or noncompliance.  The city shall endeavor to so
arrange its request for special testing so as to minimize hardship or
inconvenience to grantee or to the subscribers caused by the testing.



      (2)   Before ordering the tests, grantee shall be afforded 30
days to correct problems or complaints upon which tests were ordered.  If
the 30 days have elapsed without correction of the matter in controversy or
unresolved complaints, the tests shall be conducted by a qualified engineer
selected by the city.



      (3)   In the event that special testing determines that the
system or grantee is the source of technical difficulties in violation of the
FCC technical specifications as required by this franchise, the cost of the
testing shall be reimbursed by the grantee.



   (G)   FCC reports.  The results of any tests required to be filed
by grantee with the FCC shall also be filed with the city or its designee
within ten days of the conduct of the tests.



   (H)   Nonvoice return capability.  The grantee is required to use
cable having the technical capacity for nonvoice return communications.



   (I)    Lockout device.  Upon the request of a subscriber, the
grantee shall provide a lockout device.



(Ord. 660, passed 4-22-99)



§ 119.26  SERVICE PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Regulation of service rates.



      (1)   The city may regulate rates for the provision of cable
service, equipment or any other communications service provided over the
system to the extent allowed under federal or state law(s).  The city
reserves the right to regulate rates for any future services to the extent
permitted by law.



      (2)   A list of grantee’s current subscriber rates and
charges shall be maintained on file with the city and shall be available for
public inspection.  The grantee shall give the city and subscribers written
notice of any change in a rate or charge no less than 30 days prior to the
effective date of the change.



   (B)   Non-standard installations.  The grantee shall install and
provide cable service to any person requesting other than a standard
installation provided that cable service can meet FCC technical
specifications.  In such case, the grantee may charge for the incremental
increase in material and labor costs incurred beyond the standard
installation.



   (C)   Sales procedures.  The grantee shall not exercise deceptive
sales procedures when marketing any of its services within city.  The
grantee shall have the right to market door-to-door during reasonable hours
consistent with local ordinances and regulation.



   (D)   Telephone inquiries and complaints.



      (1)   Availability.  The grantee will maintain an adequate
number of local, toll-free or collect call telephone access lines which will
be available to its subscribers 24 hours a day, seven days a week, so as to
receive subscriber complaints, requests and inquiries.  During normal
business hours, trained representatives of the grantee shall be available to
respond to subscriber inquiries.  The grantee will ensure that:



         (a)   An adequate number of trained company
representatives will be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries
during normal business hours; and



         (b)   After normal business hours, the access line may
be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an
answering machine.  Further, inquiries received after normal business hours
must be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business
day.



      (2)   Telephone answer time and busy signals.  Under normal
operating conditions, telephone answer time by a customer representative,
including wait time, shall not exceed 30 seconds after the connection is
made.  If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed
30 seconds.  These standards shall be met no less than 90% of the time under
normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis. Under normal
operating conditions, the customer will receive a busy signal less than 3% of
the time.



   (E)   Installation, outage and service calls.  Under normal
operating conditions, each of the following standards will be met no less
than 95% of the time measured on a quarterly basis:



      (1)   Installations will be performed within seven business
days after an order has been placed.



      (2)   The grantee will begin working on service interruptions
promptly, in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes
known, and subscriber requests for repairs shall be performed within 24 hours
of the request unless conditions beyond the control of grantee prevent the 
performance.



      (3)   The appointment window alternatives for installations,
service calls and other installation activities will be either a specific
time or, at maximum, a four-hour time block during normal business hours. 
The grantee may schedule service calls and other installation activities
outside of normal business hours for the convenience of the customer.



      (4)   The grantee may not cancel an appointment with a
customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the
scheduled appointment.



      (5)   If a representative of the grantee is running late for
an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment
as scheduled, the customer will be contacted.  The appointment will be
rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer.



   (F)   Complaint and other service records. Subject to the
grantee’s need to maintain the privacy of certain information, the grantee
shall prepare and maintain written records of all complaints received and the
resolution of complaints, including the date of the resolution.  The written
records shall be on file at the office of grantee.  The grantee shall
provide the city with a written summary of the complaints and their
resolution on a quarterly basis.  The grantee will also provide detailed
compliance reports on a quarterly basis with respect to the objectively
measurable service standards herein in a form mutually agreed upon.



   (G)   Billing and subscriber communications.  The grantee must give
subscribers 30 days advance written notice with copy to city before any
changes in rates, programming services, or channel positions.  Bills must be
clear, concise and understandable, with itemization of all charges for
services, equipment charges and any optional services, charges and other
activity during the billing period.  In case of a billing dispute, the cable
operator must respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days.



   (H)   Subscriber contracts.  The grantee shall file with the city
any standard form subscriber contract utilized by grantee.  If no written
contract exists, the grantee shall file with the city a document completely
and concisely stating the length and terms of the subscriber contract offered
to customers.  The length and terms of any subscriber contract(s) shall be
available for public inspection during normal business hours.



   (I)   Refunds and credits.  In the event a subscriber establishes
or terminates service and receives less than a full month’s service, the
grantee shall prorate the monthly rate on the basis of the number of days in
the period for which service was rendered to the number of days in the
billing.  Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than the
return of the equipment supplied by the grantee if service is terminated. 
If service is interrupted or discontinued for a total of more than 48 hours
in any 30-day period, subscribers shall be credited pro rata for the
interruption beginning with the date of interruption.  Credits for will be
issued no later than the subscriber’s next billing cycle following the
determination that a credit is warranted.



   (J)   Late fees.  Fees for the late payment of bills shall not
accrue until the normal billing cut-off for the next month’s service and in
no event less than one month after the unpaid bill in question was sent to
the subscriber customer service center and bill payment locations will be
open at least during normal business hours.  Payments at the cable
operator’s drop-box location shall be deemed received on the date the
payments are picked up by the cable operator which shall occur within 24
hours after every due date.  The cable operators shall continue to provide a
grace period of at least five days after each due date.  Late fees shall not
exceed the grantee’s actual and demonstrable costs associated with
collection of late payments as may be determined by a court of competent
jurisdiction.



   (K)   Drop box.  The grantee shall maintain a local drop box for
receiving subscriber payments after hours.



   (L)   Additional customer service requirements. The city expressly
reserves authority to adopt additional or modified customer service
requirements to address subscriber concerns or complaints in accordance with
law.



(Ord. 660, passed 4-22-99)



§ 119.27  ACCESS CHANNEL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Public, educational and government access.



      (1)   The city is hereby designated to operate, administer,
promote and manage community programming, public, education and government
programming, hereinafter PEG access, in the cable system.



      (2)   The grantee shall dedicate five channel(s), with channel
defined as a six MHz spectrum allocation, for PEG access and community
programming use.  All residential subscribers who receive all or any part of
the total services offered on the system shall be eligible to receive the
channels at no additional charge.  The channel(s) shall be activated upon
the effective date of this franchise and thereafter maintained.  The city
may rename, reprogram or otherwise change the use of these channels in its
sole discretion, provided the use is non-commercial and retains the general
purpose of the provision of community programming.  Nothing herein shall
diminish the city’s rights to secure additional channels pursuant to M.S.
§ 238.084, which is expressly incorporated herein by reference. The city
shall provide a 90-day prior written notice to grantee of city’s intent to
activate access channels and shall allow grantee reasonable time to vacate
the channel(s).



      (3)   The VHF spectrum must be used for the PEG access
channel(s) required in this section.  The grantee shall designate the
channel locations of any other access channel(s) but may not move or
otherwise change the channel number or location of any PEG access or
community program channel without the written approval of the city.



   (B)   Charges for use.  Channel time and playback of prerecorded
programming on the PEG access and community program channel(s) must be
provided without charge to the city and the public.



   (C)   Access rules.  City, or its designee, shall implement rules
for use of any access channel(s).



   (D)   Access support.



      (1)   The grantee shall collect from subscribers and quarterly
pay to the city in support of PEG operations the full amount of revenues
generated by a $.25 per month, per subscriber, fee beginning upon the
effective date of this franchise.  This fee may be separately itemized as a
PEG fee and passed through to subscribers independent from rates regulated
pursuant to FCC regulations.  The city may require increases in the PEG fee
up to a limit of $1.25 increased annually by the Consumer Price Index (CPI)
or 3%, whichever is less.  The city may not increase the PEG fee by more
than $.25 in any given year.  The city shall notify grantee of any such
increase on or before September 30, assuming a January 1 implementation. 
Should the grantee change the date of any annual rate change from January 1,
and so notify the city, then the city shall notify grantee of any PEG
increase at least 90 days prior to the new grantee rate change date.  The
payment shall be separate from and in addition to the franchise fee.



      (2)   The grantee shall transfer title to any PEG equipment
which it owns currently to provide PEG programming to the city and repair or
replace such other PEG equipment as the city deems necessary, as is indicated
on Exhibit C, Ord. 660, passed 4-22-99.



      (3)   Within 45 days of the effective date of this franchise,
grantee shall pay the city $90,000 as a capital equipment grant.  The
grantee may recoup the grant by an addition of up to $.25 to the PEG fee. 
The additional PEG fee shall be retained by the grantee until the time as the
capital grant above is recouped.  Upon the recoupment, grantee shall notify
the city.  The city shall have the option of leaving the recoupment addition
as part of the PEG fee on a going forward basis.  The grantee shall pay this
additional amount to the city in its regular PEG fee payment to the city. 
In the year of recoupment, the city may not increase the PEG fee an
additional amount.



(Ord. 660, passed 4-22-99)



§ 119.28  OPERATION AND ADMINISTRATION PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Administration of franchise.  The city shall have continuing
regulatory jurisdiction and supervision over the system and the grantee’s
operation under the franchise.



   (B)   Delegated authority.  The city may delegate to any other body
or person authority to administer the franchise and to monitor the
performance of the grantee pursuant to the franchise; provided, however, the
city shall not delegate any enforcement power it may have pursuant to this
franchise or any applicable laws.



   (C)   Franchise fee.



      (1)   During the term of the franchise, the grantee shall pay
to the city a franchise fee in an annual amount equal to 5% of its gross
revenues.



      (2)   Any payments due under this provision shall be payable
quarterly.  The payment shall be made within 60 days of the end of each of
the grantee’s current fiscal quarters together with a report in form
reasonably acceptable to the city and the grantee and which shows the basis
for the computation.



      (3)   All amounts paid shall be subject to audit and
recomputation by the city and acceptance of any payment shall not be
construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount.



   (D)   Access to records.  The city shall have the right to inspect,
upon reasonable notice and during normal business hours, any records
maintained by grantee which relate to this franchise or system operations
including specifically grantee’s accounting and financial records, subject
to the privacy provisions of 47 USC 521 et seq.  In addition or
alternatively, the grantee shall provide copies of any records upon request
by city.



   (E)   Reports and maps to be filed with the city.



      (1)   The grantee shall file with the city, at the time of
payment of the franchise fee, a report of all gross revenues certified by an
officer of the grantee.



      (2)   The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the city, at
the times and in the form prescribed, other reports with respect to the
operations, affairs, transactions or property, as they relate to the system,
which the grantee and the city may agree upon.



      (3)   The grantee shall furnish to and file with the city upon
request the maps, plats and permanent records of the location and character
of all facilities constructed, including underground facilities.



   (F)   Periodic evaluation.



      (1)   The city may require evaluation sessions at any time
during the term of this franchise, upon a 30-day written notice to the
grantee.



      (2)   All evaluation sessions shall be open to the public. 
The grantee shall notify its subscribers of all evaluation sessions by
announcement of at least 60 seconds in duration on at least one basic service
channel of the system between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m., for five
consecutive days preceding each session.



      (3)   Topics which may be discussed at any evaluation session
may include, but are not limited to, application of new technologies, system
performance, programming offered, access channels, facilities and support,
municipal uses of cable, customer complaints, amendments to this franchise,
judicial rulings, FCC rulings, line extension policies and any other topics
the city and the grantee deem relevant.



      (4)   As a result of a periodic review or evaluation session,
the city may request the grantee to amend the franchise to provide additional
services or facilities as are mutually agreed upon and which are both
economically and technically feasible.



(Ord. 660, passed 4-22-99)



§ 119.29  FINANCIAL PROVISIONS; INSURANCE.



   (A)   Performance bond.



      (1)   At the time the franchise becomes effective and at all
times thereafter, until the grantee has liquidated all of its obligations
with the city, the grantee shall furnish a bond to the city in the amount of
$50,000 in a form and with sureties as are reasonably acceptable to the
city. 



      (2)   This bond will be conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the grantee according to the terms of the franchise and upon
the further condition that in the event the grantee shall fail to comply with
any law, ordinance or regulation governing the franchise, there shall be
recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the bond
any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result, including the full
amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of removal or abandonment
of any property of the grantee, plus a reasonable allowance for attorneys’
fees and costs, up to the full amount of the bond, and further guaranteeing
payment by the grantee of claims, liens and taxes due the city which arise by
reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the system.



      (3)   The rights reserved by the city with respect to the bond
are in addition to all other rights the city may have under the franchise or
any other law.  The city may, from year to year, in its sole discretion,
reduce the amount of the bond.



      (4)   In the event this franchise is canceled by reason of
default of grantee or revoked, the city shall be entitled to collect from the
performance bond that amount which is attributable to any damages sustained
by the city pursuant to the default or revocation.  The grantee, however,
shall be entitled to the return of the performance bond, or portion thereof,
as remains at the expiration of the term of the franchise.



      (5)   The rights reserved to the city with respect to the
performance bond shall not be deemed an exclusive remedy and are in addition
to all other rights of the city whether reserved by this franchise or
authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with
respect to the performance bond shall affect any other right the city may
have.



   (B)   Construction bond.  Upon the grantee’s initiation of
construction and system upgrade in city as required by this franchise, the
grantee shall provide an additional construction bond to city in the amount
of $50,000 or shall increase the performance bond to $100,000.  The grantee
shall maintain the bond(s) during the term of the construction upon the terms
and conditions provided above.  Upon completion of construction, the grantee
shall provide written notice to city.  Within 30 days of receipt of the
notice, the city shall indicate in writing its agreement or specify those
items of construction which city determines are incomplete.  At the time as
the city and the grantee mutually agree that the construction is complete,
the grantee shall be required to provide city only with a performance bond as
required above.



   (C)   Letter of credit.



      (1)   At the time of acceptance of this franchise, the grantee
shall deliver to the city an irrevocable and unconditional letter of credit,
in form and substance acceptable to the city, from a national or state bank
approved by the city, in the amount of $10,000.



      (2)   The letter of credit shall provide that funds will be
paid to the city, upon written demand of the city, and in an amount solely
determined by the city in payment for penalties charged pursuant to this
section, in payment for any monies owed by grantee pursuant to its
obligations under this franchise, or in payment for any damage incurred as a
result of any acts or omissions by grantee pursuant to this franchise.



      (3)   In addition to recovery of any monies owed by grantee to
the city or damages to the city as a result of any acts or omissions by
grantee pursuant to the franchise, the city, in its sole discretion, may
charge to and collect from the letter of credit the penalties prescribed in
§ 119.99.



      (4)   Whenever the city finds that the grantee has violated
one or more terms, conditions or provisions of this franchise, a written
notice shall be given to grantee informing it of the violation.  At any time
after 30 days following receipt of notice, provided the grantee remains in
violation of one or more terms, conditions or provisions of this franchise,
in the sole opinion of the city, the city may draw from the letter of credit
all penalties or monies due the city from the date of the local receipt of
notice.  The city may grant additional time beyond the initial 30 days in
the event the city determines the additional time is necessary to cure the
alleged violation.



      (5)   The grantee may, within 15 days of receipt of the
notice, notify the city in writing that there is a dispute as to whether a
violation or failure has in fact occurred.  The written notice by the
grantee to the city shall specify with particularity the matters disputed by
the grantee.  All penalties shall continue to accrue and the city may draw
from the letter of credit at the end of the 30-day cure period
notwithstanding the grantee’s dispute regarding the violation.



         (a)   The city shall hear the grantee’s dispute at the
next regularly scheduled meeting or within 60 days, whichever period is
longer.



         (b)   Upon determination by the city that no violation
has taken place, the city shall rescind the notice of violation and refund to
grantee, without interest, all monies drawn from the letter of credit by
reason of the alleged violation.



      (6)   (a)   If the letter of credit or any subsequent
letter of credit delivered pursuant thereto expires prior to five months
after the expiration of the term of this franchise, it shall be renewed or
replaced during the term of this franchise to provide that it will not expire
earlier than five months after the expiration of this franchise.



         (b)   The renewed or replaced letter of credit shall be
of the same form and amount and with a bank authorized herein.



      (7)   If the city draws upon the letter of credit on any
subsequent letter of credit delivered pursuant hereto, in whole or in part,
the grantee shall replace the same within ten days and shall deliver to the
city a like replacement letter of credit for the full amount required herein
as a substitution of the previous letter of credit.



      (8)   If any letter of credit is not so replaced, the city may
draw on the letter of credit for the whole amount thereof and use the
proceeds as the city determines in its sole discretion.  The failure to
replace any letter of credit may also, at the option of the city, be deemed a
default by grantee under this franchise.  The drawing on the letter of
credit by the city, and use of the money so obtained for payment or
performance of the obligations, duties and responsibilities of grantee which
are in default, shall not be a waiver or release of the default.



      (9)   Collection by the city of any damages, monies or
penalties from the letter of credit shall not be deemed an exclusive remedy
and shall not affect any other right or remedy available to the city, nor
shall any act, or failure to act, by the city pursuant to the letter of
credit, be deemed a waiver of any right of the city pursuant to this
franchise or otherwise.



   (D)   Indemnification of the city.



      (1)   The city, its officers, boards, committees, commissions,
elected officials, employees and agents shall not be liable for any loss or
damage to any real or personal property of any person, or for any injury to
or death of any person, arising out of or in connection with the construction
operation, maintenance, repair or removal of or other action or event with
respect to the system or as to any other action or event with respect to this
franchise.



      (2)   The grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless
the city, its officers, boards, committees, commissions, elected officials,
employees and agents, from and against all liability, damages, and penalties
which they may legally be required to pay as a result of the exercise,
administration or enforcement of the franchise including, but not limited to,
the reimbursement to the city of any insurance deductible paid by the city.



      (3)   Nothing in this franchise relieves a person, except the
city, from liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care
to avoid injuring the grantee’s facilities while performing work connected
with grading, regrading or changing the line of a right-of-way or public
place or with the construction or reconstruction of a sewer or water system.



   (E)   Insurance.



      (1)   The grantee shall file with its acceptance of this
franchise, and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and effect at
its sole expense, a comprehensive general liability insurance policy,
including broadcaster’s/cablecaster’s liability and contractual liability
coverage, in protection of the grantee, and the city, its officers, elected
officials, boards, commissions, agents and employees for any and all damages
and penalties which may arise as a result of this franchise.  The policy or
policies shall name the city as an additional insured, and in their capacity
as such, the city officers, elected officials,  boards, commissions, agents
and employees.



      (2)   The policies of insurance shall be in the sum of not
less than $1,000,000 for personal injury or death of any one person, and
$2,000,000 for personal injury or death of two or more persons in any one
occurrence, $1,000,000 for property damage to any one person and $2,000,000
for property damage resulting from any one act or occurrence.



      (3)   The policy or policies of insurance shall be maintained
by grantee in full force and effect during the entire term of the
franchise.  Each policy of insurance shall contain a statement on its face
that the insurer will not cancel the policy or fail to renew the policy,
whether for nonpayment of premium, or otherwise, and whether at the request
of the grantee or for other reasons, except after a 60-day advance written
notice has been provided to the city.



(Ord. 660, passed 4-22-99)



§ 119.30  SALE, ABANDONMENT AND TRANSFER.



   (A)   City’s right to revoke.  In addition to all other rights
which the city has pursuant to law or equity, the city reserves the right to
revoke, terminate or cancel this franchise, and all rights and privileges
pertaining thereto, if after the hearing required by division (B) below, it
is determined that:



      (1)   The grantee has violated any material provision of this
franchise;



      (2)   The grantee has attempted to evade any of the material
provisions of the franchise;



      (3)   The grantee has practiced fraud or deceit upon the city
or subscriber; or



      (4)   The grantee is adjudged a bankrupt.



   (B)   Procedures for revocation.



      (1)   The city shall provide the grantee with written notice
of a cause for revocation and the intent to revoke and shall allow grantee 60
days subsequent to receipt of the notice in which to correct the violation or
to provide adequate assurance of performance in compliance with the franchise.



      (2)   The grantee shall be provided the right to a public
hearing affording due process before the city prior to revocation, which
public hearing shall follow the 60-day notice provided in subsection (1)
above.  The city shall provide the grantee with written notice of its
decision together with written findings of fact supplementing the decision.



      (3)   Only after the public hearing and upon written notice of
the determination by the city to revoke the franchise may grantee appeal the
decision with an appropriate state or federal court or agency.



      (4)   During the appeal period, the grantee may continue to
operate the system pursuant to the terms and conditions of the franchise,
unless the term thereof sooner expires.



   (C)   Abandonment of service.  The grantee may not abandon the
system or any portion thereof without having first given a three-month
written notice to the city.  The grantee may not abandon the system or any
portion thereof without compensating the city for damages resulting from the
abandonment.



   (D)   Removal after abandonment, termination or forfeiture.



      (1)   In the event of termination or forfeiture of the
franchise or abandonment of the system, the city shall have the right to
require grantee to remove all or any portion of the system from all
rights-of-way and public property within the city provided, however, that the
grantee shall not be required to remove the system if it is authorized to
provide telecommunications service pursuant to state or federal law.



      (2)   If the grantee has failed to commence removal of system,
or such part thereof as was designated by the city, within 120 days after
written notice of the city demand for removal is given, or if the grantee has
failed to complete the removal within 12 months after written notice of the
city demand for removal is given, the city shall have the right to apply
funds secured by the letter of credit and performance bond toward removal
and/or declare all right, title and interest to the system to be in the city
with all rights of ownership including, but not limited to, the right to
operate the system or transfer the system to another for operation by it
pursuant to the provisions of 47 USC 547.



   (E)   Sale or transfer of franchise.



      (1)   No sale, transfer or corporate change of or in grantee,
including, but not limited to, the sale of a majority of the entity’s
assets, a merger including the merger of a subsidiary and parent entity,
consolidation or the creation of a subsidiary or affiliate entity, shall take
place until the parties to the sale, transfer or corporate change file a
written request with the city for its approval and the approval is granted by
the city, provided, however, that the approval shall not be required where
the grantee grants a security interest in its franchise and assets to secure
an indebtedness.



      (2)   Any sale, transfer, exchange or assignment of stock in
grantee so as to create a new controlling interest in the system shall be
subject to the requirements of this section.  The term controlling interest
as used herein is not limited to majority stock ownership, but includes
actual working control in whatever manner exercised.  As a minimum, control
or controlling interest as used herein, means a legal or beneficial interest
(even though actual working control does not exist) of at least 5%.



      (3)   The city shall have such time as is permitted by
applicable law in which to review a transfer request.



      (4)   The grantee shall reimburse city for all reasonable
legal, administrative and consulting costs and fees associated with the
city’s review of any request to transfer.  Nothing herein shall prevent
the grantee from negotiating partial or complete payment of costs and fees by
the transferee.



      (5)   In no event shall a sale, transfer, corporate change or
assignment of ownership or control pursuant to subsection (1) or (2) above be
approved without the transferee becoming a signatory to this franchise and
assuming all rights and obligations hereunder, and assuming all other rights
and obligations of the transferor to the city.



      (6)   In the event of any proposed sale, transfer, corporate
change or assignment pursuant to subsection (1) or (2) above, the city shall
have the right of first refusal of any bona fide offer to purchase the
system.  Bona fide offer, as used in this section, means an offer received
by the grantee which it intends to accept subject to the city rights under
this section.  This written offer must be conveyed to the city along with
the grantee’s written acceptance of the offer contingent upon the rights of
the city provided for in this section.



   (F)   Waiver of rights.  The city shall be deemed to have waived
its rights under this section in the following circumstances:



      (1)   If it does not indicate to the grantee in writing,
within 90 days of notice of a proposed sale or assignment, its intention to
exercise its right of purchase; or



      (2)   It approves the assignment or sale of the franchise as
provided within this section.



(Ord. 660, passed 4-22-99)



§ 119.31  PROTECTION OF INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS.



   (A)   Discriminatory practices prohibited.  The grantee shall not
deny service, deny access or otherwise discriminate against subscribers or
general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex,
age, status as to public assistance, affectional preference or disability. 
The grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal,
state and local laws, and all executive and administrative orders relating to
nondiscrimination.



   (B)   Subscriber privacy.



      (1)   The grantee shall comply with the subscriber
privacy-related requirements of 47 USC 551.  No signals including signals of
a Class IV channel may be transmitted from a subscriber terminal for purposes
of monitoring individual viewing patterns or practices without the express
written permission of the subscriber.  Written permission shall be for a
limited period of time not to exceed one year which may be renewed at the
option of the subscriber.  No penalty shall be invoked for a subscriber’s
failure to provide or renew authorization.  The authorization shall be
revocable at any time by the subscriber without penalty of any kind
whatsoever.  Permission shall be required for each type or classification of
Class IV channel activity planned for the purpose of monitoring individual
viewing patterns or practices.



      (2)   No lists of the names and addresses of subscribers or
any lists that identify the viewing habits of subscribers shall be sold or
otherwise made available to any party other than to the grantee and its
employees for internal business use, and also to the subscriber subject of
that information, unless the grantee has received specific written
authorization from the subscriber to make the data available. Written
permission shall be for a limited period of time not to exceed one year which
may be renewed at the option of the subscriber.  No penalty shall be invoked
for a subscriber’s failure to provide or renew authorization.  The
authorization shall be revocable at any time by the subscriber without
penalty of any kind whatsoever.



      (3)   Written permission from the subscriber shall not be
required for the conducting of system- wide or individually addressed
electronic sweeps for the purpose of verifying system integrity or monitoring
for the purpose of billing.  Confidentiality of information shall be subject
to the provision set forth in subsection (2) above.



(Ord. 660, passed 4-22-99)



§ 119.32  RENEWAL AND AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Franchise renewal.  Any renewal of this franchise shall be
performed in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws and
regulations.  The term of any renewed franchise shall be limited to a period
not to exceed 15 years.



   (B)   Work performed by others.  All obligations of this franchise
shall apply to any subcontractor or others performing any work or services
pursuant to the provisions of this franchise, however, in no event shall any
subcontractor or other person performing work obtain any rights to maintain
and operate a system or provide cable service.  The grantee shall provide
notice to the city of the name(s) and address(es) of any entity, other than
grantee, which performs substantial services, in excess of $70,000, pursuant
to this franchise.



   (C)   Amendment of franchise ordinance.  The grantee and the city
may agree, from time to time, to amend this franchise.  Written amendments
may be made subsequent to a review session pursuant to § 119.28(F) or at any
other time if the city and the grantee agree that an amendment will be in the
public interest or if such an amendment is required due to changes in
federal, state or local laws, provided, however, nothing herein shall
restrict the city’s exercise of its police powers.



   (D)   Compliance with federal, state and local laws.



      (1)   If any federal or state law or regulation shall require
or permit the city or grantee to perform any service or act or shall prohibit
the city or grantee from performing any service or act which may be in
conflict with the terms of this franchise, then as soon as possible following
knowledge thereof, either party shall notify the other of the point in
conflict believed to exist between such law or regulation.  The grantee and
the city shall conform to state laws and rules regarding cable communications
not later than one year after they become effective, unless otherwise stated,
and to conform to federal laws and regulations regarding cable as they become
effective.



      (2)   If any term, condition or provision of this franchise or
the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall, to any extent,
be held to be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder hereof and the
application of such term, condition or provision to persons or circumstances
other than those as to whom it shall be held invalid or unenforceable shall
not be affected thereby, and this franchise and all the terms, provisions and
conditions hereof shall, in all other respects, continue to be effective and
complied with provided the loss of the invalid or unenforceable clause does
not substantially alter the agreement between the parties.  In the event the
law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or
otherwise changed so that the provision which had been held invalid or
modified is no longer in conflict with the law, rules and regulations then in
effect, the provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect and
shall thereafter be binding on the grantee and the city.



   (E)   Nonenforcement by city.  The grantee shall not be relieved of
its obligations to comply with any of the provisions of this franchise by
reason of any failure or delay of the city to enforce prompt compliance. 
The city may only waive its rights hereunder by expressly so stating in
writing.  Any written waiver by the city of a breach or violation of any
provision of this franchise shall not operate as or be construed to be a
waiver of any subsequent breach or violation.



   (F)   Rights cumulative.  All rights and remedies given to the city
by this franchise shall be in addition to and cumulative with any and all
other rights and remedies, existing or implied, now or hereafter available to
the city at law or in equity, and such rights and remedies shall not be
exclusive, but each and every right and remedy specifically given by this
franchise or otherwise existing or given may be exercised from time to time
and as often and in such order as may be deemed expedient by the city and the
exercise of one or more rights or remedies shall not be deemed a waiver of
the right to exercise at the same time or thereafter any other right or
remedy.



   (G)   The grantee acknowledgment of validity of franchise.  The
grantee acknowledges that it has had an opportunity to review the terms and
conditions of this franchise and that under current law grantee believes that
the terms and conditions are not unreasonable or arbitrary, and that grantee
believes the city has the power to make the terms and conditions contained in
this franchise.



(Ord. 660, passed 4-22-99)



§ 119.33  PUBLICATION AND ACCEPTANCE.



   (A)   Publishing franchise.  This franchise shall be published in
accordance with applicable local and Minnesota law. The effective date of
this franchise shall be the date of acceptance by grantee in accordance with
the provisions of division (B).



   (B)   Acceptance.



      (1)   The grantee shall accept this franchise within 60 days
of its enactment by the city, unless the time for acceptance is extended by
the city.  Acceptance by the grantee shall be deemed the grant of this
franchise for all purposes provided.  In the event acceptance does not take
place, or should all ordinance adoption procedures and timelines not be
completed, this franchise and any and all rights previously granted to
grantee shall be null and void.



      (2)   Upon acceptance of this franchise, the grantee shall be
bound by all the terms and conditions contained herein.



      (3)   The grantee shall accept this franchise in the following
manner:



         (a)   This franchise will be properly executed and
acknowledged by the grantee and delivered to the city; and



         (b)   With its acceptance, the grantee shall also
deliver any grant payments, performance bond and insurance certificates
required herein that have not previously been delivered.



(Ord. 660, passed 4-22-99)



CABLE SYSTEM FRANCHISE-FRONTIER COMMUNICATIONS



§ 119.40  CABLE SYSTEM FRANCHISE.



   (A)   Statement of intent and purposes. The city intends, by the
adoption of this franchise, to authorize the operation of a cable system in
competition with an



incumbent franchised cable operator. Such competition can contribute
significantly to the cable communications needs and desires of the residents
and citizens of the city and the public generally.



   (B)   Findings. In the review of the request for a franchise by
grantee and negotiations related thereto, and as a result of a public
hearing, the City Council makes the following findings:



      (1)   Grantee’s technical ability, financial condition and
legal qualifications were considered and approved in a full public proceeding
after due notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard;



      (2)   Grantee’s plans for operating the cable system were
considered and found adequate and feasible in a full public proceeding after
due notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard;



      (3)   The franchise granted to grantee by the city complies
with the existing applicable state statutes, federal laws and regulations; and



      (4)   The franchise granted to grantee is nonexclusive.



   (C)   Short title. This franchise shall be known and cited as the
Frontier Cable System Franchise chapter.



   (D)   Definitions. For purposes of this franchise, the following
terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning ascribed
to them by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended from time
to time (the “Cable Act”), unless otherwise defined herein. Words used in
the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the
singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.
All capitalized terms used in the definition of any other term shall have
their meaning as otherwise defined in this section. The words SHALL and WILL
are mandatory and MAY is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their
common and ordinary meaning.



      BASIC CABLE SERVICE. Any service tier which includes the lawful
retransmission of local television broadcast signals and any public,
educational, and governmental access programming required by the franchise to
be carried on the basic tier. BASIC CABLE SERVICE as defined herein shall be
the definition set forth in 47 U.S.C. § 522(3).



      CABLE ACT. The Cable Communications Act of 1984 as amended, 47
U.S.C. § 521 et. seq.



      CABLE SERVICE or SERVICE means:



         (a)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of:



            i.   Video programming; or



            ii.   Other programming service; and



         (b)   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required
for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming
service. Cable service as defined herein shall be the definition set forth in
47 U.S.C. § 522(6).



      CABLE SYSTEM or SYSTEM. A facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video
programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community,
but such term does not include:



         (a)   A facility that serves only to retransmit the
television signals of one or more television broadcast stations;



         (b)   A facility that serves subscribers without using
any public rights-of-way;



         (c)   A facility of a common carrier which is subject,
in whole or in part, to the provisions of 47 U.S.C. §§ 201 et seq., except
that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for
purposes of 47 U.S.C. § 541(c)) to the extent such facility is used in the
transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; unless the extent
of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services;



         (d)   An open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C.
§ 573; or



         (e)   Any facilities of any electric utility used solely
for operating its electric utility system.



         (f)   CABLE SYSTEM as defined herein shall be the
definition set forth in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7).



      CHANNEL or CABLE CHANNEL. A portion of the electromagnetic
frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of
delivering a television channel.



      CITY. The City of Apple Valley, Minnesota.



      CITY CODE. The municipal code of the City of Apple Valley, as may
be amended from time to time.



      CONVERTER. An electronic device which converts signals to a
frequency acceptable to a television receiver of a subscriber.



      COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Apple Valley, Minnesota.



      DAY. Unless otherwise specified shall mean a calendar day.



      DEMARCATION POINT. A point agreed upon by a grantee and the city
up to 12 inches outside the building wall consistent with 47 C.F.R. § 76.5
(mm) as may be amended.



      DROP. The cable that connects the ground block on the
subscriber’s residence to the nearest distribution point of the system.



      EFFECTIVE DATE. October 1, 2016.



      FCC. The Federal Communications Commission and any legally
appointed, designated or elected agent or successor.



      FRANCHISE. This franchise and the regulatory and contractual
relationship established hereby.



      FRANCHISE FEE. In accordance with 47 U.S.C. § 542(g), any tax,
fee, or assessment of any kind imposed by the city or other governmental
authority on grantee or cable subscriber, or both, solely because of their
status as such. The term FRANCHISE FEE does not include:



         (a)   Any tax, fee, or assessment of general
applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both
utilities and cable operators or their services but not including a tax, fee,
or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or
subscribers);



         (b)   Capital costs which are required by the franchise
to be incurred by grantee for PEG Access facilities;



         (c)   Requirements or charges incidental to the award or
enforcement of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds,
letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated
damages; or



         (d)   Any fee imposed under Title 17 of the United
States Code.



      GOVERNMENTAL AUTHORITY. Any court or other federal, state,
county, municipal or other governmental department, commission, board, agency
or instrumentality.



      GRANTEE. Frontier Communications of Minnesota, Inc., a Minnesota
Corporation, its lawful successors, transferees or assignees.



      GROSS REVENUES.



         (a)   Any and all revenues actually received by the
grantee, as determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles (“GAAP”), from the operations of the cable system to provide
cable services in the service area. Gross revenues shall not include any
taxes, fees or assessments of general applicability imposed or assessed by
any governmental authority, launch fees, tower rent, network capacity and
facilities rent for the provision of non-cable services (including but not
limited to voice or data services), investment income, bad debt,  credits,
refunds, any amounts collected from subscribers for deposits, FCC fees or PEG
fees. A franchise fee is not such a tax, fee or assessment. The city
acknowledges and accepts that grantee shall maintain its books and records in
accordance with GAAP.



         (b)   The parties acknowledge that the grantee may offer
a bundle or package of cable services and non-cable services at a discounted
rate. In order to calculate gross revenues, the grantee will allocate
revenues between cable services (which are subject to the franchise fee) and
non-cable services (which are not subject to the franchise fee but may be
subject to other fees and/or taxes) included in the bundle or package of
services. Nothing in this section shall have any effect on grantee’s rates
for other services that are rate regulated by the Minnesota Public Utilities
Commission or Federal Communications Commission. The grantee shall apportion
the revenues generated from bundled or packaged services on a proportionate
pro rata basis among the services offered unless such allocation methodology
is directly in conflict with GAAP, in which case grantee shall allocate
bundled revenues in accordance with GAAP, and in no event shall the grantee
allocate the revenues to evade its franchise fee obligations under this
franchise or disproportionately reduce gross revenues.



      INSTALLATION. The connection of the system from distribution
cable to the point of connection, including standard installations and custom
installations.



      NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS. Those hours during which most similar
businesses in the city are open to serve customers. In all cases, NORMAL
BUSINESS HOURS must include some evening hours at least one night per week
and/or some weekend hours. Cable system NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS as defined
herein shall be the definition set forth in 47 C.F.R. § 76.309(d).



      OTHER PROGRAMMING SERVICES. Information that a cable operator
makes available to all subscribers generally. OTHER PROGRAMMING SERVICES as
defined herein shall be the definition set forth in 47 U.S.C. § 522(14).



      PEG. Public, educational and governmental.



      PERSON. Any individual or any association, firm, general
partnership, limited partnership, joint stock company, joint venture, trust,
corporation, limited liability company or other legally recognized entity,
private or public, whether for-profit or not-for-profit.



      QUALIFIED LIVING UNIT. A living unit capable of receiving cable
service.



      RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS- OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above the
public roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane, and public sidewalk
in which the city has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way
for travel purposes and utility easements of local government units including
the city.



      SERVICE AREA. That portion of the city, as it is now constituted
or may in the future be constituted, in which grantee is authorized to
provide local exchange telephone service as the incumbent local exchange
carrier, unless otherwise specified in this franchise.



      SERVICE INTERRUPTION. The loss of picture or sound on one or more
cable channels. SERVICE INTERRUPTION as defined herein shall be the
definition set forth in 47 C.F.R. § 76.309.



      STANDARD INSTALLATION. Any residential installation to a
qualified living unit.



      STATE. The State of Minnesota.



      SUBSCRIBER. Any person who lawfully elects to subscribe to cable
service via the system. SUBSCRIBER as defined herein shall be the definition
set forth in 47 C.F.R. § 76.5(ee).



      VIDEO PROGRAMMING. Programming provided by, or generally
considered comparable to programming provided by a television broadcast
station. VIDEO PROGRAMMING as defined herein shall be the definition set
forth in 47 U.S.C. § 522(20).



   (E)   Written notice.



      (1)   All notices, reports or demands required or permitted to
be given under this franchise shall be in writing and shall be deemed to be
given when delivered personally to the party designated below, or when five
days have elapsed after it has been deposited in the United States mail in a
sealed envelope, which registered or certified mail, postage prepaid thereon,
or on the next business day if sent by express mail or nationally recognized
overnight air courier addressed to the party to which notice, report or
demand is being given, as follows:



      If to city:   City Administrator
            City of Apple Valley
            7100 147th Street West
            Apple Valley, MN 55124



      If to grantee:   Jack Phillips
            Frontier Communications
            14450 Burnhaven Drive
            Burnsville, MN 55306



      (2)   Such addresses may be changed by either party upon
notice to the other party given as provided in this section.



   (F)   Grant of authority and general provisions.



      (1)   Franchise required. It shall be unlawful for any person
to construct, install, operate or maintain a cable system or to offer cable
service in the city unless such person or the person for whom such action is
being taken shall have first obtained and shall currently hold a valid cable
television franchise. The city shall at all times comply with the level
playing field statute at M.S. § 238.08 and any other applicable state or
federal level playing field requirements.



      (2)   Grant of franchise.



         (a)   This nonexclusive franchise is granted pursuant to
the terms and conditions contained herein. The city hereby authorizes grantee
to occupy or use the city’s rights-of- ways subject to: 1) the provisions
of this non-exclusive franchise to provide cable service within the city; and
2) all generally applicable nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral
provisions of the city code. Nothing in this franchise shall be construed to
prohibit grantee from: 1) providing services other than cable services; or 2)
challenging any exercise of the city’s legislative or regulatory authority
in an appropriate forum. The city hereby reserves all of its rights to
regulate such other services to the extent not prohibited by applicable law
and no provision herein shall be construed to limit or give up any city right
to regulate.



         (b)   The city shall endeavor to require developers of
future subdivisions to allow and accommodate the construction of the system
as part of any provisions for utilities to serve such subdivisions.



         (c)   The grantee agrees to comply with the terms of any
lawfully adopted generally applicable local ordinance related to the safety,
health, and welfare of the public or use of rights-of-way, to the extent that
the provisions of the ordinance do not conflict with this franchise. This
franchise is a contract and except as to those changes which are the result
of the city’s lawful exercise of its general police power, the city may not
take any unilateral action which materially changes the explicit mutual
promises in this contract. Any changes to this franchise must be made in
writing signed by the grantee and the city. In the event of any conflict
between this franchise and any city ordinance or regulation that is not
generally applicable, this franchise shall control. Grantee reserves all
rights it may have to challenge any modifications to the city code whether
arising in contract or at law. The city reserves all of its rights and
defenses to such challenges whether arising in contract or at law.



         (d)   Nothing in this franchise shall:



            i.   Abrogate the right of the city to perform any
public works or public improvements of any description;



            ii.   Be construed as a waiver of any codes or
ordinances promulgated by the city;



            iii.   Be construed as a waiver or release of the
rights of the city in and to the right-of-way; or



            iv.   Be construed as a waiver or release of
rights of the grantee.



         (e)   This franchise complies with the Minnesota
franchise standards set forth in M.S. § 238.084. The city and the grantee
shall conform to Minnesota laws promulgated subsequent to the date of this
franchise. The city and the grantee shall conform to federal laws and
regulations as they become effective.



      (3)   Additional providers.



         (a)   The franchise granted herein shall be nonexclusive.



         (b)   In the event the city initiates the franchising
process pursuant to M.S. § 238.081, the city shall notify grantee in writing
or by publication of notice of its intent to initiate the franchising process
at least 20 days prior to doing so.



         (c)   Grantee shall have the right to terminate this
franchise and operate the cable system to the extent provided in any future
amendment to applicable state or federal law.



      (4)   Term. The initial term of this franchise shall be for
the period of five years from the effective date unless renewed, revoked, or
terminated sooner as herein provided (“Initial Term”). The initial term
may be extended by mutual agreement of the parties.



      (5)   Rules of grantee. The grantee shall have the authority
to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the
conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable said
grantee to exercise its rights and perform its obligation under this
franchise and to assure uninterrupted service to each and all of its
subscribers; provided that such rules, regulations, terms and conditions
shall not be in conflict with provisions hereto, the city code or applicable
law.



      (6)   Service area and service activation.



         (a)   This franchise is granted for the service area.
Grantee shall design, construct and maintain the cable system in the service
area in accordance with M.S. § 238.084. As the cable system is constructed
and made capable of providing cable service, grantee shall activate and offer
cable service to qualified living units within a reasonable period of time.
No person shall be refused service arbitrarily.



         (b)   Throughout the term of the franchise, grantee
shall annually meet with city representatives to report on the progress of
cable system construction and service activation and, at such annual
meetings, shall provide current service area maps. Grantee’s annually
updated maps may be marked as “Trade Secret” in which case the city shall
maintain them accordingly under the Minnesota Data Practices Act, M.S. Ch. 13.



   (G)   Construction standards.



      (1)   Permits. Grantee shall not construct any cable system
facilities until grantee has secured the permits from the city required by
applicable law.



      (2)   Grantee’s facilities and equipment.



         (a)   In those areas of the city where transmission or
distribution facilities of all the utilities providing telephone and electric
power service are underground, the grantee likewise shall construct, operate
and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities therein underground.



         (b)   Grantee shall be granted access to any easements
granted to a public utility, municipal utility or utility district in any
areas annexed by city or new developments.



         (c)   In those areas of the city where grantee’s
cables are located on the above-ground transmission or distribution
facilities of the utility providing telephone or electric power service, and
in the event that the facilities of both such utilities subsequently are
placed underground, then the grantee likewise shall construct, operate and
maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground.



         (d)   Certain of grantee’s equipment, such as
pedestals, amplifiers and power supplies, which normally are placed above
ground, may continue to remain in above-ground enclosures.



      (3)   Conditions on right-of- way use.



         (a)   Nothing in this franchise shall be construed to
prevent the city from constructing, maintaining, repairing or relocating
sewers; grading, paving, maintaining, repairing, relocating and/or altering
any right-of- way; constructing, laying down, repairing, maintaining or
relocating any water mains; or constructing, maintaining, relocating, or
repairing any sidewalk or other public work consistent with applicable law.



         (b)   Relocation for the city. The grantee shall, upon
receipt of reasonable advance written notice, temporarily disconnect,
relocate, or remove any property of grantee when lawfully required by the
city pursuant to its police powers. Grantee shall be responsible for any
costs associated with these obligations to the same extent all other users of
the city rights-of- way are responsible for the costs related to the
relocation of their facilities.



         (c)   Relocation for a third party. The grantee shall,
on the request of any person holding a lawful permit issued by the city,
protect, support, raise, lower, temporarily disconnect, relocate in or remove
from the right- of-way as necessary any property of the grantee, provided
that the expense of such is paid by any such person benefitting from the
relocation prior to grantee commencing the work required and the grantee is
given reasonable advance written notice to prepare for such changes. The
grantee may require such payment in advance. For purposes of this division,
“reasonable advance written notice” shall be no less than ten business
days in the event of a temporary relocation and no less than 120 days for a
permanent relocation.



         (d)   Reimbursement of costs. If funds are available to
any person using the rights-of-way for the purpose of defraying the cost of
any of the foregoing, the city shall reimburse the grantee in the same manner
in which other persons affected by the requirement are reimbursed. If the
funds are controlled by another governmental entity, the city shall make
application for such funds on behalf of the grantee.



         (e)   The grantee shall, on request of any person
holding a moving permit issued by the city, temporarily move its wires or
fixtures to permit the moving of buildings with the expense of such temporary
removal to be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall
be given not less than ten days advance notice to arrange for such temporary
changes.



         (f)   Nothing in this franchise shall be construed to
prevent the city from adopting and enforcing requirements for the usage of
rights-of-way, or from constructing, maintaining, repairing or relocating
utility facilities, streets or sidewalks, or from grading, paving,
maintaining, repairing, relocating and/or altering any right-of-way.



         (g)   All system facilities shall be located so as not
to obstruct or interfere with the use of right-of-way and public utility
installations, and so as not to unnecessarily interfere with the usual and
customary trade, traffic, or travel upon the streets and public places in the
franchise area or endanger the life or property of any person.



      (4)   Tree trimming. Grantee shall have the authority to trim
trees, in accordance with applicable law.



      (5)   Protection of facilities. Nothing contained in this
section shall relieve any person from liability arising out of the failure to
exercise reasonable care to avoid damaging grantee’s facilities while
performing any work connected with grading, regrading or changing the line of
any rights-of-way or public place or the construction or reconstruction of
any sewer or water system.



      (6)   Safety requirements. The grantee shall at all times keep
and maintain the system in good condition, order, and repair so as to avoid
endangering the life or property of any person; employ ordinary and
reasonable care and common industry practices to avoid causing damage,
injuries, or nuisances to the public, and; keep and maintain the system in
accordance with all federal, state and local laws and regulations including
the National Electric Safety Code.



      (7)   Drop burial. Grantee shall bury all drops in a
reasonable time period which shall not exceed ten business days, subject to
weather conditions and the completion of required utility locates. In the
event the ground is frozen, grantee shall be permitted to delay burial until
the ground is suitable for burial which in no event shall be later than June
30.



      (8)   Repair of rights-of-way and property. Any and all
rights-of-way or public property disturbed or damaged during the
construction, repair, replacement, relocation, operation, maintenance or
reconstruction of the system shall be promptly and fully restored by grantee
at its expense in accordance with any applicable ordinance governing
rights-of-way.



   (H)   Design provision.



      (1)   Cable system design and functionality. The grantee shall
operate a cable system with the functional equivalent of a 750 MHz cable
system (in terms of video offerings and functionality).



      (2)   Programming decisions.



         (a)   Grantee shall carry broad categories of video
programming, including local news, sports, and entertainment. Any change in
the broad categories of video programming or other information services shall
require city approval consistent with 47 U.S.C. § 544(b), which approval
shall not be unreasonably withheld.



         (b)   Grantee shall comply with federal law regarding
notice to the city and subscribers prior to any channel additions, deletions,
or realignments.



      (3)   Technical standards. The technical standards used in the
operation of the cable system shall comply, at minimum, with applicable
technical standards promulgated by the FCC relating to cable systems
including, to the extent applicable, Title 47, Section 76, Subpart K of the
Code of Federal Regulations, as may be amended or modified from time to time,
which regulations are expressly incorporated herein by reference.



      (4)   Special testing. City may reasonably require special
testing of a location or locations within the system if there is a particular
matter of controversy or unresolved complaints pertaining to such
location(s). Demand for such special tests may be made on the basis of
complaints received or other evidence indicating an unresolved controversy or
noncompliance. Such tests shall be limited to the particular matter in
controversy or unresolved complaints. The city shall arrange its request for
such special testing so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to grantee
or to the subscribers caused by such testing. Before ordering such tests, the
grantee shall be afforded 30 days to correct problems or complaints upon
which tests were ordered. The city shall meet with grantee prior to requiring
special tests to discuss the need for such and, if possible, visually inspect
those locations which are the focus of concern. If, after such meetings and
inspections, the city wishes to commence special tests and the 30 days have
elapsed without correction of the matter in controversy or unresolved
complaints, the tests shall be conducted by a qualified engineer mutually
selected by the city and grantee based on a mutually agreed upon scope of
work. The parties shall bear their respective costs for the testing.



      (5)   FCC reports. The results of tests required to be filed
by grantee with the FCC shall also be copied to the city within ten days of
filing such report with the FCC.



      (6)   Emergency alert capability. At all times during the term
of this franchise, grantee shall provide and maintain an Emergency Alert
System (EAS) consistent with applicable federal law and regulations including
47 C.F.R., Part 11, and any Minnesota State Emergency Alert System
requirements. The city may identify authorized emergency officials for
activating the EAS consistent with the Minnesota State Emergency Statewide
Plan (“EAS Plan”).



      (7)   Parental control lock. Grantee shall provide, for sale
or lease, to subscribers, upon request, a parental control locking device or
digital code that permits inhibiting the video and audio portions of any
channels offered by grantee.



   (I)   Service provisions.



      (1)   Rate regulation.  The city reserves the right to
regulate rates for basic cable service (hereinafter referred to as "the
lowest cost level of service") and any other services offered over the cable
system, to the extent authorized by applicable law. 



      (2)   Leased channel service. Grantee shall offer leased
channel service on reasonable terms and conditions and in accordance with
applicable law.



      (3)   Service to public buildings. Subject to applicable law,
the grantee shall provide, free of charge, the lowest cost level of service,
and any converter or other device necessary to receive such service, to one
drop at City Hall and, within one  year of the effective date, such
institutional buildings as are listed in Exhibit A, and such additional
institutional buildings that may be identified by the city and are a
qualified living unit, so long as such building is not currently served by
another cable operator.



      (4)   Consumer Protection and Service Standards.  Grantee
shall comply with the FCC Customer Service Rules at 47 CFR §76.309, and the
following:



         (a)   Complaint records. Subject to grantee's need to
maintain the privacy of certain information, the grantee shall at all times
maintain a record of all written complaints received regarding interruptions
or degradation of cable service and the resolution of such complaints, which
shall be maintained for one year.  Upon request, grantee shall make
available for the city's review a written summary of such complaints and
their resolution in accordance with divisions (K)(3) and (4) of this
section.  Upon request, grantee will also make reports available with
respect to the objectively measurable service standards established at 47 CFR
§ 76.309.



         (b)   Additional customer service requirements. The city
expressly reserves authority to adopt additional or modified customer service
requirements to address subscriber concerns or complaints in accordance with
law and divisions (K)(3) and (4) of this section.



      (5)   Standard installations. The grantee shall provide
standard installations without charge to every qualified living unit. 



      (6)   Sales procedures. Grantee shall have the right to market
door-to-door during reasonable hours consistent with local ordinances and
regulation. 



      (7)   Subscriber contracts. Grantee shall, upon written
request, provide the city with any standard form residential subscriber
contract utilized by grantee.  If no such written contract exists, grantee
shall file with the city a document completely and concisely stating the
length and terms of the subscriber contract offered to customers.  The
length and terms of any standard form subscriber contract(s) shall be
available for public inspection during normal business hours.  A list of
grantee's current subscriber rates and charges for cable service shall be
maintained on file with the city and shall be available for public
inspection. For purposes of this section, the availability of this
information on grantee's website shall constitute compliance.



      (8)   Refund policy. If a subscriber's cable service is
interrupted or discontinued, without cause, for 24 or more consecutive hours,
grantee shall, upon request by the subscriber, credit such subscriber pro
rata for such interruption.  For this purpose, every month will be assumed
to have 30 days.



      (9)   Late fees. Grantee shall comply with all applicable laws
with respect to any assessment, charge, cost, fee or sum, however
characterized, that grantee imposes upon a subscriber for late payment of a
bill. 



      (10)   Disputes. All subscribers and members of the general
public may direct complaints regarding grantee's service or performance to
the chief administrative officer of the city or the chief administrative
officer's designee, which may be a board or commission of the city.  Grantee
shall endeavor to resolve subscriber complaints within 30 days.



      (11)   Customer bills.  Customer bills shall be designed in
such a way as to present the information contained therein clearly and
comprehensibly to customers, and in a way that:  (a) is not misleading; and
(b) does not omit material information.  Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary in division (I)(5)(d), above, grantee may, in its sole discretion,
consolidate costs on customer bills as may otherwise be permitted by §
622(c) of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. §542(c)).



      (12)   Local offices and repair phone line.  Grantee shall
provide a conveniently located customer service office which shall be staffed
and open during normal business hours.  Grantee shall also maintain a local
or toll-free telephone subscriber repair line, available to its subscribers
24-hours per day, seven days a week. 



      (13)   Notification of complaint procedure. Grantee shall have
printed clearly and prominently on each subscriber bill and in the customer
service agreement provided for in division (I)(5), the 24-hour grantee phone
number for subscriber complaints.  Additionally, grantee shall provide
information to customers concerning the procedures to follow when they are
unsatisfied with measures taken by grantee to remedy their complaint.  This
information will include the phone number of the city office or person
designated to handle complaints. Additionally, grantee shall state that
complaints should be made to grantee prior to contacting the city.



      (14)   Subscriber privacy. To the extent required by M.S. §
238.084, subd. 1(s) grantee shall comply with the following: 



         (a)   No signals, including signals of a class IV
channel, may be transmitted from a subscriber terminal for purposes of
monitoring individual viewing patterns or practices without the express
written permission of the subscriber.  The request for permission must be
contained in a separate document with a prominent statement that the
subscriber is authorizing the permission in full knowledge of its
provisions.  Such written permission shall be for a limited period of time
not to exceed one  year which may be renewed at the option of the
subscriber.  No penalty shall be invoked for a subscriber's failure to
provide or renew such permission.  The permission shall be revocable at any
time by the subscriber without penalty of any kind whatsoever. For purposes
of this provision, a "class IV cable communications channel" means a
signaling path provided by the system to transmit signals of any type from a
subscriber terminal to another point in the system.



         (b)   No information or data obtained by monitoring
transmission of a signal from a subscriber terminal, including but not
limited to lists of the names and addresses of subscribers or any lists that
identify the viewing habits of subscribers shall be sold or otherwise made
available to any party other than to grantee or its agents for grantee's
business use, and also to the subscriber subject of that information, unless
grantee has received specific written permission from the subscriber to make
such data available.



         (c)   Written permission from the subscriber shall not
be required for the conducting of system wide or individually addressed
electronic sweeps for the purpose of verifying system integrity or monitoring
for the purpose of billing.  Confidentiality of such information shall be
subject to the provision set forth in division (14)(b) of this section.



      (15)   Grantee identification. Grantee shall provide all
customer service technicians and all other grantee employees entering private
property with appropriate picture identification so that grantee employees
may be easily identified by the property owners and subscribers.



   (J)    Public access provisions.



      (1)   Public, educational and governmental access facilities.
City or its designee is hereby designated to operate, administer, promote,
and manage the PEG programming (hereinafter "PEG Access") to the cable system
established pursuant to division (F) of this section.  Grantee is
responsible for PEG access only as set forth in division (F) of this section
and Exhibit B attached to Ordinance No. 1020.



      (2)   Grantee support for PEG usage. In accordance with the
provisions of the Cable Act and M.S. § 238.084, grantee shall provide and
make available for PEG access usage within the service area the following:



         (a)   Provision and use of the funds and channels
designated in Exhibit B of this franchise for local educational and
governmental programming and access use in accordance with the requirements
of Exhibit B.



         (b)   Maintenance of the PEG access facilities and
channels, and support of educational and governmental programming to the
extent specified in Exhibit B attached to Ordinance No. 1020.



         (c)   PEG access facilities shall be operated by the
city and PEG channels shall be programmed by the city or its lawful designee.



   (K)   Operation and administration provisions.



      (1)   Franchise fee. 



         (a)   During the term of the franchise, grantee shall
pay quarterly to the city a franchise fee of 5% of gross revenues.  In no
event shall the definition of gross revenues be different for any franchised
cable operator in the city.



         (b)   Each franchise fee payment shall be paid quarterly
not later than 45 days following the end of a given quarter and shall be
accompanied by a franchise fee payment worksheet substantially in the form
attached to Ordinance No. 1020 as Exhibit C. Any franchise fees owing
pursuant to this franchise which remain unpaid more than 45 days after the
dates specified herein shall be past due and subject to interest at an annual
rate of the prime interest rate, as published by the Wall Street Journal,
during the period of underpayment plus 1%.



         (c)   Except as otherwise provided by law, no acceptance
of any payment by the city shall be construed as a release or as an accord
and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for further or additional
sums payable as a franchise fee under this franchise or for the performance
of any other obligation of the grantee. 



         (d)   No more than once every three  years and upon 30
days prior written notice, city shall have the right to conduct an
independent review/audit of grantee's records solely for the purpose of
assessing grantee's compliance with the franchise fee obligation herein.  In
the event an audit reveals an underpayment of 5% or more of the franchise fee
amounts due during the period audited, the grantee shall reimburse the city's
audit fees and expenses in full up to a maximum of $5,000.



      (2)   Reports.



         (a)   Grantee shall provide the city with an annual
statement, within 90 days of the close of each calendar year end, reflecting
the total amounts of gross revenues and all payments, and computations of the
franchise fee for the previous calendar year.



         (b)   Upon request, grantee shall provide the city with
a summary of service calls, identifying the number, general nature and
disposition of such calls shall be submitted to the city within 30 days
following its request in a form reasonably acceptable to the city.



         (c)   All reports and records required under this
franchise shall be furnished at the sole expense of grantee, except as
otherwise provided in this franchise.



      (3)   Records required and city's right to inspect.



         (a)   Grantee shall at all times maintain a full and
complete set of plans, records and "as-built" drawings and/or maps showing
the location of the cable system installed or in use in the city, exclusive
of subscriber service drops and equipment provided in subscribers' homes.



         (b)   Subject to the privacy provisions of the Cable Act
and "Trade Secret" designation of certain records under the Minnesota Data
Practices Act, M.S. Ch. 13, throughout the term of this franchise, the
grantee agrees that the city, upon reasonable prior written notice of 30 days
to the grantee, and no more than once per calendar year, may review such of
the grantee's books and records regarding the operation of the cable system
and the provision of cable service in the franchise area which are reasonably
necessary to monitor and enforce grantee's compliance with the provisions of
this franchise ("Records").  Such notice shall specifically reference the
section(s) of the franchise that are under review so that the grantee may
organize the necessary records for easy access by the city. Grantee shall
make available for review such records as soon as possible and in no event
more than 30 days unless grantee explains that it is not feasible to meet
this timeline and provides a written explanation for the delay and an
estimated reasonable date for when such information will be provided.  All
such records pertaining to financial matters that may be the subject of an
inspection by the city shall be retained by the grantee for a period of six
years, pursuant to M.S. § 541.05.  The grantee shall not deny the city
access to records on the basis that they are under the control of any parent
corporation, affiliated entity or a third party. Grantee shall provide all
records requested by the city or city's agent in the following manner: 1) at
a conference room in City Hall; or 2) at grantee's office located in or near
the city; or 3) via mail or electronic communication acceptable to the city
and grantee. All records shall be subject to the provisions of this franchise
and applicable law regarding confidentiality.



      (4)   Confidential information.



         (a)   Subject to applicable law, and except as otherwise
expressly provided herein, grantee may provide confidential records that it
is obligated to make available to the city pursuant to this franchise, by
allowing the city, or its designated representative(s), to view the records
at a mutually agreeable location and without the city obtaining its own
copies of such records.  Grantee may also choose to provide any confidential
or proprietary records pursuant to a mutually acceptable non-disclosure
agreement with a city designated agent. The intent of the parties is to work
cooperatively to insure that records reasonably necessary for city's
monitoring and enforcement of franchise obligations are available to the city
while protecting grantee's confidential information all in accordance with
applicable law.  To the extent that grantee does provide records directly to
the city, the city agrees to not disclose records except as required by
applicable law.  Grantee shall be responsible for clearly and conspicuously
identifying the records as "Trade Secret."  Grantee acknowledges that the
Minnesota Data Practices Act, M.S. Ch. 13, limits the city's ability to
refuse public disclosure unless data or information constitutes "Trade
Secrets" or otherwise is protected from disclosure under the Act.



         (b)   If the city believes it must release any
confidential or proprietary records in the course of enforcing this
franchise, or for any other reason including compliance with the Minnesota
Data Practices Act, M.S. Ch. 13, it shall advise grantee in advance so that
grantee may take appropriate steps to protect its interests.  The city
agrees that, to the extent permitted by the Minnesota Data Practices Act,
M.S. Ch. 13 and other applicable law, it shall deny access to any of
grantee's records marked confidential or "Trade Secret," as set forth above,
to any person and that it shall furnish only that portion of the grantee's
records required under the Minnesota Data Practices Act, M.S. Ch. 13, and
other applicable law.



   (L)   General financial and insurance provisions.



      (1)   Letter of credit.



         (a)   At the time of acceptance of this franchise,
grantee shall deliver to the city and thereafter maintain an irrevocable and
unconditional letter of credit in the amount of $10,000.



         (b)   In addition to recovery of any monies owed by
grantee to the city or damages to the city as a result of any acts or
omissions by grantee pursuant to the franchise, the city, in compliance with
this section, may charge to and collect from the letter of credit the
following liquidated damages:



            1.   For failure to provide data, documents,
reports or information required herein, the penalty shall be $50 per day for
each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues.



            2.   For failure to comply with construction,
operation, customer service, or maintenance standards, the penalty shall be
$100 per day for each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or continues.



            3.   For failure to meet the PEG access
requirements set forth in division (F) of this franchise, the penalty shall
be $100 per day for each day, or part thereof, such failure occurs or
continues.



            4.   For failure to comply with any of the
provisions of this franchise, the penalty shall be $50 per day for each day,
or part thereof, such violation continues.



            5.   Each violation of any provision of this
franchise shall be considered a separate violation for which a separate
penalty can be imposed.



      (2)   Procedure for franchise enforcement.  Whenever the city
finds that grantee has allegedly violated one or more terms, conditions or
provisions of this franchise, a written notice shall be given to grantee. 
The written notice shall describe in reasonable detail the alleged violation
so as to afford grantee an opportunity to remedy the violation.  Grantee
shall have 30 days subsequent to receipt of the notice in which to correct
the violation.  Grantee may, within 30 days of receipt of notice, notify the
city that there is a dispute as to whether a violation or failure has, in
fact, occurred.  Such notice by grantee shall specify with particularity the
matters disputed by grantee and shall stay the running of the above-described
time and the accrual of penalties.



         (a)   City shall hear grantee's dispute at a mutually
agreed upon time.  Grantee shall have the right to speak and introduce
evidence.  The city shall determine if grantee has committed a violation and
shall make written findings of fact relative to its determination.  If a
violation is found, grantee may petition for reconsideration.



         (b)   If after hearing the dispute, the claim is upheld
by the city, then grantee shall have 30 days within which to remedy the
violation before the city may seek to draw on the letter of credit.



         (c)   Grantee may appeal any adverse decision by the
city which shall stay the city's right to draw on the letter of credit until
such time as the action has been finally adjudicated by a court of competent
jurisdiction.



      (3)   Time for correction of violation.  The time for grantee
to correct any alleged violation may be extended by the city if the necessary
action to correct the alleged violation is of such a nature or character as
to require more than 30 days within which to perform provided grantee
commences corrective action within 15 days and thereafter uses reasonable
diligence, as determined by the city, to correct the violation.



      (4)   Letter of credit cap. If the city draws upon the letter
of credit or any subsequent letter of credit delivered pursuant hereto, in
whole or in part, grantee shall replace or replenish to its full amount up
the maximum provided by this division the same within ten days and shall
deliver to the city a like replacement letter of credit or certification of
replenishment for the full amount stated in division (L)(1)(a) as a
substitution of the previous letter of credit.  This shall be a continuing
obligation for any draws upon the letter of credit up to an aggregate total
of $25,000 over the franchise term.



      (5)   Liability insurance.



         (a)   Grantee shall with its acceptance of this
franchise, and at its sole expense, take out and maintain during the term of
this franchise commercial general liability insurance with a company
authorized to do business in the State of Minnesota that shall protect the
grantee, the city and their officials, officers, directors, employees and
agents from claims which may arise from operations under this franchise,
whether such operations be by the grantee, its officials, officers,
directors, employees and agents or any subcontractors of grantee. This
liability insurance shall include, but shall not be limited to, protection
against claims arising from bodily and personal injury and damage to
property, resulting from grantee's vehicles, products and operations.  The
amount of insurance for single limit coverage applying to bodily and personal
injury and property damage shall not be less than $3,000,000 which may be
satisfied by an umbrella liability policy.  The following shall be included
in the liability policy:



            1.   The policy shall provide coverage on an
"occurrence" basis.



            2.   The policy shall cover personal injury as
well as bodily injury.



            3.   The policy shall cover blanket contractual
liability subject to the standard universal exclusions of contractual
liability included in the carrier's standard endorsement as to bodily
injuries, personal injuries and property damage.



            4.   Property damage liability shall be afforded.



            5.   The city shall be named as an additional
insured on the policy.



            6.   An endorsement shall be provided which states
that the coverage is primary insurance and that no other insurance maintained
by the city will be called upon to contribute to a loss under this coverage.



            7.   Standard form of cross-liability shall be
afforded.



         (b)   Cancellation notice will be provided for any
reason other than non-payment of premium and material alteration and requires
the city provide grantee a valid contact name and e-mail address (with any
changes to the contact name or e-mail address being the responsibility of the
city).



         (c)   Grantee shall submit to the city documentation of
the required insurance, including a certificate of insurance evidencing these
requirements.



      (6)   Indemnification.



         (a)   Grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold the city,
its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees (collectively the
"Indemnified Parties") harmless from and against any and all lawsuits,
claims, causes of action, actions, liabilities, demands, damages, judgments,
settlements, disability, losses, expenses (including attorney's fees and
disbursements of counsel) and costs of any nature that any of the indemnified
parties may at any time suffer, sustain or incur arising out of, based upon
or in any way connected with the grant of this franchise, the operation of
grantee's system, the breach by grantee of its obligations under this
franchise and/or the activities of grantee, its subcontractor, employees and
agents hereunder.  Grantee shall be solely responsible for and shall
indemnify, defend and hold the indemnified parties harmless from and against
any and all matters relative to payment of grantee's employees, including
compliance with social security and withholdings.



         (b)   The indemnification obligations of grantee set
forth in this franchise are not limited in any way by the amount or type of
damages or compensation payable by or for grantee under Workers'
Compensation, disability or other employee benefit acts, acceptance of
insurance certificates required under this franchise, or the terms,
applicability or limitations of any insurance held by grantee.



         (c)   City does not, and shall not, waive any rights
against grantee which it may have by reason of the indemnification provided
for in this franchise, because of the acceptance by the city, or the deposit
with the city by grantee, of any of the insurance policies described in this
franchise.



         (d)   The indemnification of the city by grantee
provided for in this franchise shall apply to all damages and claims for
damages of any kind suffered by reason of any of the grantee's operations
referred to in this franchise, regardless of whether or not such insurance
policies shall have been determined to be applicable to any such damages or
claims for damages.



         (e)   Grantee shall not be required to indemnify the
city for negligence or misconduct on the part of the city or its officials,
boards, commissions, agents, or employees.  The city shall hold grantee
harmless, subject to the limitations in M.S. Ch. 466, for any damage
resulting from the negligence or misconduct of the city or its officials,
boards, commissions, agents, or employees in utilizing any PEG channels,
equipment, or facilities and for any such negligence or misconduct by the
city in connection with work performed by the city and permitted by this
franchise, on or adjacent to the cable system.



      (7)   Process.  In order for the city to assert its rights to
be indemnified, defended, and held harmless, the city must, with respect to
each claim:



         (a)   Promptly notify grantee in writing of any claim or
legal proceeding which gives rise to such right;



         (b)   Afford grantee the opportunity to participate in
any compromise, settlement or other resolution or disposition of any claim or
proceeding; and



         (c)   Fully cooperate with reasonable requests of
grantee, at grantee's expense, in its participation in any compromise,
settlement or resolution or other disposition of such claim or proceeding
subject to division (a) above.



      (8)   Grantee's insurance. Grantee shall not commence any
cable system construction work or permit any subcontractor to commence work
until all insurance required under this franchise has been obtained.  Said
insurance shall be maintained in full force and effect until the expiration
of this franchise.



      (9)   Workers' compensation insurance.  Grantee shall obtain
and maintain Workers' Compensation Insurance for all of grantee's employees,
and in case any work is sublet, grantee shall require any subcontractor
similarly to provide Workers' Compensation Insurance for all of their
employees, all in compliance with state laws.  Grantee shall provide the
city with a certificate of insurance indicating Workers' Compensation
coverage upon its acceptance of this franchise.



   (M)   Sale, abandonment, transfer, and revocation.



      (1)   Abandonment of service. Grantee may only abandon the
system or any portion thereof in accordance with M.S. § 238.084, subd.
1(w). 



      (2)   Removal after termination or forfeiture.



         (a)   In the event of termination or forfeiture of the
franchise, the city shall have the right to require grantee to remove all or
any portion of the system from all rights-of-way and public property within
the city associated solely with the provision of cable service; provided,
however, that if grantee is providing services other than cable services or
pursuant to M.S. § 237.01 et seq., the city shall not require the removal of
the system.  Nothing in this section shall be deemed either to grant or to
preclude the provision of services other than cable services.



         (b)   If grantee has failed to commence removal of
system, or such part thereof as was designated by the city, within 120 days
after written notice of the city's demand for removal is given, or if grantee
has failed to complete such removal within 12 months after written notice of
the city's demand for removal is given, the city shall have the right to
declare all rights, title, and interest to the system to be in the city with
all rights of ownership including, but not limited to, the right to operate
the system or transfer the system to another for operation by it pursuant to
the provisions of 47 U.S.C. § 547 (1989).



      (3)   Sale or transfer of franchise.



         (a)   No sale, transfer, or assignment of this
franchise, or "fundamental corporate change", as defined in M.S. § 238.083,
in grantee, shall take place until a written request is filed with the city
for its approval, provided, however, that said approval shall not be required
where grantee grants a security interest in its franchise and assets to
secure an indebtedness.



         (b)   City shall have 30 days from the time of the
request to reply in writing and indicate its determination that a public
hearing is necessary due to potential adverse effects on grantee's
subscribers resulting from the sale or transfer. Such determination shall be
expressed in writing.



         (c)   If a public hearing is deemed necessary pursuant
to division (b) above, such hearing shall be commenced within 30 days of such
determination and notice of any such hearing shall be given in accordance
with local law or 14 days prior to the hearing by publishing notice thereof
once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.  The notice shall
contain the date, time and place of the hearing and shall briefly state the
substance of the action to be considered by the city.



         (d)   Thereafter, the city shall approve or deny in
writing the sale or transfer request.  The city shall set forth in writing
its reason(s) for denying approval.  The city shall not unreasonably
withhold its approval.



         (e)   The parties to the sale or transfer of the
franchise only, without the inclusion of the system in which substantial
construction has commenced, shall establish that the sale or transfer of only
the franchise will be in the public interest.



         (f)   Any sale or transfer of stock in grantee so as to
create a new controlling interest in the system shall be subject to the
requirements of this division (3).  The term CONTROLLING INTEREST as used
herein is not limited to majority stock ownership, but includes actual
working control in whatever manner exercised.



         (g)   In no event shall a transfer or assignment of
ownership or control be approved without the transferee becoming a signatory
to this franchise and assuming all rights and obligations there under, and
assuming all other rights and obligations of the transferor to the city.



      (4)   Reservation of rights.  The city and grantee reserve
all rights that they may possess under applicable laws unless expressly
waived herein.



   (N)   Miscellaneous provisions.



      (1)   Franchise renewal.  Any renewal of this franchise shall
be in accordance with applicable laws.  The term of any renewed franchise
shall be limited to a period as provided in M.S. § 238.084, subd. 1(c).



      (2)   Work of contractors and subcontractors.  All provisions
of this franchise shall apply to any subcontractor or others performing any
work or services on grantee's behalf pursuant to the provisions of this
franchise.  Grantee shall be responsible for ensuring that the work of
contractors and subcontractors is performed consistent with the franchise and
applicable laws and shall indemnify the city pursuant to division (L)(6).



      (3)   Governing law. This franchise shall be deemed to be
executed in the State of Minnesota, and shall be governed in all respects,
including validity, interpretation and effect, and construed in accordance
with, the Cable Act and the laws of the State of Minnesota, as applicable to
contracts entered into and performed entirely within the state.



      (4)   Non-enforcement by city.  Grantee shall not be relieved
of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this franchise by
reason of any failure of the city to enforce prompt compliance.



      (5)   Captions. The paragraph captions and headings in this
franchise are for convenience and reference purposes only and shall not
affect in any way the meaning or interpretation of this franchise.



      (6)   Calculation of time. Where the performance or doing of
any act, duty, matter, payment or thing is required hereunder and the period
of time or duration for the performance is prescribed and fixed herein, the
time shall be computed so as to exclude the first and include the last day of
the prescribed or fixed period or duration of time.  When the last day of
the period falls on Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be
omitted from the computation and the next business day, shall be the last day
of the period.



      (7)   Survival of terms. Upon the termination or forfeiture of
the franchise, grantee shall no longer have the right to occupy the
rights-of-way for the purpose of providing cable service.  However,
grantee's obligations to the city shall survive according to their terms.



      (8)   Severability. If any provision of this franchise is held
by any governmental authority of competent jurisdiction, to be invalid as
conflicting with any applicable laws now or hereafter in effect, or is held
by such governmental authority to be modified in any way in order to conform
to the requirements of any such applicable laws, such provision shall be
considered a separate, distinct, and independent part of this franchise, and
such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all other
provisions hereof.  In the event that such applicable laws are subsequently
repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision
hereof which had been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with
such laws, said provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect and
shall thereafter be binding on the city and grantee, provided that the city
shall give grantee 30 days written notice of such change before requiring
compliance with said provision or such longer period of time as may be
reasonably required for grantee to comply with such provision.



      (9)   Force majeure.  In the event grantee's performance of
any of the terms, conditions, obligations or requirements of this franchise
is prevented or impaired due to any cause beyond its reasonable control, such
inability to perform shall be deemed to be excused for the period of such
inability and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof.
Such causes beyond grantee's reasonable control shall include, but shall not
be limited to, acts of God, civil emergencies and labor unrest or strikes,
untimely delivery of equipment, inability of grantee to obtain access to an
individual's property and inability of grantee to secure all necessary
permits to utilize utility poles and conduit so long as grantee utilizes due
diligence to timely obtain said permits.



   (O)   Publication effective date; acceptance and exhibits.



      (1)   Publication; effective date. This franchise shall be
published in accordance with applicable law.  The effective date of this
franchise shall be as defined herein.



      (2)   Acceptance. Grantee shall accept this franchise within
30 days of its enactment by the City Council, unless the time for acceptance
is extended by the city. Such acceptance by the grantee shall be deemed the
grant of this franchise for all purposes. In the event acceptance does not
take place, this franchise and any and all rights previously granted to
grantee shall be null and void.



         (a)   Upon acceptance of this franchise, grantee shall
be bound by all the terms and conditions contained herein.



         (b)   Grantee shall accept this franchise in the
following manner:



            1.   This franchise will be properly executed and
acknowledged by grantee and delivered to city.



            2.   With its acceptance, grantee shall also
deliver any performance bond and insurance certificates required herein that
have not previously been delivered.



(Ord. 1020, passed 9-22-16)



GAS ENERGY FRANCHISE



§ 119.45  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY. The City of Apple Valley, County of Dakota, State of Minnesota.



   CITY UTILITY SYSTEM. Facilities used for providing public utility
service owned or operated by the city or agency thereof, including sanitary
sewer, storm sewer, water service, street lighting and traffic signals, but
excluding facilities for providing heating, electric, gas, or other forms of
energy.



   COMMISSION.   The Minnesota Public Utilities Commission, or any
successor agency or agencies, including an agency of the federal government,
which preempts all or part of the authority to regulate gas retail rates now
vested in the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission.



   COMPANY.   CenterPoint Energy Minnegasco, a division of CENTERPOINT
ENERGY RESOURCES CORP. , a Delaware corporation, its successors and assigns,
including all successors or assigns that own or operate any part or parts of
the gas facilities subject to this franchise.



   GAS FACILITIES. Anything tangible, including equipment, which is
required to provide utility gas service.



   NOTICE. Notice means written notice personally delivered or mailed by
United States Mail to the proper addressee.




Notice to the Company shall be addressed to:





CenterPoint Energy Minnegasco
V.P., Regulatory & Supply Service
800 LaSalle Avenue, 14th Floor
Minneapolis, MN 55402





Notice to the City shall be addressed to:





City of Apple Valley
Attn: City Clerk
7100 West 147th Street
Apple Valley, MN 55124





With a copy to:





Severson, Sheldon, Dougherty & Molenda, P.A.
Attn: Michael G. Dougherty, Esq.
7300 West 147th Street, Suite 600
Apple Valley, MN 55124




   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. As defined in § 97.02 of this Code, as amended
from time to time.



   UTILITY SERVICE.   As defined in § 97.02 of this Code, as applicable
to the gas energy utility service.



(Ord. 737, passed 10-23-03)



§ 119.46  GRANT OF FRANCHISE.



   (A)   Grant of franchise. The city hereby grants company, for a
period of 20 years from the effective date this subchapter, the right to
import, manufacture, distribute and sell gas for public and private use
within and through the territorial limits of the city as its boundaries now
exist or as they may be extended in the future. For these purposes, company
may construct, operate, repair and maintain gas facilities in, on, over,
under and across the public rights-of- way, subject to the provisions of this
subchapter and the public right-of-way regulations as applicable to utility
services as set forth in this Code of Ordinances. The company may do all
reasonable things necessary or customary to accomplish these purposes,
subject however, to such reasonable regulations as may be imposed by the city
pursuant to ordinance or permit requirements and to the further provisions of
this franchise agreement.



   (B)   Effective date; written acceptance. This franchise shall be in
force and effect from and after the effective date of this subchapter. If the
company does not file a written acceptance with the city within 60 days after
the effective date of this subchapter, or otherwise informs the city, at any
time, that the company does not accept this franchise, the City Council by
resolution may revoke this franchise or seek its enforcement in a court of
competent jurisdiction.



   (C)   Service and gas rates. The service to be provided and the
rates to be charged by company for gas service with the city are subject to
the jurisdiction of the Commission.



   (D)   Publication expense.  Company shall pay the expense of
publication of this subchapter.



   (E)   Dispute resolution.  If the city or company asserts that the
other is in default in the performance of any obligation hereunder, the
complaining party shall notify the other party of the default and the desired
remedy. The notification shall be written. Representatives of the parties
must promptly meet and attempt in good faith to negotiate a resolution of the
dispute. If the dispute is not resolved within 30 days of the written notice,
the parties shall jointly select a mediator to facilitate further discussion.
Mediation must occur within 90 days after selection of the mediator. The
parties will equally share the fees and expenses of the mediation. If the
parties are unable to agree on the selection of a mediator or are unable to
resolve the dispute within 90 days after first meeting with the selected
mediator, either party may commence an action in Dakota County District Court
to interpret and enforce this subchapter or for such other relief as may be
permitted by law or equity. The mediator shall not be permitted to testify
and no evidence of statements or documents used in the mediation shall be
admitted in the district court action.



   (F)   Continuation of franchise. If the city and the company are
unable to agree on the terms of a new franchise by the time this franchise
expires, this franchise will remain in effect until a new franchise is agreed
upon, or until 90 days after the city or the company serves written notice to
the other party of its intention to terminate the franchise. However, in no
event shall this franchise continue for more than one year after expiration
of the 20-year term set forth in division (A) above.



(Ord. 737, passed 10-23-03)



§ 119.47  LOCATION, OTHER REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Location of facilities. Gas facilities shall be located,
constructed, and maintained so as not to interfere with the safety and
convenience of ordinary travel along and over public rights-of-way and so as
not to disrupt normal operation of any city utility system. Gas facilities
shall be located on public rights-of-way as determined by the city. Company's
construction, reconstruction, operation, repair, maintenance, location and
relocation of gas facilities shall be subject to the public right-of-way
regulations set forth in this Code of Ordinances and other reasonable
regulations of the city consistent with authority granted the city to manage
its public rights-of-way under state law.



   (B)   Street openings.  Company shall not open or disturb the
surface of any public rights-of-way for any purpose except in accordance with
the public right-of-way regulations as set forth in this Code of Ordinances.



   (C)   Restoration. After undertaking any work requiring the opening
of any public right-of-way, the company shall restore the public right-of-way
in accordance with Minnesota Rules, part 7819.1100 and the public
right-of-way regulations set forth in this Code of Ordinances and other
applicable Code of Ordinances provisions.



   (D)   Avoid damage to gas facilities. The company shall take
reasonable measures to prevent the gas facilities from causing damage to
persons or property. The company shall take reasonable measures to protect
the gas facilities from damage that could be inflicted on the facilities by
persons, property, or the elements. The company shall take protective
measures when the city performs work near the gas facilities, if given
reasonable notice by the city of such work prior to its commencement.



   (E)   Notice of improvements to streets.



      (1)   The city shall give company reasonable written notice of
plans for improvements to public rights-of-way where the city has reason to
believe that gas facilities may affect or be affected by the improvement. The
notice will contain:



         (a)   The nature and character of the improvements,



         (b)   The public rights-of-way upon which the
improvements are to be made,



         (c)   The extent of the improvements,



         (d)   The time when the city will start the work, and



         (e)   If more than one public right-of-way is involved,
the order in which the work is to proceed.



      (2)   The notice provided to company shall set forth a
reasonable length of time, considering seasonal working conditions and the
city's need to complete its public improvement projects in a timely manner,
in advance of the actual commencement of the work to permit company to make
any additions, alterations or repairs to its gas facilities the company or
city deems necessary.



   (F)   Mapping information. The company must promptly provide
complete and accurate mapping information for any of its gas facilities in
accordance with the requirements of Minnesota Rules Parts 7819.4000 and
7819.4100 and this Code of Ordinances public right-of-way regulations.



(Ord. 737, passed 10-23-03)



§ 119.48  RELOCATIONS.



   (A)   Relocation in public rights-of-way. The company shall comply
with Minnesota Rules and this Code of Ordinances public right-of-way
regulations and other Code of Ordinances provisions. Pursuant to Minnesota
Rule 7819.3100, company shall promptly and at its own expense, with due
regard for seasonal working conditions, permanently remove and relocate its
facilities in the right-of-way when it is necessary to prevent interference,
and not merely for convenience of the city, in connection with:



      (1)   A present or future local government use of the
right-of-way for a public project;



      (2)   The public health or safety; or



      (3)   The safety and convenience of travel over the
right-of-way. Notwithstanding the foregoing, company is not required to
remove or relocate its facilities from a right-of-way that has been vacated
in favor of a non-governmental entity unless and until the reasonable costs
to do so are first paid to company.



   (B)   Projects with federal funding. Relocation, removal, or
rearrangement of any company gas facilities made necessary because of the
extension into or through city of a federally-aided highway project shall be
governed by the provisions of M.S. § 161.46, as amended from time to time.



(Ord. 737, passed 10-23-03)



§ 119.49  INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.



   (A)   Limitation of liability. Upon the effective date of this
subchapter, the city does not assume any liability:



      (1)   For injuries to persons, damage to property or loss of
service claims by parties other than the company or the city, or



      (2)   For claims or penalties of any sort resulting from the
installation, presence, maintenance or operation of equipment or facilities
by the company or its agents.



   (B)   Indemnification. Company shall indemnify and keep and hold the
city, its officials, employees and agents, free and harmless from any and all
costs, liabilities, and claims for damages of any kind arising out of the
construction, presence, installation, maintenance, repair or operation of its
equipment and facilities, or out of any activity undertaken in or near a
public right-of-way, or out of any delay thereof, whether or not any act or
omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by permit. The
foregoing does not indemnify the city for its own negligence except for
claims arising out of or alleging the city's negligence in issuing any permit
or in failing to properly or adequately inspect or enforce compliance with a
term, condition or purpose of a permit.



   (C)   Defense of city. In the event a suit is brought against the
city under circumstances where this agreement to indemnify applies, company,
at its sole cost and expense, shall defend the city in such suit if written
notice thereof is promptly given to company within a period wherein company
is not prejudiced by lack of such notice. If company is required to indemnify
and defend, it will thereafter have control of such litigation, but company
may not settle such litigation without the consent of the city, which consent
shall not be unreasonably withheld. This section is not, as to third parties,
a waiver of any defense or immunity otherwise available to the city. The
company, in defending any action on behalf of the city, shall be entitled to
assert in any action every defense or immunity that the city could assert in
its own behalf. This franchise agreement shall not be interpreted to
constitute a waiver by the city of any of its defenses of immunity or
limitations on liability under M.S. Ch. 466.



   (D)   Delay damage fee. The city may establish and impose a damage
fee for unreasonable delays in completion of any right-of-way excavation,
obstruction, patching, restoration, removal, or relocation. The delay damage
fee shall be established from time-to-time by a resolution of the City
Council based upon its reasonable estimation of the actual costs that would
be incurred due to any delay, the actual amount being undeterminable. The
company shall be advised in writing by facsimile, with the original to follow
by U.S. mail, of the perceived delay and of the period within which the work
must be completed to avoid a delay damage fee. Disputes shall be handled in
accordance with § 119.46(E), dispute resolution, hereof. A delay damage fee
shall not be imposed if the delay in project completion is due to
circumstances beyond the control of company, including without limitation
inclement weather, acts of God, or civil strife.



(Ord. 737, passed 10-23-03)



§ 119.50  VACATION OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   The city shall give company at least two weeks prior written notice of
a proposed vacation of a public right-of-way. The city and the company shall
comply with Minnesota Rules and applicable provisions of this Code of
Ordinances right-of-way regulations and other city ordinances consistent with
law.



(Ord. 737, passed 10-23-03)



§ 119.51  CHANGE IN FORM OF GOVERNMENT.



   Any change in the form of government of the city shall not affect the
validity of this subchapter. Any governmental unit succeeding the city shall,
without the consent of company, succeed to all of the rights and obligations
of the city provided in this subchapter.



(Ord. 737, passed 10-23-03)



§ 119.52  FRANCHISE FEE.



   (A)   Form.



      (1)   During the term of the franchise hereby granted, and in
addition to permit fees being imposed or that the city has a right to impose,
the city may charge the company a franchise fee. The fee may be:



         (a)   A percentage of gross revenues received by the
company for its operations within the city, or



         (b)   A flat fee per customer based on metered service
to retail customers within the city or on some other similar basis, or



         (c)   A fee based on units of energy delivered to any
class of retail customers within the corporate limits of the city.



      (2)   The method of imposing the franchise fee, the percentage
of revenue rate, or the flat rate based on metered service may differ for
each customer class or combine the methods described in divisions (A)(1) -
(3) above in assessing the fee. The city shall seek to use a formula that
provides a stable and predictable amount of fees, without placing the company
at a competitive disadvantage. If the company claims that the city-required
fee formula is discriminatory or otherwise places the company at a
competitive disadvantage, the company shall provide a formula that will
produce a substantially similar fee amount to the city and reimburse the
city's reasonable fees and costs in reviewing and implementing the formula.
The city will attempt to accommodate the company but is under no franchise
obligation to adopt the company-proposed franchise fee formula and each
review will not delay the implementation of the city-imposed fee.



   (B)   Separate ordinance. The franchise fee shall be imposed by
separate ordinance duly passed and adopted by the City Council, which
ordinance shall not be adopted until at least 30 days after written notice
enclosing the proposed ordinance has been served upon the company. The
effective date of the franchise fee shall be specified in the proposed
ordinance.



   (C)   Condition of fee. The separate ordinance imposing the fee
shall not be effective against the company unless it lawfully imposes a fee
of the same or substantially similar amount on the sale of gas energy within
the city by any other gas energy supplier, provided that, as to such
supplier, the city has the authority or contractual right to require a
franchise fee or similar fee through a previously agreed upon franchise.



   (D)   Collection of fee. The franchise fee shall be payable not less
than quarterly during complete billing months of the period for which payment
is to be made. The franchise fee formula may be changed from time to time,
however, the change shall meet the same notice requirements and the fee may
not be changed more often than annually. Such fee shall not exceed any amount
that the company may legally charge to its customers prior to payment to the
city. Such fee is subject to subsequent reductions to account for
uncollectibles and customer refunds incurred by the company. The company
agrees to make available for inspection by the city at reasonable times all
records necessary to audit the company's determination of the franchise fee
payments.



   (E)   Continuation of franchise fee. If this fran-chise expires and
the city and the company are unable to agree upon terms of a new franchise,
the franchise fee, if any being imposed by the city at the time this
franchise expires, will remain in effect until a new franchise is agreed upon.



(Ord. 737, passed 10-23-03)



§ 119.53  ABANDONED FACILITIES.



   The company shall notify the city when facilities are to be abandoned.
The company shall comply with applicable provisions of this Code of
Ordinances public right-of-way regulations, as well as other city ordinances,
Minnesota Statutes, and Minnesota Rules, as they may be amended from time to
time in connection with any abandoned facilities. The company shall maintain
records describing the exact location of all abandoned and retired facilities
within the city, produce such records at the city's request and comply with
the location requirements of M.S. § 216D.04 with respect to all facilities,
including abandoned and retired facilities.



(Ord. 737, passed 10-23-03)



§ 119.54  PROVISIONS OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Controlling ordinance. Company's con-struction,
reconstruction, operation, repair, maintenance, location and relocation of
gas facilities shall be subject to other reasonable regulations of the city
consistent with the authority granted the city to manage its public ways and
public grounds under state law, to the extent not inconsistent with a
specific term of this franchise. Where a provision of the city's right-of-way
management ordinance conflicts with the provisions of this subchapter, the
provisions of the city's right-of-way management ordinance shall prevail.
Where a provision of any other city ordinance conflicts with the provisions
of this subchapter, the provisions of this subchapter shall prevail.



   (B)   Severability. Every section, provision, or part of this
subchapter is declared separate from every other section, provision, or part;
and if any section, provision, or part shall be held invalid, it shall not
affect any other section, provision, or part.



   (C)   Limitation on applicability. This subchapter constitutes a
franchise agreement between the city and company as the only parties and no
provision of this franchise shall in any way inure to the benefit of any
third person (including the public at large) so as to constitute any such
person as a third party beneficiary of the agreement or of any one or more of
the terms hereof, or otherwise give rise to any cause of action in any person
not a party hereto.



(Ord. 737, passed 10-23-03)



§ 119.55  AMENDMENT PROCEDURE.



   Either party to this franchise agreement may at any time propose that
the agreement be amended. This subchapter may be amended at any time by the
city passing a subsequent ordinance declaring the provisions of the
amendment, which amendatory ordinance shall become effective upon the filing
of company's written consent thereto with the City Clerk within 60 days after
the effective date of the amendatory ordinance.



(Ord. 737, passed 10-23-03)



§ 119.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty has been provided shall be subject to the fine in §
10.99.



   (B)   For failure to complete system upgrade as provided herein,
unless the city approves the delay, the penalty shall be $200 per day for
each day, or part thereof, the failure occurs or continues.



   (C)   For failure to provide data, documents, reports or information
required herein or for failure to cooperate with the city during an
application process or system review or as otherwise provided herein, the
penalty shall be $50 per day for each day, or part thereof, the failure
occurs or continues.



   (D)   For failure to comply with construction, operation or customer
service, or maintenance and technical standards, including the customer
service requirements herein, the penalty shall be $100 per day for each day,
or part thereof, the failure occurs or continues.



   (E)   For failure to provide the services grantee has proposed,
including, but not limited to, the implementation and the utilization of the
access channels and the maintenance and/or replacement of the equipment and
other facilities, the penalty shall be $100 per day for each day, or part
thereof, the failure occurs or continues.



   (F)   For violation of any other provision of this franchise or
applicable federal, state, or local law or regulation, the penalty shall be
$50 per day for each day, or part thereof, the violation continues.



   (G)   Each violation of any provision of this franchise shall be
considered a separate violation for which a separate penalty can be imposed.



(Ord. 660, passed 4-22-99)



CHAPTER 120:  SALE OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS



Section



   120.01   Definitions



   120.02   License required



   120.03   License application



   120.04   License nontransferable; duration of license



   120.05   Conditions of license



§ 120.01  DEFINITIONS.



   The terms “consumer fireworks” and “fireworks” shall have the
meaning as provided for the same in § 130.07.



(Ord. 771, passed 4-14-05)



§ 120.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No consumer fireworks shall be possessed, kept, or sold by any retailer
without first obtaining a license therefor from the Apple Valley Fire
Department, Fire Prevention Bureau. A separate consumer fireworks license
shall be issued for the retail sale of consumer fireworks at each fixed place
of sale or business and no license shall be issued for a mobile business
location.



(Ord. 771, passed 4-14-05)



§ 120.03  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   (A)   Each applicant shall file a completed application, along with
the license fee, with the Apple Valley Fire Department, Fire Prevention
Bureau, on the form provided by the city.



   (B)   The license fee shall be in an amount as provided in Chapter
35, Appendix A.



(Ord. 771, passed 4-14-05)



§ 120.04  LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE; DURATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   A license granted under this subdivision shall not be
transferable.  Any change in ownership in the licensed premises shall
terminate the license and a new license shall be obtained as required herein.



   (B)   The license shall be effective from the date of approval to
December 31 of the year of approval and for each calendar year thereafter,
expiring on December 31 of each year.  A license fee shall be paid for each
and every year the license is in effect.



(Ord. 771, passed 4-14-05)



§ 120.05  CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.



   A licensee under this chapter shall comply with the following
requirements and failure to comply shall be deemed unlawful and a violation
of the license constituting suspension or revocation thereof:



   (A)   Indoor retail sales of consumer fireworks shall occur only on
property where retail business or institutional uses are permitted.  No sale
of consumer fireworks shall occur on property zoned residential or on
property with mixed uses which include residential.



   (B)   The building in which the consumer fireworks are being sold or
stored shall have at least  two exits to the outside and all consumer
fireworks display aisles shall be a minimum width of 48 inches. The height of
the consumer fireworks display shall not exceed six feet.



   (C)   Consumer fireworks shall not be sold to any person under the
age of 18 years.  Photo identification of each purchaser shall be checked at
each sale.



   (D)   Outdoor sales of consumer fireworks shall be subject to the
special outdoor promotions regulations set forth in the city code zoning
regulations and all consumer fireworks kept outdoors in a structure during
the permitted period of the promotion shall be stored in a metal container
approved and required by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA)
Standard 1124 between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. and any other
times that the licensee is not open for business/sales.  Any structure in
which the outdoor promotion and sales of consumer fireworks is to occur shall
comply with the requirements of NFPA Standard 1124.



   (E)   Smoking within 50 feet of the retail consumer fireworks sale
and storage areas is prohibited and the sale and storage area(s) shall have
signs designated "No Smoking" in red letters not less than two inches in
height on white background.  All signs shall be maintained in legible
condition and all signage must be approved by the Fire Chief or his/her
designee.



   (F)   No consumer fireworks shall be discharged, exploded, or used
within 100 feet of the building in which the consumer fireworks are being
sold or stored.



   (G)   The building in which the consumer fireworks are sold or
stored shall have at least one 2½-gallon pressurized water fire extinguisher
in the area where the fireworks are sold or stored in accordance with the
2000 International Fire Code.



   (H)   All consumer fireworks fuses shall be covered or arranged so
fuses cannot be touched directly by a person handling the consumer fireworks
without that person puncturing or tearing the package.



   (I)   In buildings in which consumer fireworks are sold or stored,
and that do not have an approved automatic sprinkler system, consumer
fireworks sales, displays, or storage shall be limited to 50 pounds net
pyrotechnic composition or 200 pounds gross weight, if the pyrotechnic
composition weight is unknown.  In buildings with an approved automatic
sprinkler system, fireworks sales, displays, and storage shall be limited to
100 pounds net pyrotechnic composition or 400 pounds gross weight, if the
pyrotechnic composition weight is not known.



   (J)   The building in which retail sale consumer fireworks are
permitted hereunder shall meet all applicable provisions of the State
Building Code and Fire Code.



   (K)   The licensee shall comply with all federal and state laws and
regulations regarding fireworks in consumer fireworks and all provisions of
this section.



   (L)   The licensee shall be responsible for the actions of its
employees or agents with regard to the sale of consumer fireworks on the
licensed premises and for purposes of this provision, the sale of consumer
fireworks by an employee or agent will be considered a sale by the licensee.



   (M)   The licensee shall maintain at all times during the duration
of the license and as a condition thereof, general liability, bodily injury,
and property damage insurance approved by the city in a minimum amount of
$1,000,000.00 per claim and for each incident.  The city shall be named as
an additional insured and the licensee shall provide to the City Clerk a
current certificate of insurance.  The licensee shall notify the City Clerk
at least 30 days in advance of any insurance cancellation or threat of
cancellation of insurance.



   (N)   Retail sale of consumer fireworks shall occur only on the
premises for which the license is issued.



(Ord. 771, passed 4-14-05)



CHAPTER 121:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 122:  RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY



Section



   122.01   Purpose



   122.02   Definitions



   122.03   Applicability; scope



   122.04   Rental manager required



   122.05   Registration



   122.06   Registration fees



   122.99   Violation



§ 122.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of the community at large, and the residents of residential rental
properties in the city.  The purpose of this chapter is also to ensure that
rental housing in the city is decent, safe and sanitary, and is so operated
and maintained as not to become a nuisance to the neighborhood or an
influence that fosters blight and deterioration, or does not create a
disincentive to reinvest in the community.  The operation of residential
rental properties is a business enterprise that entails certain
responsibilities.  Owners and operators are responsible for taking such
reasonable steps as are necessary to ensure that the citizens of the city who
occupy such rental properties may pursue the quiet enjoyment of the normal
activities of life in their surroundings that are:  safe, secure and
sanitary; free from noise, nuisances or annoyances; and free from conditions
that endanger the health or safety of persons, and the security of property.



(Ord. 826, passed 11-20-07)



§ 122.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APARTMENT BUILDING.  A multi-family building containing dwelling units
in a stacked configuration, having common walls and floors/ceilings.



   APPLICANT.  The natural person completing the registration form
prescribed herein.



   DWELLING UNIT.  A single unit providing a living space delineated by
partitions of any kind for one or more persons. 



   MULTIPLE RESIDENTIAL BUILDING.  A building with any dwelling joined to
another dwelling at one or more sides by a party wall or walls, including
apartments, townhomes, twinhomes, duplexes or quadhomes. 



   RENTAL MANAGER.  Any natural person who has been delegated by the
residential rental property owner the charge, care or control of a
residential rental property, and is able to respond in person to issues
related to the residential rental property.



   RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY.  Any building, or one or more portions
thereof, occupied or intended to be occupied for residential purposes by a
residential tenant.   



   RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY OWNER.  Any person or entity owning
residential rental property within the city.



   RESIDENTIAL TENANT.  A person who does not own, but occupies a
dwelling for residential purposes, for payment of a fee or other compensation
to the owner, under a lease or contract, written or verbal.



(Ord. 826, passed 11-20-07)



§ 122.03  APPLICABILITY; SCOPE.



   This chapter applies to any dwelling, and any dwelling unit therein,
that is a residential rental property as defined herein, including garages,
storage buildings and appurtenances.  This chapter does not apply to
Minnesota Department of Health-licensed rest homes, convalescent care
facilities, group homes  and nursing homes; hotels, motels; and
owner-occupied units or condominium units.



(Ord. 826, passed 11-20-07)



§ 122.04  RENTAL MANAGER REQUIRED.



   (A)   Each residential rental property owner shall appoint a rental
manager upon whom the city may lawfully serve notices pertaining to the
administration of this or any other chapter of the city code or state or
federal law, service of which shall be as effective as if made upon such
residential rental property owner.



   (B)   The residential rental property owner may serve as the rental
manager, provided all requirements of a rental manager prescribed within this
chapter are met by the residential rental property owner.



(Ord. 826, passed 11-20-07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 122.05  REGISTRATION.



   (A)   All residential rental properties shall be registered with the
city by either the residential rental property owner or rental manager. 
Registration of each residential rental property shall be made on a separate
form provided by the city, and shall include the following information:



      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the
residential rental property owner and rental manager(s);



      (2)   The name, address and telephone number of the natural
person completing the registration form;



      (3)   The address of the residential rental property.  In the
case of an apartment building, the applicant shall provide the address and
name for the building, as well as the number of dwelling units contained
therein;



      (4)   Whether or not the residential rental property owner or
rental manager conducts a criminal background check on each and every
residential tenant;



      (5)   Whether a written lease exists for the residential
rental property and each unit dwelling thereon; and



      (6)   Whether a written lease addendum commonly known as a
"Drug Free/Crime Free Lease Addendum" exists for each and every written lease.



   (B)   Upon completion of the registration form, the city shall issue
to the registrant a certificate of registration as proof of the
registration.  Certificates of registration shall be non-transferable and
state the following:  the date of issuance; the address of the residential
rental property and the name, if an apartment building, of the residential
rental property owner; the name(s) of the rental manager(s); and the number
of dwelling units located within the residential rental property.  Within 30
days of a transfer of ownership, change in rental manager, change in the
number of rental units, or change in dwelling occupancy from owner occupancy
to rental tenant occupancy, the residential rental property owner or rental
manager shall complete and submit a registration form for each and every
residential rental property affected by the transfer or change.



   (C)   A residential rental property owner owning residential rental
property at the time of the adoption of this chapter shall have 180 days from
its effective date to comply with the registration provisions contained
therein.



(Ord. 826, passed 11-20-07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 122.06  REGISTRATION FEES.



   The fee for registration shall be set forth in the appendix to Chapter
35 of this code.  The registration fee shall be paid at the time the
registration form is submitted to the city.



(Ord. 826, passed 11-20-07)



§ 122.99  VIOLATION.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to provide false information on
the prescribed registration form.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person or entity to operate or cause to
be operated any property as a residential rental property without first
registering with the city as set forth herein.



(Ord. 826, passed 11-20-07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 123:  MASSAGE THERAPY BUSINESS AND MASSAGE THERAPIST LICENSES



Section



   123.01   Purpose



   123.02   Definitions



   123.03   Licenses required



   123.04   License application



   123.05   License eligibility



   123.06   Restrictions and regulations



   123.07   Prohibited business or operations



§ 123.01  PURPOSE.



   The city recognizes and accepts therapeutic massage, as distinguished
from other forms of massage, as a scientific health care and/or maintenance
technique or procedure for the human muscles, tendons, tissues, and the
like.  The city, however, equally recognizes the potential for illicit
massage operations or establishments in the wake of legitimate, professional
therapeutic massage establishments.  Accordingly, in order to prevent or
protect against the existence of illicit massage establishments or operations
in the city and to protect the public's health, safety, and welfare,
including the protection of the city's legitimate massage therapists'
profession and reputation, the city deems it necessary to regulate
therapeutic massage establishments and massage therapists through the
licensing process.



(Ord. 912, passed 3-24-11)



§ 123.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCREDITED INSTITUTION. An educational institution holding accredited
status from the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools (NCA) or
another regional accrediting agency approved by the United States Department
of Education presently or at the time the applicant obtained his/her diploma
or certificate of graduation.



   ACCREDITED PROGRAM. A professional massage program presently or at the
time the applicant obtained  his/her diploma or certificate of graduation
accredited by the Commission on Massage Therapy Accreditation (COMTA), or a
comparable national or regional organization  which is approved by the
United States Department of Education for its accrediting program for
compliance with quality and competency standards through a process of
periodic review and self-study.



   MASSAGE THERAPY OR THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE.  A scientific health care or
health maintenance techniques or procedures carried out by a massage
therapist involving the rubbing, tapping, pounding or kneading of a person's
skin, muscles, and tissues or the stretching of body limbs (e.g., Thai
massage) for the purpose of easing mental and physical tension, the breaking
up of fatty tissues, relaxing muscles, or alleviating muscle spasms, and the
improvement of circulation through the body.



   MASSAGE THERAPY BUSINESS.



      (1)   Any enterprise, establishment, or operation, whether
under control of an individual or legal entity, providing or offering to
provide massage therapy services within the city for a fee or other
consideration paid either directly or indirectly, that:



         (a)   Has one or more massage therapists, other than the
owner, employed or contracted to provide massage therapy services for the
massage therapy business; or



         (b)   Is located in a fixed location in a
non-residential district within the city wherein massage therapy services are
provided. 



      (2)   Any health or medical facility, office, or clinic
operated by state licensed medical professional(s) or any health or
medical-related business operated by state licensed medical professional(s)
which provides therapeutic massage to its patients shall not be deemed as a
massage therapy business.



   MASSAGE THERAPIST. A person who practices or provides therapeutic
massage to another for a fee or other consideration paid either directly or
indirectly.  A person licensed as a medical doctor, chiropractor, osteopath,
podiatrist, licensed nurse, physical therapist, athletic director or trainer,
or beautician (cosmetologist) or barber who confines his/her treatment to the
scalp, face, and neck or the lower leg and feet in the case of a pedicure
shall not be deemed as a massage therapist.



   STUDENT OF MASSAGE THERAPY. A person who is enrolled in and attends
classes at a school, college, university, or other institution that is
approved by the American Massage Therapists Association or other similar
reputable massage association or accredited by a recognized educational
accrediting association or agency or is licensed by the state or local
government agency having jurisdiction over the school. 



(Ord. 912, passed 3-24-11)



§ 123.03  LICENSES REQUIRED.



   (A)   Massage therapist license required.  It is unlawful for any
person to practice therapeutic massage therapy or provide or offer to provide
massage therapy within the city without a license therefor issued by the city.



   (B)   Massage therapy business license required. It is unlawful for
any person or entity to operate a massage therapy business within the city
without a license therefor issued by the city.



   (C)   Exception.



      (1)   This section shall not apply to and no massage therapy
business license shall be required for:



         (a)   A health care office, clinic, or facility:



            1.   Owned by a municipal corporation organized
under the laws of the state, or



            2.   Owned by the state or any of its agencies, or



            3.   Licensed by the state; or



         (b)   Any business or entity owned and operated by state
licensed medical professional(s) through whom therapeutic massage is provided
to its patients as a secondary health care treatment provided by the business
or entity.



      (2)   This section shall not apply to, and no massage therapy
business license shall be required for, an accredited institution which
provides an accredited program of study or course work in massage therapy or
therapeutic massage provided: 



         (a)   The school, college, university, or institution
meets the criteria set forth in the definition of student of massage therapy
herein; and



         (b)   The massage therapy is provided during and as part
of a course or clinical component of the school's program or course work; and



         (c)   The person is supervised by an instructor while
providing or performing massage therapy.



      (3)   This section shall not apply to and no massage therapist
license shall be required for:



         (a)   A massage therapist who is working for, or an
employee of, a medical professional licensed under M.S. Chapter 147 or
Chapter 148 or an employee of a health care office, clinic, or facility:



            1.   Owned by a municipal corporation organized
under the laws of the state, or



            2.   Owned by the state or any of its agencies, or



            3.   Licensed by the state; or



         (b)   Any student of massage therapy meeting the
definition as set forth herein, provided:



            1.   The massage therapy is provided during and as
part of a course or clinical component of an accredited program or course
work; and



            2.   The massage therapy student is supervised by
an instructor while providing or performing massage therapy services.  A
notice, which advises the public that the person who may provide massage
therapy services is a student of massage therapy and is not licensed by the
city, shall be posted in a conspicuous location in the room in which the
massage therapy is provided.



   (D)   License period and renewal. A license issued under this
chapter shall be an annual license, expiring on June 30 of each year.  A
license may be annually renewed, provided the licensee complies with the
renewal application process as follows:



      (1)   The licensee shall complete the renewal application on a
form provided by the city;



      (2)   The completed renewal application, along with the
license fee, shall be filed with the City Clerk no later than May 15 of the
renewal year; and



      (3)   The massage therapy business licensee shall provide all
information regarding ownership interest if different than the prior
applications.  If ownership interests have changed, an additional
investigation fee is required;



      (4)   When a licensee fails to file the application for a
renewal or to pay the required license fee on or before May 15, the license
renewal application will not be accepted or considered until or unless the
licensee submits payment of a late fee of 130% of the amount of the license
fee for the annual license term, not to exceed $30 more than the license fee;
and



      (5)   If the licensee fails to file the application for
renewal, along with the license fee and late fee on or before June 30, the
license shall be deemed expired.



   (E)   License and investigation fees.  The license and
investigation fees shall be determined by the City Council as set forth in
Chapter 35 Appendix.  All required license fees shall be paid on a prorated
quarterly basis. In the case of a massage therapy business that is wholly
owned and operated by the massage therapist licensed under this chapter and
does not have any employee or contracted person other than the massage
therapist licensed owner providing massage therapy services for or through
the massage therapy business, the massage therapy business license fees shall
not be required and only the massage therapist license fees shall be
required.  If it is found at any time during the term of the license period
that the massage therapy business is not wholly owned and operated by the
massage therapist licensed under this chapter or it has an employee(s) or
contracted person(s) other than the massage therapist licensed owner
providing massage therapy services for or through the massage therapy
business, then the massage therapy business license fees shall be required to
be paid on a prorated basis for the remaining term of the massage therapy
business license.



(Ord. 912, passed 3-24-11; Am. Ord. 986, passed 3-26-15; Am. Ord. 1043,
passed 4-12-18)



§ 123.04  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   (A)   Massage therapy business license application. An application
for a license to operate a massage therapy business shall be filed, along
with all required fees, with the City Clerk.  The application fee is applied
to the city's costs of the background investigation of the massage therapy
business and all persons or entities that have a 5% financial interest in the
massage therapy business.  An investigation by the building inspector may be
required of all premises proposed to be licensed before consideration by the
city. The Police Department shall conduct the background investigation before
consideration by the city.  All applications shall thereafter be considered
and approved or denied by the City Clerk. The application shall provide:



      (1)   All applicants:



         (a)    Whether the applicant/owner is an individual,
corporation, partnership, or other form of organization;



         (b)   Full name, address, date and place of birth, and
telephone number of the applicant, all owners and operators, including the
designated on-site manager or agent of the applicant;



         (c)   The address of the premises where the massage
therapy business is to be located if proposed to have a fixed location in
which the services are provided and if the applicant does not own the
premises, a copy of the lease agreement to occupy the premises;



         (d)   Statement of whether all taxes and special
assessments due and owing on the premises on which the applicant proposes to
operate the massage therapy business are current, and if taxes are
delinquent, the years for which the taxes on the premises are delinquent
(this information is required by the applicant only if the applicant or other
entity in which the applicant has an interest has the legal duty to pay said
property taxes or assessments due and owing);



         (e)   The name of the business if the business is to be
operated under a name or designation other than the name of the applicant.
This shall be accompanied by a copy of the certificate required by M.S. §§
333.01 and 333.02; and



         (f)   Proof of general liability insurance coverage in
effect as required in this chapter;



         (g)   The applicant shall produce at time of filing
application the applicant's proof of identification which may be established
only by one of the following:



            1.   A valid driver's license or identification
card issued by Minnesota, another state, or a province of Canada, and
including the photograph and date of birth of the licensed person;



            2.   A valid military identification card issued
by the United States Department of Defense;



            3.   A valid passport issued by the United States:
or



            4.   In the case of a foreign national, by a valid
passport.



For purposes of proof of identification, the APPLICANT shall mean the on-site
manager or agent for a massage therapy business filing application and the
natural person signing the application for a massage therapy business license;



         (h)   The application shall identify the full name,
address, date and place of birth, and telephone number of the natural person,
designated by the applicant as the massage therapy business's on-site manager
or agent, who shall be a resident as of the date of application of the State
of Minnesota or the following Wisconsin counties:  Pierce, St. Croix, Pepin,
Dunn, Polk, along with the notarized written consent of such a person to:



            1.   Take full responsibility for the conduct of
the licensed premises and operation; and



            2.   Serve as agent for service of notices and
other process relating to the license;



         (i)    With respect to the owner, operator, or any
person who has a 5% financial interest in the proposed licensed massage
therapy business and the appointed on-site manager or agent of the applicant,
information as to any and all criminal conviction(s) of any state, county, or
local law or regulation;



         (j)   Proof of Workers' Compensation insurance as
required by Minnesota law; and



         (k)   Such other information as the city shall require
or as required by state law.



      (2)   Individuals:



         (a)   The full name, address, date and place of birth,
and telephone number of the applicant;



         (b)   Whether the applicant and on-site manager or agent
have ever used or have been known by a name other than his or her name on the
application, and if so, the name or names used and information concerning
dates and places where used;



         (c)   Whether the applicant is a United States citizen
or is legally permitted to be in the United States and providing proof
thereof;



         (d)   The street and city addresses at which the
applicant and on-site manager or agent lived during the preceding ten years;



         (e)   Names, addresses, and dates of the applicant's and
on-site manager's or agent's employers for the preceding ten years;



         (f)   Whether the applicant and on-site manager or agent
have ever been engaged in the operation of massage services.  If so, they
shall furnish information as to the name, place, and length of time of the
involvement in such an establishment; and



         (g)   Such other information as the city shall require
or as required by state law.



      (3)   Partnerships:



         (a)   The full name(s), address(s), date and place of
birth, and financial interest of all general partners and all of the
information concerning each general partner that is required of applicants in
division (A)(2) of this section;



         (b)   The full name(s), address, date and place of
birth, and telephone number of the managing partner(s) and the interest of
each managing partner in the business;



         (c)   A copy of the partnership agreement shall be
submitted with the application.  The license shall be issued in the name of
the partnership; and



         (d)   Such other information as the city shall require
or as required by state law.



      (4)   Corporations and other organizations:



         (a)   The name of the corporation or business firm, and
if incorporated, the state of incorporation;



         (b)   A copy of the certificate of incorporation, shall
be attached to the application.  If the applicant is a foreign corporation,
a certificate of authority as required by M.S. § 303.06, shall be attached;



         (c)   The name of the manager(s), proprietor(s) or other
agent(s) in charge of the business and all of the information concerning each
manager, proprietor, or agent that is required of applicants in division
(A)(2) of this section;



         (d)   A list of all persons who own or have a 5% or more
interest in the corporation or organization or who are officers of said
corporation or organization, together with their addresses and all the
information regarding such persons as is required in division (A)(2) of this
section;  and



         (e)  Such other information as the city shall require or
as required by state law.



   (B)   Massage therapist license application. An application for a
massage therapist license shall be filed, along with all required fees, with
the City Clerk.  The Police Department shall conduct the background
investigation before consideration by the city.  All applications shall
thereafter be considered and granted or denied by the City Clerk. The
application for a license under this division shall be made on a form
supplied by the City Clerk and shall request the following information:



      (1)   The applicant's full name, address, date and place of
birth, telephone number, weight, height, eye color;



      (2)   The name, address, and telephone number of the
applicant's current employer;



      (3)   The applicant's employers for the previous ten years,
including the employer's name and address and dates of employment;



      (4)   The applicant's addresses for the previous ten years;



      (5)   Whether the applicant is a United States citizen or is
legally permitted to be in the United States and providing proof thereof;



      (6)   Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by
a name other than his or her name, and if so, the name or names used and
information concerning dates and the county and state where used;



      (7)   Proof of general liability insurance coverage in effect
as required in this chapter (proof of insurance coverage may not be available
to the applicant at time of application, but proof of insurance coverage
shall be submitted to the City Clerk before a license is issued);



      (8)   The applicant shall produce at time of filing
application the applicant's proof of identification which may be established
only by one of the following:



         (a)   A valid driver's license or identification card
issued by Minnesota, another state, or a province of Canada, and including
the photograph and date of birth of the licensed person;



         (b)   A valid military identification card issued by the
United States Department of Defense;



         (c)   A valid passport issued by the United States; or



         (d)   In the case of a foreign national, by a valid
passport.



      (9)   Information as to any and all criminal conviction(s) of
any state, county, or local law or regulation;



      (10)   One of the following: 



         (a)   Proof of successful completion of a minimum of 500
credit hours of certified therapeutic massage training/course work that
includes subjects of anatomy, physiology, hygiene, ethics, massage theory and
research, and massage practice from an accredited institution or program;



         (b)   A diploma or certificate of graduation for a
comprehensive massage therapy program consisting of the course work stated
above in  division (B)(10)(a) issued to the applicant from an accredited
institution or an accredited program; or



         (c)   Proof of passing the National Certification Exam
offered by the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage &
Bodywork and a minimum of seven years of full-time work experience as a
massage therapist within the United States; and



      (11)   Such other information as the city shall require or as
required by state law.



(Ord. 912, passed 3-24-11; Am. Ord. 1043, passed 4-12-18)



§ 123.05  LICENSE ELIGIBILITY.



   (A)   A massage therapy business shall not be issued a massage
therapy business license upon the following grounds:



      (1)   The proposed fixed location or premises in which the
massage therapy business proposes to provide massage therapy services is not
located in a commercial or industrial district in which medical or health
care facilities or uses are permitted as established by the zoning chapter of
this code;



      (2)   The owner, operator, or any person who has a 5%
financial interest in the proposed licensed massage therapy business or the
appointed on-site manager or agent of the applicant has a conviction for, or
was charged with, but convicted of a lesser charge of, a crime involving a
violation of any massage therapy-related regulation in any other
jurisdiction, any prostitution-related offense, criminal sexual conduct,
indecent exposure, surreptitious intrusion, disorderly house as defined by
Minnesota Statutes, theft, felony drug offense, any crime of violence as
defined by Minnesota Statutes, or any other similar crime or offense within
ten years of the date of application;



      (3)   The owner, operator, or any person who has a 5%
financial interest in the proposed licensed massage therapy business had a
massage therapist- or massage therapy business-related license in another
jurisdiction that was suspended or revoked within ten years preceding the
date of application;



      (4)   The application failed to identify the full name,
address, and date and place of birth of the natural person designated by the
applicant as the massage therapy business's on-site manager or agent, along
with the notarized written consent of such a person to:



         (a)   Take full responsibility for the conduct of the
licensed premises and operation; and



         (b)   Serve as agent for service of notices and other
process relating to the license;



      (5)   The on-site manager or agent designated by the applicant
is not a resident as of the date of application of the State of Minnesota or
the following Wisconsin counties:  Pierce, St. Croix, Pepin, Dunn, Polk;



      (6)   The on-site manager or agent designated by the applicant
is not a United States citizen and is not legally permitted to be in the
United States;



      (7)   The applicant provided false or misrepresented
information in the application;



      (8)   The massage therapy business is proposed to be operated
on premises on which property taxes, assessments, or other financial claims
by the state, county, or city are due, delinquent, and unpaid, provided the
applicant or other entity in which the applicant has an interest has the
legal duty to pay said taxes, assessments, or claims due and owing;



      (9)   The applicant does not have general liability insurance
coverage in effect as required in this chapter; and



      (10)   The applicant has been denied a license under this
chapter within the preceding 12 months.



   (B)   A massage therapist shall not be issued a massage therapist
license upon the following grounds:



      (1)   The applicant has a conviction for or was charged with,
but convicted of a lesser charge, a crime involving a violation of any
massage therapy-related regulation in any other jurisdiction, any
prostitution-related offense, criminal sexual conduct, indecent exposure,
surreptitious intrusion, disorderly house as defined by Minnesota Statutes,
theft, felony drug offense, any crime of violence as defined by Minnesota
Statutes, or any other similar crime or offense within ten years of the date
of application;



      (2)   The applicant had a massage therapist- or massage
therapy business-related license in another jurisdiction that was suspended
or revoked within ten years preceding the date of application;



      (3)   The applicant is not 18 years of age or older;



      (4)   The applicant is not a resident as of the date of
application of the State of Minnesota or the following Wisconsin counties:
Pierce, St. Croix, Pepin, Dunn, Polk;



      (5)   The applicant is not a United States citizen and is not
legally permitted to be in the United States;



      (6)   The applicant has not earned or did not provide:



         (a)   Proof of successful completion of a minimum of 500
credit hours of certified therapeutic massage training/course work that
includes the subjects of anatomy, physiology, hygiene, ethics, massage theory
and research, and massage practice from an accredited institution or program;
or



         (b)   Proof of a diploma or certificate of graduation in
a comprehensive massage therapy program consisting of the course work stated
above in division (B)(6)(a) issued to the applicant from an accredited
institution or an accredited program for massage therapy; or



         (c)   Proof of passing the National Certification Exam
offered by the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage &
Bodywork and a minimum of seven years of full-time work experience as a
massage therapist within the United States.  In the case of an applicant who
provided proof of the minimum of 500 hours of training/course work as set
forth herein, a license may be issued, but a license will not be renewed
unless the applicant provides at the time of license renewal proof of a
diploma or certificate of graduation from a full massage therapy program from
an accredited institution or an accredited program for massage therapy;



      (7)   The applicant provided false or misrepresented
information on the application;



      (8)   The applicant does not have general liability insurance
coverage in effect as required in this chapter; or



      (9)   The applicant has been denied a license under this
chapter within the preceding 12 months.



(Ord. 912, passed 3-24-11)



§ 123.06  RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Massage therapy business licenses granted for massage therapy
services or operation at a fixed location or premises does not permit the
business to provide massage therapy services at any location other than the
premises identified on the license, except a licensed massage therapist
employed or contracted by the massage therapy business licensee may provide
massage therapy services:



      (1)   To a client at the client's residence or place of care
if in a long- or short-care facility, such as a hospital, nursing home, or
convalescence facility;  and



      (2)   In connection with a special event or function whereby
the massage therapist provides massage therapy to attendees of the event or
function. 



   (B)   The act of any employee of the licensee is deemed to be the
act of the licensee. The licensee shall be responsible for all acts and
conduct attributable to and in connection with massage therapy services
provided by the licensee or occurring on the premises of the massage therapy
business.



   (C)   The person who is receiving a massage shall at all times have
his/her anus, intergluteal cleft (buttocks crease), and genitals covered with
clothing or properly draped with non-transparent material.  The person who
is receiving massage therapy of the breast or buttocks (gluteal) shall have
the breast or buttock (gluteal muscle) that is not then immediately receiving
massage therapy properly covered and draped with non-transparent material.



   (D)   The licensee and all employees of the licensee shall at all
times be fully clothed and shall not expose his/her breast, buttocks, anus,
or genitals.



   (E)   At no time shall the massage therapist touch or offer to touch
or massage the penis, scrotum, mons veneris, vulva, or vaginal area of any
customer or person inquiring of massage therapy services.



   (F)   No beer, liquor, narcotic drug, or controlled substances, as
such terms are defined by state statutes or the City Code, shall be used or
ingested or present during any massage therapy session.



   (G)    No doors of massage rooms, when occupied by one or more
persons, shall be locked. All locks, if any, shall be keyed only from the
exterior of the massage rooms.



   (H)   Only massage therapists who are licensed by the city shall
practice or provide therapeutic massage services for a licensed massage
therapy business or within the licensed massage therapy business premises as
identified in its license.



   (I)   The licensee shall comply with any and all provisions of this
chapter, all provisions of the City Code, and any state law or regulation.



   (J)   The licensee shall not provide any massage therapy services
and the identified premises for a licensed massage therapy business shall not
be open between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day.



   (K)   The licensed premises under a licensed massage therapy
business, if any, shall, during all operating hours, be open to inspection by
any building, zoning, code or police officer to determine whether this
chapter and all other laws are being observed.  All persons, as a condition
to being issued such license, consent to such inspections by such officers. 
It is unlawful for any licensee or agent or employee of a licensee to hinder
or prevent a city inspecting officer from making such inspection.



   (L)   If a licensed massage therapy business's on-site manager or
agent ceases to be located at the licensed premises or ceases to act in such
capacity for the licensee without appointment of a successor, the license
issued pursuant to such appointment shall be subject to revocation or
suspension.



   (M)   A massage therapist licensee shall have the valid license
issued by the city in his/her possession while providing massage therapy
within the city and a massage therapy business shall conspicuously post the
valid license issued by the city in its premises identified in the massage
therapy business license. 



   (N)   No license issued under this chapter may be transferred. 
Massage therapy business licenses shall terminate upon any change in officers
or ownership interests of the licensee, unless the change is approved by the
City Clerk in which case the license shall only continue in force until the
end of the license term.



   (O)   The licensee shall have in effect during the license period
general liability insurance providing minimum coverage of $300,000 combined
single limit per occurrence.  This requirement shall not apply to a licensed
massage therapist who is an employee of and covered under a massage therapy
business liability insurance policy provided proof of such coverage is
provided to the city.  The licensee shall provide to the city a certificate
of insurance evidencing the insurance coverage as required herein.



   (P)   The licensee shall comply with all laws of health and
sanitation.



   (Q)    Violation of any law or regulation relating to the license
issued under this chapter, or any building, safety or health regulation shall
be grounds for suspension or revocation of any license, as determined by the
City Council.



(Ord. 912, passed 3-24-11; Am. Ord. 1043, passed 4-12-18)



§ 123.07  PROHIBITED BUSINESS OR OPERATIONS.



   No massage therapy business shall be used or operated as or in
conjunction with an adult use business as defined in this code.



(Ord. 912, passed 3-24-11)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Chapter



   130.   GENERAL OFFENSES



CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Section



General Provisions



   130.01   Adoption of criminal statutes



   130.02   Disorderly conduct



   130.03   Disruptive presence at schools



   130.04   Trespassing



   130.05   False fire alarm



   130.06   Drug paraphernalia



   130.07   Fireworks regulations



   130.08   Sexual offender residence location restriction



Social Host Liability



   130.10   Purpose and findings



   130.11   Definitions



   130.12   Prohibited acts



   130.13   Exceptions



Dangerous Weapons



   130.20   Purpose



   130.21   Definitions



   130.22   Discharge and use prohibited



   130.23   Transportation requirements



   130.24   Possession by minors



   130.25   Prohibited activity



   130.26   Exception



False Alarms; Alarm Systems



   130.40   Purpose



   130.41   Definitions



   130.42   Fees



   130.43   Notification; multiple false alarms



   130.44   Exception



   130.45   Prohibited alarm systems



Noise Regulations



   130.55   Purpose



   130.56   Certain activities prohibited between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m.



   130.57   Exception



   130.58   Electronic sound system or audio equipment



   130.59   Parties or gatherings



Graffiti



   130.70   Purpose and findings



   130.71   Definitions



   130.72   Prohibited activity



   130.73   Removal



   130.74   Notice of graffiti



Curfew



   130.80   Purposes and findings



   130.81   Definitions



   130.82   Prohibited acts



   130.83   Exceptions



   130.84   Enforcement



   130.85   Violations



   130.86   Continuing review and evaluation



   130.87   Duties of person legally responsible for minor



   130.88   Duties of other persons



   130.89   Defense



 



   130.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 130.01  ADOPTION OF CRIMINAL STATUTES.



   (A)   Purpose.  This chapter is enacted pursuant to M.S. § 471.62
and other applicable laws of the state.  The purpose of this chapter is to
provide uniform rules for the regulation of certain criminal violations
committed in the city in conformity with those rules applicable to criminal
offenses in the entire state.



   (B)   Acts prohibited.  M.S. 97B.045, 97B.051, 97B.091, 97B.205,
Chapter 152, Chapter 609 and § 617.23, together with amendments thereto, are
hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference and made a part of the
laws of the city to the same extent as if the sections were set forth in full
herein.



(‘81 Code, § 14-1)  (Ord. 91, passed 4-14-71)



§ 130.02  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   It is unlawful for any person, in a public or private place, knowing,
or having reasonable grounds to know, that it will, or will tend to, alarm,
anger or disturb others or provoke any assault or breach of peace, to do the
following:



   (A)   Engage in brawling or fighting;



   (B)   Disturb an assembly or meeting which  is not unlawful in its
character;



   (C)   Engage in offensive, obscene or abusive language or gestures,
fighting, or in boisterous and noisy conduct tending reasonably to arouse
alarm, anger or resentment in others;



   (D)   Willfully and lewdly expose the person or the private parts
thereof, or procure another to so expose the person, or engage in any open or
gross lewdness or lascivious behavior or any act of public indecency;



   (E)   Appear publicly without being garbed in a manner sufficient to
cover the person and equal to the standards generally adopted and accepted by
the public;



   (F)   Cause the making or production of any unnecessary noise by
racing the motor of any motor vehicle, causing the spinning or skidding of
wheels or tires causing tire squeal or similar noise, shouting or by any
other means or mechanism including the excessive blowing of any automobile or
other vehicle horn;



   (G)   Use a flashlight, laser pointer, spotlight or similar device
in a manner so as to annoy or endanger others;



   (H)   Drink or display any intoxicating liquor, wine or 3.2% malt
liquor on or about any premises where the drinking or display thereof is
prohibited by law or ordinance;



   (I)   Cause defacement, destruction or other damage to any premises
or any property located thereon;



   (J)   Strew, scatter, litter, throw, dispose of or deposit any
refuse, garbage or rubbish on any premises except in receptacles provided for
the purpose;



   (K)   Enter any motor vehicle of another without the consent of the
owner or operator; and



   (L)   Fail or refuse to vacate or leave any street, alley or other
public way or public place, or any public gathering or assembly, or the
vicinity of any store, shop or business or commercial establishment, or any
private property, or place after being requested or ordered, whether orally
or in writing, to do so by the owner, or person in charge thereof, or by any
law enforcement agent or official; provided however, this provision shall not
apply to any person who is owner or tenant of the premises involved, nor to
any law enforcement or other government official who may be present thereon
at that time as part of the official’s official duty, nor shall it include
the spouse, children, employee or tenant of the owner or occupier.



(‘81 Code, § 14-2)  (Ord. 173, passed 12-10-75) 



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning disorderly conduct, see M.S.§ 609.72



   For provisions concerning the city’s authority to prevent disorderly
conduct, see M.S. § 412.221, subd. 24



§ 130.03  DISRUPTIVE PRESENCE AT SCHOOLS.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any public building and its parking lots and grounds,
park or other publicly owned land, including the municipal golf course and
Minnesota State Zoo; and also any privately owned commercial or multiple
residential building and its parking lots and grounds.



   SCHOOL.  Any elementary school, middle school, four-year high school,
senior high school, adult school, vocational school or any branch thereof or
community college and its parking lots and grounds.



(‘81 Code, § 14-3)



   (B)   Remaining after order to leave.  It shall be unlawful for any
person to enter or remain in any school or public place after being ordered
by any law enforcement officer, school official or the director of parks and
recreation to leave or refrain from entering; provided, however, that the
authority of the school officials hereunder is limited to schools and the
authority of the Director of Parks and Recreation hereunder is limited to
city park and recreation facilities.



(‘81 Code, § 14-4)



   (C)   Causes for issuance of order.  An order to leave may also be
issued by any law enforcement officer or school official for any of the
following reasons:



      (1)   The person’s presence at the place disrupts or tends
to disrupt the usual activities or business conducted on the premises;



      (2)   The person is loitering or otherwise interfering with
the premises; or



      (3)   The time of day is other than the hours when the school
or public place is open to the general public or students of the school.



(‘81 Code, § 14-5)  (Ord. 181, passed 9-8-76; Am. Ord. 551, passed
2-25-93)



§ 130.04  TRESPASSING.



   (A)   No person shall enter upon the land of another and, without
claim of right, intentionally refuse to depart therefrom on demand of the
lawful possessor thereof or his or her agent.  A demand to depart may be
made as follows:



      (1)   Orally, by the lawful possessor or the possessor’s
agent;



      (2)   By conspicuously posting signs which prohibit entry onto
the affected land; or



      (3)   By conspicuously posting signs which prohibit entry onto
the affected land during certain hours.



   (B)   No person, after receiving a written demand not to re-enter
the lawful possessor's land, shall re- enter the lawful possessor's land
without the written permission of the lawful possessor, or his or her agent,
for a period of up to one year from the date of the written demand as
provided therein.



(‘81 Code, § 14-6)  (Ord. 611, passed 1-11-96; Am. Ord. 976, passed
10-9-14)



§ 130.05  FALSE FIRE ALARM.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally give, make or
cause to be given or made, an alarm of fire without reasonable cause.



(‘81 Code, § 14-15)  (Ord. 33, passed 11-14-66) 



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning false fire alarms, see M.S. § 299F.452



§ 130.06  DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   To protect and promote the public health, safety and
welfare by prohibiting the possession, manufacturing, delivery and
advertisement of drug paraphernalia.



      (2)   To deter substance usage by controlling paraphernalia
associated with use and manufacture.



      (3)   To reduce the availability of drug paraphernalia in
order to prevent their availability from inducing, promoting, suggesting or
increasing the public acceptability of controlled substances.



(‘81 Code, § 14-17)



   (B)   Definition.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.  All equipment, products and materials of any kind
which are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling
or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in
violation of M.S. Chapter 152.  It includes, but is not limited to:



      (1)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of
plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance
can be derived;



      (2)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances;



      (3)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed
for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance;



      (4)   Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for
use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances;



      (5)   Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed
for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances;



      (6)   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine,
hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for
use or designed for use in cutting controlled substances;



      (7)   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or
designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or
refining marijuana;



      (8)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices
used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled
substances;



      (9)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used,
intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances;



      (10)   Containers and other objects used, intended for use or
designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;



      (11)   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used,
intended for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled
substances into the human body; and



      (12)   Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in
ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or
hashish oil into the human body, such as:



         (a)   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or
ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or
punctured metal bowls;



         (b)   Water pipes;



         (c)   Carburetion tubes and devices;



         (d)   Smoking and carburetion masks;



         (e)   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning
material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too
short to be held in the hand;



         (f)   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;



         (g)   Chamber pipes;



         (h)   Carburetor pipes;



         (i)   Electric pipes;



         (j)   Air-driven pipes;



         (k)   Chillums;



         (l)   Bongs;



         (m)   Ice pipes or chillers.



(‘81 Code, § 14-18)



   (C)   Factors in determining drug paraphernalia.  In determining
whether an object is drug paraphernalia, the following relevant factors
should be considered:



      (1)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the
object concerning its use;



      (2)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in
control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any
controlled substance;



      (3)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a
direct violation of division (D) below.



      (4)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;



      (5)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on
the object;



      (6)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an
owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom
the owner or person in control knows, or should reasonably know, intend to
use the object to facilitate a violation of division (D) below; the innocence
of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation
of division (D) shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for
use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;



      (7)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object
concerning its use;



      (8)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which
explain or depict its use;



      (9)   National and local advertising concerning its use;



      (10)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;



      (11)   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object
is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;



      (12)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales
of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;



      (13)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the
object in the community; and



      (14)   Expert testimony concerning its use.



(‘81 Code, § 14-19)



   (D)   Prohibited activity.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with
intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow,
harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation
of M.S. Chapter 152.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with
intent to deliver or manufacture with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia,
knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it
will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into
the human body a controlled substance in violation of M.S. Chapter 152.



      (3)   It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper,
magazine, handbill or other publication any advertisement, knowing, or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the
advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects
designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.



(‘81 Code, § 14-19.1)



(Ord. 237, passed 5-8-80)



§ 130.07  FIREWORKS REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Adoption of M.S. §§ 624.20 to 624.25.  The provisions of
M.S. §§ 624.20 to 624.25, as amended (2004), are hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference as though set forth verbatim herein.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CONSUMER FIREWORKS.  Wire or wood sparklers of not more than 100
grams of mixture per item, other sparking items which are non-explosive and
non-aerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical mixture per tube, or a
total of 500 grams or less for multiple tubes, snake and glow worms, smoke
devices, or trick noise makers which include paper streamers, party poppers,
string poppers, snappers, and drop pops each consisting of not more than
25/100 grains of explosive mixture, toy pistols and toy guns in which paper
caps containing 25/100 grains or less of explosive compound are used, or toy
pistol caps which contain less than 20/100 grains of explosive mixture.



      FIREWORKS.  Any substance or combination of substances or
article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect
by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, and includes blank
cartridges, toy cannons, and toy canes in which explosives are used, the type
of balloons which require fire underneath to propel them, firecrackers,
torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, daygo bombs, sparklers other than those
identified as consumer fireworks, or other FIREWORKS of like construction and
any FIREWORKS containing any explosive or inflammable compound, or any
tablets or other device containing any explosive substance and commonly used
as FIREWORKS.  Consumer fireworks shall not be deemed FIREWORKS.



   (C)   Sale, possession, and use of fireworks prohibited.



      (1)   Fireworks.  Except as otherwise permitted under M.S.
§§ 624.20 through 624.25, it is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for
sale, store, possess, use, or explode any fireworks within the city. 



      (2)   Consumer fireworks.



         (a)   No person under the age of 18 years shall purchase
any consumer fireworks.



         (b)   No person shall use or discharge any fireworks or
consumer fireworks between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except on
July 4 the prohibited hours shall be from 11:59 p.m. on July 4 to 8:00 a.m.
on July 5 and on January 1 the prohibited hours shall be from 12:30 a.m. to
8:00 a.m.



      (3)   Fireworks and consumer fireworks.



         (a)   No person shall throw, toss, or otherwise dispose
of any fireworks or consumer fireworks at or in the direction of any person,
animal, vehicle, thing, or object.



         (b)   No person shall throw, toss, or otherwise discard
any fireworks or consumer fireworks from a vehicle, moving or non-moving.



         (c)   No consumer fireworks shall be kept, stored, used,
permitted or discharged on any public property or on any public street or
right-of-way.



      (d)   No person shall use or discharge consumer fireworks
within any building or structure.



   (D)   The sale of consumer fireworks within the city requires a
license and fee as indicated in Chapter 120 of the city code.



(‘81 Code, § 14-19.2)  (Ord. 240, passed 6-9-80; Am. Ord. 770, passed
4-14-05; Am. Ord. 858, passed 4-23-09)



§ 130.08  SEXUAL OFFENDER RESIDENCE LOCATION RESTRICTION.



   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms
shall be defined as stated:



      DESIGNATED OFFENDER. Any person who has been convicted,
adjudicated, or committed for a designated sexual offense, as defined herein,
or who is required to register as a predatory offender pursuant to M.S. §
243.166 (2016 or as amended) in which the victim of the offense was less than
16 years of age at the time of the offense or for which the offender has been
categorized as a “level III sex offender” under Minnesota Statutes.



      DESIGNATED SEXUAL OFFENSE. A conviction, adjudication of
delinquency, or commitment under M.S. Ch. 253B involving any of the following
offenses: M.S. §§ 609.342; 609.343; 609.344; 609.345; 609.352; 609.365;
617.23; 617.246; 617.247; 617.293; successor statutes; or a similar offense
from another state.



      RESIDENCE (or RESIDE). A place where a person abides, dwells,
inhabits or stays for more than 14 days in the aggregate during a 12-month
period or a place where the person routinely abides, dwells, inhabits or
stays for four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month.
Residence does not require the person to have an ownership interest in or a
formal rental or lease agreement for the residence. A hotel, motel, or other
commercial lodging establishment, boarding house or shelter, and group home
may be deemed a person’s residence under this section.



   (B)   Location of residence.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any designated offender to establish
residence or otherwise reside within 1,500 feet of any of the following uses
(hereinafter referred to as “protected zones”):



         (a)   School for pre-K through grade 12, public or
private;



         (b)   Public park or playground;



         (c)   Place of worship that provides regular educational
programs (i.e., Sunday school);



         (d)   Licensed child care center (excluding in- home
daycare providers); and



         (e)   Adult establishment (sexually oriented) businesses.



      (2)   For purposes of determining the minimum distance
separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a horizontal line
from any property line of the lot or parcel on which the subject residence is
located to the nearest property line of subject use of a prohibited zone
identified above.



      (3)   The Police Chief shall maintain an official map showing
approximate locations in which a designated offender is prohibited to reside,
as defined by this section. The Police Chief shall update the map at least
annually to reflect any changes in the location of prohibited zones. The
actual measurement of minimum distance separation between the residence and
the use within the prohibited zone shall govern.



   (C)   Exceptions. A designated offender residing within a prohibited
zone as described in this section is not in violation of this section if any
of the following applies:



      (1)   The designated offender established the residence and
reported and registered the residence pursuant to M.S. §§ 243.166, 243.167,
or successor statute, prior to the effective date of this section.



      (2)   The designated offender is under the age of 18 and
resides with a parent or legal guardian.



      (3)   The school, park, playground, place of worship, licensed
child care facility, or adult establishment (sexually oriented) business
within 1,500 feet of the designated offender’s proposed residence commenced
operation after the designated offender established residence and
reported/registered the residence pursuant to Minnesota Statutes governing
sex offender registration requirements.



   (D)   Renting real property in violation of this section.



      (1)   It is unlawful to let or rent any place, building,
trailer or other structure, or part thereof, with the knowledge that it will
be used as a residence by any person prohibited from establishing such
residence pursuant to this section, if such place, structure, or part
thereof, trailer or other conveyance, is located within a prohibited zone
described in this section.



      (2)   A property owner’s failure to comply with provisions
of this section shall constitute a violation of this section.



(Ord. 1026, passed 2-23-17)



SOCIAL HOST LIABILITY



§ 130.10  PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.



   The Apple Valley City Council intends to prevent underage possession
and consumption of alcohol, even if done within the confines of a private
residence, and intends to hold persons criminally responsible who host events
or gatherings where persons under 21 years of age possess or consume alcohol
regardless of whether the person hosting the event or gathering supplied the
alcohol.  The Apple Valley City Council finds that:



   (A)   Events and gatherings held on private or public property where
alcohol is possessed or consumed by persons under the age of 21 are harmful
to those persons and constitute a potential threat to public health, safety
and welfare requiring prevention or abatement.



   (B)   Prohibiting underage consumption acts to protect underage
persons, as well as the general public, from injuries related to alcohol
consumption, such as alcohol overdose or alcohol-related traffic collisions.



   (C)   Alcohol is an addictive drug which, if used irresponsibly,
could have drastic effects on those who use it as well as those who are
affected by the actions of an irresponsible user.



   (D)   Often, events or gatherings involving underage possession and
consumption occur outside the presence of parents.  There are, however,
times when the parent(s) is/are present and, condone the activity, and in
some circumstances provide the alcohol.



(Ord. 848, passed 11-6-08)



§ 130.11  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOL or ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Any beverage or liquid intended to be
consumed as or with a beverage containing more than 0.5% alcohol by volume.



   EVENT or GATHERING.  Any group of two or more persons who have
assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.



   HOST.  Any person who aids, conducts, allows, entertains, organizes,
supervises, controls, or permits a gathering or event.  The owner or tenant
of a residence is considered a HOST whether or not they are present on the
premises at the time of the offense.



   PARENT.  Any person having the care or custody of an underage person:



      (1)   As natural, adoptive parent, or step-parent;



      (2)   As a legal guardian; or



      (3)   As a person to whom legal custody has been given by
order of a court.



   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, corporation, or
any association of one or more individuals.



   RESIDENCE or PREMISES.  Any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment,
condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or
meeting room, park, or any other place of assembly, public or private,
whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a
dwelling or specifically for a party or other social function, and whether
owned, leased, rented, or used with or without permission or compensation.



   TENANT.  Any person who does not own, but occupies a dwelling for
residential purposes, for payment of a fee or other compensation to the
owner, under a lease or contract, written or verbal.



   UNDERAGE PERSON.  Any individual under 21 years of age.



(Ord. 848, passed 11-6-08)



§ 130.12  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person(s) to:



      (1)   Host or allow an event or gathering;



      (2)   At any residence, premises, or on any other private or
public property;



      (3)   Where alcohol or alcoholic beverages are present; and



      (4)   When the person knows or reasonably should know that an
underage person will or did consume any alcohol or alcoholic beverage, or
possess any alcohol or alcoholic beverage.



   (B)   It is unlawful for a person to intentionally aid, advise,
hire, counsel, or conspire with or otherwise procure another to commit the
prohibited act set forth above.



(Ord. 848, passed 11-6-08)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.13  EXCEPTIONS.



   This subchapter does not apply to the following:



   (A)   Consumption or possession of alcohol by an underage person
when with his or her parent while present in the parent's household and no
event or gathering is occurring;



   (B)   Legally protected religious observances; or



   (C)   Underage persons who are lawfully in possession of alcohol or
alcoholic beverages during the course and scope of his or her employment as
permitted by law.



(Ord. 848, passed 11-6-08)



DANGEROUS WEAPONS



§ 130.20  PURPOSE.



   The City Council finds that in order to preserve and protect the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Apple Valley it is necessary to
adopt regulations governing the use of firearms, bows and arrows and
dangerous weapons within the city.



(‘81 Code, § 14-20)  (Ord. 245, passed 8-28-80)



§ 130.21  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BODILY HARM.  Physical pain or injury, illness or any impairment of
physical condition.



   BOWS AND ARROWS or BOW AND ARROW.  Any device or combination of
devices designed to propel any arrow from a cord connecting the two ends of a
bow by pulling on the cord thus bending the bow and then releasing the cord,
except it shall not mean devices of this type commonly interpreted to be toys.



   DANGEROUS WEAPON.  Any firearm, whether loaded or unloaded, or any
device designed as a weapon and capable of producing bodily harm, or any
other device or instrument which, in the manner it is used or intended to be
used, is calculated or likely to produce bodily harm.



   FIREARM.  Any device from which is propelled any missile, projectile,
bullet or other mass through a barrel by means of explosives, gas, air and/or
spring devices except that any device that discharges blank cartridges for a
show or theater, for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports, or
for use as a bird or animal repelling device shall not be considered a
FIREARM for purposes of this subchapter.



(‘81 Code, § 14-21)  (Ord. 245, passed 8-28-80)



§ 130.22  DISCHARGE AND USE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Except in accordance with this subchapter, it shall be
unlawful to discharge or use any firearm or bow and arrow within the
corporate boundaries of the city.



   (B)   Bows and arrows may be used on private property, or on school
and city property in connection with an organized school or recreation class
or in accordance with § 130.03, provided that the arrows used shall be
equipped with blunt tips (also known as “field points” or “target
arrows”).



   (C)   Firearms may be discharged on any approved firearms range
operating under a permit issued by the City Council or within any county or
regional park while participating under a permit or license in a special
hunting program established by the county board.



   (D)   Except for discharge, this section intends neither to further
restrict nor to permit what is restricted in M.S. §§ 624.711 through
624.7181.



   (E)   Under the conditions for discharge allowed in this section, it
shall be unlawful for any person to be under the influence of alcohol,
narcotics or any other drug when discharging a firearm or bow and arrow.



   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to include any
discharge of any firearm or bow and arrow when done in the lawful defense of
person, family, property or within the basement of a private residence.



   (G)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to include any
discharge of any device used exclusively for the firing of stud cartridges,
explosive rivets or similar industrial ammunition when used for construction
purposes.



(‘81 Code, § 14-22)  (Ord. 245, passed 8-28-80; Am. Ord. 597, passed
5-11-95)



§ 130.23  TRANSPORTATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to transport any firearm in a motor
vehicle, airplane, snowmobile or boat unless the same is unloaded in both
barrels and magazine and completely contained in a gun case expressly made
for that purpose which is fully enclosed by being zipped, snapped, buckled,
tied or otherwise fastened, with no portion of the firearm exposed, or unless
unloaded and contained in the trunk of a car with the trunk door closed,
except that pistols and revolvers may be transported when done in accordance
with M.S. §§ 624.711 through 624.717.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to transport the following in a motor
vehicle, airplane, snowmobile or boat:



      (1)   A bow and arrow unless unstrung, completely contained in
a case or unless contained in the trunk of a car with the trunk door closed;
or



      (2)   A muzzle loading firearm unless fully unloaded and
completely contained in a gun case expressly made for that purpose which is
fully enclosed by being zipped, snapped, buckled, tied or otherwise fastened
with no portion of the firearm exposed, or unless unloaded and contained in
the trunk of a car with the trunk door closed.  A muzzle loading firearm
with a flintlock ignition is fully unloaded it if has no priming powder in
any pan and a muzzle loading firearm with percussion ignition is fully
unloaded if it has no percussion cap on any nipple.



(‘81 Code, § 14-23)  (Ord. 245, passed 8-28-80) 



§ 130.24  POSSESSION BY MINORS.



   (A)   (1)   Except in accordance with this section, it shall be
unlawful for any person under the age of 16 years unless accompanied by a
parent or guardian, to have in his or her possession or under his or her
control, any firearm for any purpose. 



      (2)   For the purposes of this section, the word
“guardian” is defined as legal guardian or any other person over the age
of 18 years who has been selected by the parent or legal guardian to
supervise the person under the age of 16 years while he or she has in his or
her possession or under his or her control any firearm.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to any person between the ages of
14 years and 16 years who has the certificate provided for in M.S. § 97.81,
or to any person participating in the course provided by the section to carry
a properly encased and unloaded firearm to and from class and to handle the
same during the instruction.  Also, the person shall be allowed
participation in organized target shooting programs conducted under qualified
adult supervision.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for a parent or guardian to permit a
child under 14 years of age to handle or use outside of the parent’s or
guardian’s presence, any firearm, any ammunition or any explosive.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish a minor under
18 years of age with any firearm, any ammunition or any explosive without the
written consent of the minor’s parent or guardian.



(‘81 Code, § 14-24)  (Ord. 245, passed 8-28-80) 



§ 130.25  PROHIBITED ACTIVITY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to do the following:



      (1)   Recklessly handle or use a firearm, bow and arrow,
dangerous weapon or explosive so as to endanger the safety of another;



      (2)   Intentionally point a firearm of any kind, whether
loaded or unloaded, at or toward another;



      (3)   Possess any device or weapon known as a slungshot,
slingshot, sand club, metal knuckles, switchblade knife, dagger, stiletto,
dirk, blackjack, chain club, pipe club, Molotov cocktail, grenade, throwing
star or similar device;



      (4)   Possess any other dangerous article or substance for the
purpose of being used unlawfully as a weapon against another; and



      (5)   Sell or have in possession any device designed to
silence or muffle the discharge of a firearm.



   (B)   Division (A) above shall not apply to the articles mentioned
when they are carried or possessed as curiosities for their historical
significance or value.



(‘81 Code, § 14-25)  (Ord. 245, passed 8-28-80; Am. Ord. 314, passed
3-8-84)



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning unlawful acts with a “dangerous weapon,”
see M.S. § 609.66



§ 130.26  EXCEPTION.



   This subchapter does not apply to law enforcement officers and members
of the armed services of either the United States or the state for use in the
course of their duties.



(‘81 Code, § 14-26)  (Ord. 245, passed 8-28-80)



FALSE ALARMS; ALARM SYSTEMS



§ 130.40  PURPOSE.



   The City Council finds that in order to preserve and protect the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Apple Valley, it is necessary
to adopt regulations setting forth the collection of service fees for the
Apple Valley Police Department or Fire Department responses to excessive fire
alarm calls from faulty or negligently operated automatic alarms within the
city.



(‘81 Code, § 14-70)  (Ord. 280, passed 11-23-82; Am. Ord. 960, passed
1-23-14)



§ 130.41  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM USER. The person using and responsible for an automatic alarm to
protect premises regardless of whether the person owns or leases the property.



   AUTOMATIC ALARM. Any device or system which is designed to be used for
the detection of an unauthorized person in any structure, for alerting others
of the commission of an unlawful act, or for the detection of smoke, fire,
heat, carbon monoxide,  or other hazardous condition within a structure, and
which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when activated.



   AUTOMATIC NOTIFICATION DEVICE. An automatic alarm which automatically
sends to another location, a message or signal indicating the existence of an
emergency situation.



   CALENDAR YEAR. The period of January 1 through December 31 of each year.



   CENTRAL STATION SYSTEM. Alarm system that functions through a
constantly attended location (central station) operated by an alarm company.
Alarm signals from the protected property are received in the central station
and are then re-transmitted by trained personnel to the city’s Police or
Fire Department’s alarm communications center for dispatch.



   FALSE ALARM. The city’s Police Department personnel or Fire
Department personnel responding to an automatic alarm, whether it is as a
result of direct contact with the alarm signal or contact by a third party
reporting the activated alarm, when an emergency situation or hazardous
condition did not exist.



(‘81 Code, § 14-71)  (Ord. 280, passed 11-23-82; Am. Ord. 733, passed
8-14-03; Am. Ord. 960, passed 1-23-14)



§ 130.42  FEES.



   (A)   A fee shall be imposed upon the alarm user of any automatic
alarm, and the property owner of the premises on which the automatic alarm is
located, for the fourth false alarms and each false alarm thereafter within a
calendar year. The number of false alarms shall be counted and the fee
imposed separately for responses by each the Police Department and the Fire
Department. The fee shall be in the amount specified in the appendix to
Chapter 35.



   (B)   The fee shall be imposed regardless of whether the city’s
Police Department or Fire Department receives the alarm by direct connection
or through any intermediary such as central station. No fee is imposed under
this section when notification to either department is made directly by a
person not as a result of or in response to an activated automatic alarm.



   (C)   The property owner and alarm user shall be personally liable
for any fee imposed under this section. Payment of fees under this section
shall be made to the city within 30 days after mailing the invoice. Payments
not made within 30 days are delinquent and subject to a late penalty of 10%
of the amount due. All unpaid fees and penalties shall become a lien against
the property on which the automatic alarm is located, and shall be certified
by the City Clerk to the County Treasurer-Auditor each year as a special
assessment in accordance with the statutes of the state.



(‘81 Code, § 14-72)  (Ord. 280, passed 11-23-82; Am. Ord. 317, passed
4-12-84; Am. Ord. 640, passed 12-23-97; Am. Ord. 733, passed 8-14-03; Am.
Ord. 831, passed 1-24-08; Am. Ord. 960, passed 1-23-14)



§ 130.43  NOTIFICATION; MULTIPLE FALSE ALARMS.



   When any automatic alarm has emitted two false alarms in any calendar
year, the city’s Police Department or Fire Department, as applicable, shall
notify the alarm user and property owner (if not the alarm user) of the two
false alarms and the false alarm fee regulations set forth herein.



(‘81 Code, § 14-73)  (Ord. 280, passed 11-23-82; Am. Ord. 960, passed
1-23-14)



§ 130.44  EXCEPTION.



   A newly installed automatic alarm shall be exempt from the provisions
of this subchapter for a period of 30 days from the date of installation in
order to allow for proper testing and troubleshooting of the system.



(‘81 Code, § 14-74)  (Ord. 280, passed 11-23-82; Am. Ord. 960, passed
1-23-14)



§ 130.45  PROHIBITED ALARM SYSTEMS.



   No person shall install or use, monitor, and possess an automatic alarm
that utilizes taped or prerecorded messages that are delivered or otherwise
transmitted directly to the Police or Fire Department or the city’s
dispatch center, including automatic transmission of the emergency number 911.



(Ord. 733, passed 8-14-03; Am. Ord. 960, passed 1-23-14)



NOISE REGULATIONS



§ 130.55  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to protect and promote the public
health, safety and general welfare by restricting activities emitting noise
which unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, peace, safety or welfare of any persons or precludes their
enjoyment of property or affects their property’s value.



(‘81 Code, § 14-80)  (Ord. 510, passed 5-9-91)



§ 130.56  CERTAIN ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED BETWEEN 10:00 P.M. AND 6:00 A.M.



   The following activities are prohibited between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m. daily:



   (A)   Construction, installation and maintenance of utility and
street projects, except within a public right-of-way within the ring route as
defined elsewhere in this code and any section of an arterial public
right-of-way as designated by the city's transportation plan which does not
transverse exclusively through residential zoning districts.



   (B)   Operation of tools and domestic maintenance equipment powered
by external air compressors or internal combustion engines.  Snow removal
and street-sweeping equipment are exempt from this provision;



   (C)   Repair and servicing of vehicles or other equipment where the
noise from that activity is audible beyond the property lines on which the
repair or servicing is being conducted;



   (D)   Construction, remodeling, repair or maintenance of structures.



(‘81 Code, § 14-81)  (Ord. 510, passed 5-9-91; Am. Ord. 697, passed
7-26-01)



§ 130.57  EXCEPTION.



   The performance of emergency work to preserve the public health, safety
or welfare, or in the performance of work necessary to restore a public
service or eliminate a public hazard shall be exempt from the restrictions of
§ 130.56.  Any person responsible for emergency work shall take all
reasonable actions to minimize the amount of noise.



(‘81 Code, § 14-82)  (Ord. 510, passed 5-9-91)



§ 130.58  ELECTRONIC SOUND SYSTEM OR AUDIO EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   No person shall use or operate any electronic sound system or
audio equipment including, but not limited to, any compact disc player,
cassette tape player, AM-FM radio, citizen band radio, paging system or any
other device designed to produce or reproduce audio sound in an unreasonably
loud manner that it disturbs the peace, quiet and comfort of others or
interferes with the right of another to use peacefully his or her property or
public property without disturbance.



   (B)   It shall be presumed that a violation of this section has
occurred when any electronic sound system or audio equipment is operated in a
manner in which it is plainly audible, at a distance of 50 feet or more,
between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. It shall be presumed that a
violation of this section has occurred when any electronic sound system or
audio equipment is operated in a manner in which it is plainly audible, at a
distance of 100 feet or more, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:30 p.m.



   (C)   When sound violating this section is produced by an electronic
sound system or audio equipment that is located in or on a vehicle, the
vehicle’s owner is guilty of the violation, provided that if the
vehicle’s owner is not present, the person in charge of the vehicle at the
time of the violation is guilty of the violation.



   (D)   This section shall not apply to sound produced by the
following:



      (1)   Amplifying equipment used:



         (a) In connection with activities for which a permit has
been granted by the city, subject to the terms of the permit;  or



         (b)   In connection with any special community event or
special activity sponsored or organized by a school, church, the Minnesota
Zoological Garden or the city, provided the amplifying equipment is not used
later than 10:30 p.m.;



      (2)   Anti-theft devices;



      (3)   Church bells, chimes or carillons, school bells or
emergency management warning signals; and



      (4)   Authorized emergency vehicles or other vehicles required
by law to be equipped with sound devices.



(‘81 Code, § 14-83)  (Ord. 615, passed 5-9-96; Am. Ord. 924, passed
8-11-11)



§ 130.59  PARTIES OR GATHERINGS.



   (A)   A person shall not permit or participate in any party or other
gathering of people, on public or private property, which causes unreasonably
loud noise that it disturbs the peace, quiet and comfort of others or
interferes with the right of another to use peacefully his or her property or
public property without disturbance.  It shall be presumed that a violation
of this section has occurred when any noise from a gathering is plainly
audible, at a distance of 50 feet or more, between the hours of 10:30 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m.



   (B)   When a police officer has probable cause that a violation of
this section is occurring, the officer may order all persons present, other
than the owner or tenant of the premises, to disperse and leave the premises
immediately.  It shall be a violation of this section for any person to
refuse to leave after being so ordered by the police officer.



(‘81 Code, § 14-84)  (Ord. 615, passed 5-9-96) 



GRAFFITI



§ 130.70  PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.



   (A)   The City Council finds that graffiti on public and private
property is an increasing problem in the city.  The City Council finds that
unless graffiti is removed, other properties soon become the targets of
graffiti and therefore, the City Council finds that quick removal of graffiti
will assist in preventing repeated or additional graffiti within the city.



   (B)   The City Council further finds that graffiti creates a
condition of blight which can result in the deterioration of property and is
inconsistent with the city’s property maintenance goals and aesthetic
standards.



   (C)   The City Council hereby declares its intention to minimize and
to quickly remove graffiti to limit its adverse impact on city youth and
neighborhoods.  Graffiti is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a
public health and safety hazard for purposes of M.S. §§ 429.101, subd. 1(c)
and 429.021, subd. 1(8).



(Ord. 639, passed 12-11-97)



§ 130.71  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GRAFFITI.  Any writing, printing, marking, signs, symbols, figures,
designs, inscriptions or other drawings which are scratched, scrawled,
painted, drawn, sketched or otherwise placed on any permanent structure,
fixture or object, including but not limited to buildings or the interior
surfaces of those parts of buildings accessible to the general public, walls,
fences, bridges, benches, shelters, sidewalks, curbs, trees, rocks or the
like, without the consent of the owner or legal possessor and which has the
effect of defacing or marring the property.



   GRAFFITI MATERIALS.  Paint, aerosol or pressurized containers of
paint, indelible markers, ink, dye or any other substance that is used for
graffiti.



(Ord. 639, passed 12-11-97)



§ 130.72  PROHIBITED ACTIVITY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally place or
attempt to place graffiti on public or private property.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess graffiti
materials with the intent to place graffiti on public or private property.



(Ord. 639, passed 12-11-97)



§ 130.73  REMOVAL.



   (A)   A property owner shall remove all graffiti from the owner’s
property within five business days of having knowledge of or should have had
knowledge of the existence of the graffiti.  A property owner may request
the city to remove the graffiti and if the city agrees to remove the
graffiti, the property owner shall sign a release of liability form; a
consent to enter property form; and a consent to specially assess unpaid
charges form.  The property owner shall be liable for all costs which the
city incurs in removing the graffiti under this paragraph and the city may
collect the costs as a special assessment pursuant to M.S. § 429.101, subd.
1(c), if the property owner fails to reimburse the city upon request.



   (B)   The city may remove any graffiti which has not been removed by
the property owner or legal possessor within ten business days after the
city’s service of notice of graffiti upon the owner or legal possessor. 
The city may extend the ten-day period to a longer period of time, not to
exceed an aggregate total of 30 days, for good cause shown.  The city may
charge the property owner or legal possessor the costs incurred by the city
in removing the graffiti upon the property owner or legal possessors failure
to do so under the requirements of this section.  Any charges not paid
within 30 days of the due date stated on the city’s invoice shall be deemed
delinquent and subject to collection as a special assessment.  Any unpaid
charges collected by special assessment shall be in accordance with M.S. §
429.101.



(Ord. 639, passed 12-11-97)



§ 130.74  NOTICE OF GRAFFITI.



   Based upon information received from the public or upon police
observation, the city police shall investigate and identify graffiti.  After
the police department has verified the existence of graffiti, the police
chief shall send a notice to the property owner or legal possessor by
certified mail which shall inform the property owner or legal possessor of
the following:



   (A)   The existence of the graffiti;



   (B)   The property owner or legal possessor shall remove the
graffiti within ten business days of the date of the notice, unless a longer
period of time, not to exceed 30 days, is permitted for good cause shown; and



   (C)   The city may remove the graffiti if the property owner or
legal possessor fails to do so and the city’s costs therefor will be
specially assessed against the property if the charges are unpaid.



(Ord. 639, passed 12-11-97)



CURFEW



§ 130.80  PURPOSES AND FINDINGS.



   (A)   The City Council finds and determines that there has been an
increase in juvenile violence and crime by minors in the city.



   (B)   Minors are particularly susceptible by their lack of maturity
and experience to participate in unlawful activities and to be victims of
older perpetrators of crime.



   (C)   Because of the foregoing, special and extenuating
circumstances presently exist within this city that require special
regulation of minors within the city in order to protect them and other
persons during the nighttime hours, to aid in crime prevention, to promote
parental supervision and authority over minors and to decrease juvenile crime
rates.



   (D)   In accordance with prevailing community standards, this
subchapter serves to regulate the conduct of minors in public places during
nighttime hours, to be effectively and consistently enforced for the
protection of minors from each other and from other persons, in public places
during nighttime hours, for the enforcement of parental control of, authority
over, and responsibility for their children, for the protection of the
general public from nighttime mischief by minors, for the reduction in the
incidents of juvenile criminal activities, for the furtherance of family
responsibility and for public good, safety and welfare.



   (E)   It is the intent of the City Council to review and evaluate
the need and effect of nighttime curfew for minors set forth in this
subchapter on the incidents of juvenile criminal activity and protection of
minors against criminal activity.



§ 130.81  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUTHORIZED ADULT.  Any person who is at least 18 years of age and
authorized by a parent of such minor to take said parent’s place in
accompanying said minor for a designate period of time.



   CITY COUNCIL.  The City Council of the City of Apple Valley.



   EMERGENCY.  An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action.  The term includes, but is
not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident or any
situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss
of life.



   MINOR.  A person under the age of 18 years.  The term does not
include persons under 18 who are married or have been legally emancipated.



   PARENT.  Any person having legal custody of a minor as a natural,
adoptive parent, or step-parent; as a legal guardian; or as a person to whom
legal custody has been given by order of the court.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any place to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways,
roadways, parks, public recreation, entertainment or civic facility, schools,
and the common areas of hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, and shops.



   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY.  Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk
of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted
loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.



§ 130.82  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 15 years
to be present in any public place within the city:



      (1)   Any time between 10:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday and 5:00 a.m. of the following day; and



      (2)   Any time between 11:00 p.m. on any Friday or Saturday
and 5:00 a.m. on the following day.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any minor 15, 16 or 17 years of age
to be in any public place within the city:



      (1)   Any time between 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday and 5:00 a.m. of the following day; and



      (2)   Any time between 12:01 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on any
Saturday or Sunday.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for a parent or authorized adult of a
minor to knowingly, or through negligent supervision, permit such minor to be
in any public place within the city during the hours prohibited by divisions
(A) and (B) of this section, under circumstances not constituting an
exception to this subchapter as set forth herein.  The term “knowingly”
includes knowledge which a parent or authorized adult shall reasonably be
expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor under such person’s
care.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person operating or in charge of
any place of amusement or refreshment which is open to the public to
knowingly permit any minor to be in such place during the hours prohibited by
divisions (A) and (B) of this section, under circumstances not constituting
an exception to this subchapter as set forth herein. The term “person
operating” shall mean any individual, firm, association, partnership or
corporation operating, managing or conducting any such establishment.  The
term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and
the officers of a corporation.



§ 130.83  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   The following shall constitute valid exceptions to the
operation of the curfew:



      (1)   At any time, if a minor is accompanied by his or her
parent or an authorized adult;



      (2)   At any time, if a minor is involved in, or attempting to
remedy, alleviate, or respond to an emergency;



      (3)   If the minor is engaged in a lawful employment activity,
or is going to or returning home from his or her place of employment;



      (4)   If the minor is attending an official school, religious,
or other social or recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored
by a city or the county, a civic organization, or another similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor;



      (5)   If the minor is going to or returning home from, without
any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a city or the county, a civic
organization, or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;



      (6)   If the minor is on an errand as directed by his or her
parent, without any detour or stop;



      (7)   If the minor is engaged in interstate travel;



      (8)   If the minor is on the public right-of-way boulevard or
sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the residence of the
next-door neighbor if the neighbor has not complained to the police
department about the minor’s presence;



      (9)   If the minor is exercising First Amendment rights
protected by the United States Constitution (or those similar rights
protected by Article I of the Constitution of the State of Minnesota), such
as free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and right to assembly; or



      (10)   If the minor is homeless or uses a public or
semi-public place as his or her usual place of abode.



   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under § 130.82(D)
that:



      (1)   The owner, operator or employee of an establishment
promptly notifies the Police Department that a minor was present on the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave; and



      (2)   The owner, operator or employee reasonably and in good
faith relied upon a minor’s representations of proof of age.  Proof of age
may be established pursuant to M.S. § 340A.503, subd. 6, or other verifiable
means, including, but not limited to, school identification cards and birth
certificates.



§ 130.84  ENFORCEMENT.



   Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police
officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in a
public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under
this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has
occurred and that no exception as set forth in § 130.83 is applicable.



§ 130.85  PENALTIES.



   (A)   Violation of §§ 130.82(A) and (B) will be prosecuted
pursuant to M.S. § 260.195 and will be subject to the penalties therein.



   (B)   Violation of §§ 130.82(C) or (D) shall be a misdemeanor.



§ 130.86  CONTINUING REVIEW AND EVALUATION.



   The Police Chief shall prepare and submit a report annually to the City
Council evaluating violations of this subchapter and the criminal activity by
and against minors within the county during the preceding year.  The first
report shall be submitted one year after the effective date of this
subchapter.



§ 130.87  DUTIES OF PERSON LEGALLY RESPONSIBLE FOR MINOR.



   No parent, guardian or other adult having the primary care or custody
of any minor shall permit any violation of the requirements of this
subchapter by the minor.



§ 130.88  DUTIES OF OTHER PERSONS.



   No person operating or in charge of any place of amusement,
entertainment or refreshment shall permit any minor to enter or remain in his
or her place of business during the hours prohibited by this subchapter
unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult
person having primary care or custody of the minor, or unless one of the
exceptions to this subchapter apply.



§ 130.89  DEFENSE.



   It shall be a defense to prosecution under this subchapter that the
owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the
city’s designated law enforcement provider that a minor was present on the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of § 130.08 shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties thereof as
provided in this code. Each day a person maintains a residence in violation
of § 130.08 constitutes a separate violation.



   (B)   Any violation of §§ 130.10 through 130.13 is a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 848, passed 11-6-08; Am. Ord. 1026, passed 2-23-17)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



Chapter



   150.   BUILDINGS; CONSTRUCTION



   151.   MANUFACTURED HOMES AND HOME PARKS



   152.   NATURAL RESOURCES MANAGEMENT



   153.   SUBDIVISION CONTROL



   154.   SIGN REGULATIONS



      APPENDIX A:  LOCATION PROHIBITIONS



      APPENDIX B:  TEMPORARY SIGN SIZES



      APPENDIX C:  SIGNS REQUIRING PERMITS



      APPENDIX D:  SETBACK AND HEIGHT



   155.   ZONING




      APPENDIX A:  REQUIREMENTS FOR AGRICULTURAL  AND SINGLE-FAMILY
DISTRICTS




      APPENDIX B:  REQUIREMENTS FOR MULTIPLE- FAMILY DISTRICTS



      APPENDIX C:  REQUIREMENTS FOR BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS



      APPENDIX D:  REQUIREMENTS FOR SAND AND GRAVEL DISTRICTS



      APPENDIX E:  REQUIREMENTS FOR YARDS AND OPEN SPACES



      APPENDIX F:  PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DESIGNATIONS



      APPENDIX G:  PLANNING



   156   FLOOD PLAIN CONTROL



   157.   INTERIM USE



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDINGS; CONSTRUCTION



Section



General Provisions



   150.01   Building Code adopted by reference; scope



   150.02   Organization and enforcement of code



   150.03   Permits



   150.04   Permit fees, state surcharge and other fees



   150.05   Inspections



   150.06   Electrical permits and inspections



   150.07   Completion of exterior work



Earth Removal and Excavations



   150.15   Permit required; exemptions



   150.16   Application procedure



   150.17   Duration and fees



   150.18   Operational regulations



   150.19   Inspections



   150.20   Violations



   150.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Natural Resources Management, see Chapter 152



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 150.01  BUILDING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; SCOPE.



   The Minnesota State Building Code is adopted to provide a minimum level
of building safety and construction quality.  It is mandated by the state
that cities adopt the code. The Minnesota State Building Code, including all
related chapters of Minnesota Rules and the optional Chapter 1306, subpart 3
- Special Fire Protection System, and any amendments thereto established and
adopted from time to time by the Minnesota Commissioner of Labor and
Industry, is hereby adopted by reference as though set forth verbatim herein,
one copy of which is on file in the office of the City Clerk.



(‘81 Code, §6-1)  (Ord. 379, passed 3-12-87; Am. Ord. 601, passed
6-22-95; Am. Ord. 623, passed 12-12-96, Am. Ord. 658, passed 2-25-99; Am.
Ord. 724, passed 4-24-03; Am. Ord. 774, passed 5-12-05; Am. Ord. 817, passed
7-12-07; Am. Ord. 820, passed 8-23-07; Am. Ord. 860, passed 5-28-09; Am. Ord.
877, passed 12-22-09; Am. Ord. 984, passed 2-12-14)



§ 150.02  ORGANIZATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF CODE.



   (A)   The Building Inspection Division shall be the Department of
Building Safety. The administrative authority shall be a state certified
building official so designated by the appointing authority.



   (B)   The appointing authority shall be the City Council.



(‘81 Code, § 6-3)  (Ord. 379, passed 3-12-87; Am. Ord. 601, passed
6-22-95; Am. Ord. 623, passed 12-12-96, Am. Ord. 658, passed 2-25-99; Am.
Ord. 724, passed 4-24-03)



§ 150.03  PERMITS.



   (A)   General.  Permits are required for building and mechanical
work as stated in the Minnesota State Building Code.  Permits are required
for plumbing work regulated by the Minnesota Plumbing Code.



   (B)   Expiration of permits.  Permits for building and mechanical
work shall be valid for a period of time as stated in the Minnesota State
Building Code.  Permits for plumbing work, or any other permit issued under
this chapter, shall be valid for a similar time period as building and
mechanical permits.



§ 150.04  PERMIT FEES, STATE SURCHARGE AND OTHER FEES.



   (A)   General.  Fees for permits for building, plumbing, or other
work required under the Minnesota State Building Code shall be as provided in
the appendix to Chapter 35 and § 150.01(A), and shall be paid by the
applicant prior to issuance of the permit.



   (B)   Surcharge.  In addition to the permit fee required by
division (A) above, the applicant shall pay a state permit surcharge to the
city to be remitted to the Minnesota Department of Labor and Industry as
prescribed by M.S. § 326B.148 (2009 and as amended thereafter).



   (C)   Determination of permit fees.  Permit fees shall be based on
the valuation of the work to be performed as determined by using one or a
combination of the following;



      (1)   State of Minnesota “Building Valuation Data”;



      (2)   A construction industry cost estimating manual such as
“Means Building Cost Data”;



      (3)   The valuation supplied by the permit applicant; or



      (4)   The use of a city established valuation for certain work.



   (D)   Plan review fees.  A plan review fee shall be paid when plans
are submitted and reviewed for all commercial building permits, all new
single-family home permits, and all new apartment building and condominium
permits.  The amount of the plan review fee shall be 65% of the building
permit fee.



   (E)   Other fees.  Any applicant shall pay any other fees required
under the city code to be paid in connection with a building permit prior to
permit issuance.  Fees shall be as provided in the appendix to Chapter 35.



(Am. Ord. 800, passed 12-14-06; Am. Ord. 877, passed 12-22-09)



§ 150.05  INSPECTIONS.



   Any work performed under a permit required by this chapter shall be
inspected by the city.  Inspection of work shall be as required in the
Minnesota State Building Code and as stated in the permit provided to the
applicant at the time of permit application or issuance.



§ 150.06  ELECTRICAL PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   DEFECTIVE WORK.  Electrical work that is not in compliance with this
section.



   ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR.  The designated individual employed or
contracted by the city to conduct electrical inspections required by this
section.



   ELECTRICAL WORK.  The installing, altering, repairing, planning, or
laying out of electrical wiring, apparatus, or equipment for electrical
light, heat, power, technology circuits or systems, or other purposes,
including but not limited to, the performance of any work regulated by the
Minnesota Electrical Act and all orders, rules and regulations issued by the
authority thereof.



   (B)   Permit and inspection required.



      (1)   General permit requirement.  No person shall perform
electrical work without an electrical permit first issued by the city. 
Permits for electrical work in new structures shall only be issued to
electrical contractors duly licensed by the state. Permits for the
installation, alteration, addition or repair of electrical work in existing
structures shall only be issued to electrical contractors duly licensed by
the state or for electrical work in a residential property, to the property
owner provided he/she resides within the residential structure where the work
is to be done.



      (2)   Utility provider exception.  No permit shall be
required for electrical work related to electrical equipment owned, leased,
operated or maintained by a utility service provider, as defined in Chapter
97 of this code, provided that such electrical work shall conform to the
minimum standards of the National Electrical Code.



      (3)   Fees.  No permit shall be issued unless and until the
applicant pays to the city the electrical permit fee(s) as set forth in the
Appendix of Chapter 35 of this code.  No inspection shall occur unless and
until the applicant pays to the city the proper inspection fee(s) as
specified in the Appendix to Chapter 35 of this code.



      (4)   Application.  The application for permit shall be made
in writing to the city on a form provided by the city.  The application
shall provide the following information, among other things:



         (a)   The name, address, and telephone number of the
applicant;



         (b)   The address and legal description of the property
where the electrical work is to occur and the name of the property owner if
different than the applicant;



         (c)    Proof that the applicant has the appropriate
licensure to complete the electrical work;



         (d)   A brief description of the work to be completed;
and



         (e)   Such plans, specifications and schedules as may be
necessary to determine whether the electrical installation as described will
be in conformity with all legal requirements;



      (5)   Inspection. 



         (a)   Any work performed under an electrical permit
shall be inspected by the Electrical Inspector.  Inspection of work shall be
as required in the National Electrical Code and as required by the city
Building Official in the event of any compliance issues.



         (b)   All work which involves the concealment of
electrical work shall have a "rough-in" inspection prior to concealment. 
The electrical work shall not be concealed until the Electrical Inspector has
approved the work.



         (c)   If any electrical work is found, upon inspection,
to be not in accordance with the National Electrical Code or this section,
the Electrical Inspector shall at once issue and provide to the permit
holder, and property owner if not the permit holder, a written notice stating
the defective work which have been found to exist and directing that such
defective work be brought into compliance with the National Electrical Code
and this section.  If the electrical work or any noncompliant part thereof,
poses an imminent safety hazard or threat of endangerment to human life and
property, the city Building Official, or designated inspector, may order the
immediate disconnection of electrical service to the defective work. In all
other cases, the Electrical Inspector's notice shall allow the permit holder
15 days for the electrical work to be brought into compliance with the
National Electrical Code and this section prior to disconnection.



         (d)   No provision of this section shall limit the
authority of the Building Official.



   (C)   Standards for installation of electrical work.



      (1)   All installations of electrical work shall be reasonably
safe to persons and property and in conformity with the provisions of this
section, National Electrical Code, and the applicable Minnesota Statutes and
orders, rules and regulations issued by the authority thereof.



      (2)   Buildings or structures moved from without to within the
limits of the city shall conform to all of the requirements of this code for
new buildings or structures.



      (3)   Existing buildings or structures hereafter changed in
use shall conform in all respects to the requirements of the National
Electric Code and this section for the new use.



   (D)   Unpermitted or unsafe electrical connections.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make connections
to any electrical utility service for electrical work for which no permit was
issued by the city or which has been disconnected or ordered to be
disconnected by the city Building Official.



      (2)   The electrical utility service shall disconnect the same
upon a written order from the city Building Official, or his or her
designated inspector, when he/she determines that an electrical work unsafe
to life and property or installed contrary to the National Electrical Code or
this section.



   (E)   Electrical Inspector.



      (1)   Generally.  The city shall designate the city's
Electrical Inspector who may be either employed or contracted by the city. 
The Electrical Inspector shall be under the authority of the city Building
Official.  The Electrical Inspector shall be a licensed master or journeymen
electrician as defined by Minnesota Statutes and shall have a thorough
knowledge of the standard materials and methods used in electrical work. 
The Electrical Inspector shall have prior experience as an electrical
inspector utilizing the standards of the National Electrical Code.  The
Electrical Inspector shall not otherwise engage or be employed in the sale,
installing, altering, or repairing of electrical wiring, apparatus, or
equipment for light, heat, power, and other purposes and shall have no
financial interest in any concern engaged in any such business.



      (2)   Duties. It shall be the duty of the Electrical Inspector
to enforce the provisions of this chapter and make the inspections of
electrical work as provided in this section. The Electrical Inspector shall
keep complete records of all inspections made and other official work
performed in accordance with the provisions of this section.



      (3)   Authority. The Electrical Inspector shall have the right
during reasonable hours to enter any building or premises in the discharge of
his/her official duties, or for the purpose of making any inspection,
re-inspection or test of electrical equipment contained therein or its
installation.  In accordance with other provisions of this section, the
Electrical Inspector shall have the authority to order the discontinuance of
electrical service to electrical equipment found to be not in compliance with
the National Electrical Code or this section.



(Ord. 909, passed 12-21-10)



§ 150.07  COMPLETION OF EXTERIOR WORK.



   (A)   Exterior work authorized by a building permit issued in
accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code must be completed within
the specified days set forth below from the date of issuance of the building
permit, or within the timeframe set by the Building Official at the time the
permit is issued, whichever is greater. 



      (1)   EXTERIOR WORK includes work on all exterior parts of a
structure or building, including but not limited to, roofs, doors, windows,
siding, and stairs, and work on exterior structures, including but not
limited to, retaining wall, accessory building (sheds, detached garages),
deck, and fence.



      (2)   Exterior work authorized by a building permit issued in
accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code must be completed within
the specified days from the date of issuance of the building permit as
follows:



         (a)   Buildings or structures on single-family
residential property:



            •   Roofs, siding, replacement doors and windows
   180 days



            •   Accessory structures   180 days



            •   New construction   365 days



            •   Additions to primary home   365 days



            •   Retaining walls   180 days



         (b)   Building or structures on multi-family residential
property:



               •   Twin-home exterior work   same
deadlines as single-family



            •   Quad-home exterior work:   365 days



            •   Building with more than four units:   as
determined by Building Official



         (c)   Buildings or structures on commercial or
industrial property:



            •   Building exterior work   as determined by
Building Official



            •   Exterior structures other than primary
building   365 days



 



   (B)   Upon a showing by the permit holder or property owner that
there has been an unavoidable delay in completion of the exterior work, the
Building Official, at the Official's reasonable discretion, may grant one
extension for the completion of the exterior work for a period not to exceed
180 days.



   (C)   Failure to complete all exterior work authorized by a building
permit within the specified timeframe, including any extension granted, is a
violation of this chapter.



   (D)   Notwithstanding the completion deadlines, a permit shall
expire 180 days from date of issuance if there is no substantial work
completed under the permit, as provided in the Minnesota Building Code.  If
no work has been completed under a building permit as of its expiration date,
then the completion deadline for the work under a new permit shall be as set
forth above.



   (E)   This section shall apply to any exterior work for which a
building permit was issued on or after the effective date of this section. 
Any exterior work for which a building permit was issued prior to the
effective date of this section shall be completed by May 1, 2012, unless
another time was set by the Building Official at or after the time of the
issuance of the permit.  If exterior work has been completed or in progress
without the issuance of a building permit, the completion timeframe dates set
forth herein do not apply and the Building Official shall have the sole
authority to determine a completion and code compliance date.



(Ord. 925, passed 8-25-11)



EARTH REMOVAL AND EXCAVATIONS



§ 150.15  PERMIT REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the
commercial extraction of rock, sand, dirt, gravel, clay or other like
minerals or materials which include, but is not limited to the removal,
storage or excavation thereof, within the city without first obtaining a
permit from the Council.  Permits for commercial extraction of minerals
shall only be issued for property lying within an SG zoning district, after
having been issued a conditional use permit by the Council or for a
pre-existing, nonconforming operation. 



(‘81 Code, § 6-20)



   (B)   A commercial extraction permit shall not be required for
grading, excavating, earth moving, earth removal or other land disturbing
activities which are not in connection with commercial extraction of minerals
or other materials and are regulated under natural resources management
regulations. 



(‘81 Code, § 6-21)



(Ord. 84, passed 9-23-70; Am. Ord. 476, passed 3-8-90; Am. Ord. 521, passed
10-10-91; Am. Ord. 633, passed 10-9-97)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.16  APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   The application for the permit shall be made in writing to the city on
form the city may from time to time designate, and shall include information
as may be required by the city and shall contain among other things:



   (A)   The correct legal description of the premises;



   (B)   The name and address of the applicant and owner of the land;



   (C)   The estimated time required to complete extraction activities
of entire site, the amount of material to be moved on the site and the amount
to be removed from the site;



   (D)   The highways, streets or other public roadways within the city
upon or along which the material shall be transported;



   (E)   Method and schedule for restoration, which shall be consistent
with the conditional use permit end use plan, and measures to control erosion
during and after the work;



   (F)   A map or plat of any proposed pit or excavation to be made
showing the stages or limits thereof together with the existing or proposed
finished elevations based on sea level readings; and



   (G)   For sand and gravel excavation annual excavation permits, the
following additional information shall be submitted:



      (1)   The landscape plan shall provide visual screening from
adjacent property through the use of berms, foliage or fencing as required in
the conditional use permit for the project.  The plan shall include all
excavation areas of the proposed permit which are within the required setback
areas;



      (2)   Location and surface of access roads;



      (3)   Method of controlling dust;



      (4)   Method of controlling access to open excavation;



      (5)   Method of maintaining security on premises; and



      (6)   A restoration grading plan shall be submitted by the
operator and approved by the city. The plan shall only be approved if the
city finds that the plan is designed so that it is compatible with the end
use development plan anticipated in the project conditional use permit.  The
plans shall include:



         (a)   Site analysis such as, but not limited to, trees,
depth of topsoil, adjacent and on-site buildings and land uses, flood levels,
elevation, public utilities such as overhead or buried power lines or
pipelines or city utilities, and percent of slope within and 100 feet beyond
the perimeter of the site and other existing information necessary to analyze
the site;



         (b)   An analysis of deposit information and cross
sections indicating the depth and quantities of existing sand and gravel
deposits;



         (c)   A plan indicating the operating pattern and
staging or time sequence schedule for excavation and restoration of the site
which may be revised from time to time based on current economic conditions;



         (d)   Geological and hydrological data as is necessary
to determine the feasibility of the proposed grading plan; and



         (e)   The contours at no greater than four-foot
intervals of the land when the mining operations are completed.  Contours
and grades shall conform to the standards of § 155.309.



(‘81 Code, § 6-22)  (Ord. 84, passed 9-23-70; Am. Ord. 294, passed
4-28-83; Am. Ord. 476, passed 3-8-90; Am. Ord. 633, passed 10-9-97)



Cross-reference:



   Sand and Gravel Districts, see §§ 155.285 through 155.293



§ 150.17  DURATION AND FEES.



   (A)   The excavation permit shall run from January 1 through
December 31 of each year or for a lesser period of time as the Council may
specify when the permit is issued.  For commercial sand and gravel
operations, a permit shall be required to be kept continuously active until
all restoration required by § 150.18 is completed. 



(‘81 Code, § 6-23)



   (B)   The minimum required initial and annual fees and escrow
deposit for a permit shall be as specified in the appendix to Chapter 35. 
No application shall be processed or issued until payment of all fees due and
payable or due and unpaid, based upon this section, shall have been received
by the city:



      (1)   For commercial sand and gravel operations, the initial
and first year’s annual fees shall be paid in full at the time of
application for a new permit.  The annual fee for renewal shall be paid in
full at the time each renewal application is filed.  Any permit not renewed
shall be deemed to be inactive and will not be re-activated until a new
application has been filed and initial and annual fees have paid; and



      (2)   For all other work, as specified in the appendix to
Chapter 35, plus additional charges as the Council may require pursuant to
the provisions of § 150.18(D)(4).



(‘81 Code, § 6-24)  (Ord. 84, passed 9-23-70; Am. Ord. 317, passed
4-12-84; Am. Ord. 529, passed 12-30-91; Am. Ord. 612, passed 2-22-96)



§ 150.18  OPERATIONAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   All commercial extraction operations for which an excavation
permit has been issued, whether as a conforming or nonconforming use, shall
comply with the performance standards and reclamation, restoration, and
rehabilitation requirements of the SG zoning district as set forth in §§
155.285 through 155.293.



   (B)   All commercial extraction operation permit applications
proposing an opening of new mine area which includes the removal or
stockpiling of topsoil, trees, and other vegetation, shall also designate an
equal or larger surface area to be removed from production and
reclaimed/restored.  The  reclamation/ restoration of this area shall be
done according to the approved end use plan within the 18 months after
issuance of the excavation permit.  Failure to reclaim areas as approved in
the annual excavation permit may be considered grounds for termination of
excavation permits.



   (C)   The reclamation/restoration area, as described in the annual
excavation permit, shall be considered a notice of completion of operations,
pursuant to §§ 155.285 through 155.293.  An operator may gain credit,
against the opening of future mining areas within the approved plan, by
reclaiming and restoring more acres than are opened in a year governed by the
current excavation permit.



   (D)   The Council, as a prerequisite to granting all permits, or
after any permit has been granted, may require the applicant or owner of the
premises to:



      (1)   Properly fence any pit or excavation;



      (2)   Slope the banks, fill, level off any pit or excavation
or otherwise place in a condition at any time so as not to be dangerous
because of sliding or caving banks; so as to minimize or stop erosion or dust
during or after excavation;



      (3)   Property drain, fill or level off any pit or excavation
so as to make the same safe and healthful as the Council may determine;



      (4)   Reimburse the city for the cost of special street
cleaning and maintenance and periodic inspections by the City Engineer,
Building Official or other city employee or consultant, for the purpose of
seeing that the terms under which the permit has been issued are being
complied with.  Reimbursement of the costs shall be paid by operator within
30 days of being invoiced by the city or costs will be deducted from escrow
deposit as required in the appendix to Chapter 35.  Whenever the escrow
deposit has been depleted by 50% of the amount required, operator shall be
notified and shall pay the amount necessary to restore the deposit to the
required amount within ten days;



      (5)   Post a surety bond in the form and sum as the Council
may require, running to the city, conditioned to pay the city the cost and
expense of repairing any highways, streets or other public ways within the
city, made necessary by the special burden resulting from the hauling and
transporting thereon by the applicant in the removal of rock, dirt, sand,
gravel, clay or other like material, the amount of the cost to be determined
by the City Council; and conditioned further to comply with all the
requirements of this chapter and the particular permit, and to save the city
free and harmless from all suits or claims for damages resulting from the
negligent excavation, removal or storage of rock, sand, gravel, dirt, clay or
other like material within the city;



      (6)   Post a surety bond of a minimum $500 for each acre being
excavated at any time, running to the city, conditioned to pay the city the
cost and expense of restoration of an excavated area and expense of grading,
providing top soil and seeding where the applicant or owner shall fail to
complete an excavation or restoration within the conditions under which the
excavation permit was issued;



      (7)   Show evidence that the excavation is not harmful to the
health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the city, and the excavation
shall leave the property in at least an equally suitable condition to that
immediately prior to the excavation;



      (8)   Comply with other requirements as the Council shall from
time to time deem proper and necessary for the protection of the citizens and
the general welfare; or



      (9)   Review the application with the Planning Commission for
a subsequent report to the Council where the excavation may affect existing
trees, hills, views, ponds, lakes or similar natural terrain features.



(‘81 Code, § 6-25)  (Ord. 84, passed 9-23-70; Am. Ord. 294, passed
4-28-83; Am. Ord. 476, passed 3-8-90; Am. Ord. 529, passed 12-30-91) 
Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.19  INSPECTIONS.



   At least once a year, or more often as necessary, the City
Administrator shall instruct the staff to inspect all areas where a permit
has been issued and report the findings to the Council.



(‘81 Code, § 6-26)  (Ord. 84, passed 9-23-70)



§ 150.20  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   In addition to being subject to punishment as provided in §
10.99, any person who shall fail to obtain a permit as herein required, or
who shall fail to comply with any of the conditions upon which the same is
issued or who fails to complete the filling, excavating or grading within the
time prescribed by the permit, may be enjoined from further work under the
permit.



   (B)   The Council hereby reserves the right to revoke the permit
upon a violation, and upon revocation the continuance of work shall be a
violation of this code and if the Council shall order any positive act to be
done to conform the work being done with that authorized by the permit, the
same shall be completed before any further filling, excavating or grading is
done and within ten days after mailing a notice to do the acts to the person
to whom the permit was issued.



(‘81 Code, § 6-27)  (Ord. 84, passed 9-23-70)



§ 150.99  PENALTY.



   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor
punishable as provided in § 10.99.  In the event of a violation of this
chapter, the city building official or building inspectors shall have
specific authority to issue a citation in lieu of arrest or continued
detention. 



(‘81 Code, § 6-5)  (Ord. 379, passed 3-12-87; Am. Ord. 407, passed
12-10-87; Am. Ord. 658, passed 2-25-99)



CHAPTER 151:  MANUFACTURED HOMES AND HOME PARKS



Section



General Provisions



   151.01   Definitions



   151.02   Purpose



   151.03   Outside of park; permit required



   151.04   Permit required; application and fees



   151.05   Agreements between city and operator; exemptions



   151.06   Annual inspection and fees



   151.07   Compliance; building code



Park Requirements



   151.20   Utilities and supplies furnished by park operator



   151.21   Lot area and size requirements



   151.22   Screening requirements



   151.23   Streets and sidewalks; construction and maintenance



   151.24   Vehicle storage



   151.25   Speed limits



   151.26   Utility buildings



   151.27   Occupant registration



   151.28   Fire extinguishers



   151.29   Control of pets



   151.30   Sales and display lots; permit



   151.31   Placement and construction standards



   151.32   Lot landscaping



   151.33   Maintenance requirements



   151.34   Storage of combustible materials



   151.35   Trash collection; recycling



   151.36   Accessory structure removal



Manufactured Home Park Closings



   151.50   Purpose



   151.51   Definitions



   151.52   Notice of closing



   151.53   Notice of public hearing



   151.54   Public hearing



   151.55   Conditions of closing



   151.56   Displaced resident statement



   151.57   Election to relocate



   151.58   Election to receive compensation



   151.59   Limitation of relocation costs and compensation



   151.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 151.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ATTACHED.  That which is structurally unattached but for all intents,
purposes and appearances, functions as a single unit with a mobile home.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, not affixed to or part of real
estate, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode,
is eight feet or more in width or 40 feet or more in length, or, when erected
onsite, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis
and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation
when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating,
air conditioning and electrical system contained in it.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.  Any site, lot, field or tract of land upon
which two or more occupied manufactured homes are harbored, either free of
charge or for revenue purposes, and shall include any building, structure,
tent, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the equipment
of a MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.



   TWIN 10 or TWIN 12.  Two parts of a manufactured home which have been
transported separately from the factory and attached to each other at the
manufactured home park to form one manufactured home.



(‘81 Code, § 13-1)  (Ord. 43, passed 9-14-67; Am. Ord. 515, passed
5-23-91)



§ 151.02  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is a measure to regulate the design, use, maintenance and
the operation of manufactured homes and manufactured home parks within the
city and to provide for public health, safety and welfare.



(‘81 Code, § 13-2)  (Ord. 43, passed 9-14-67)



§ 151.03  OUTSIDE OF PARK; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall locate a manufactured home outside a manufactured home
park unless the person has obtained a permit as provided in the zoning
ordinance.



(‘81 Code, § 13-3)  (Ord. 43, passed 9-14-67)  Penalty, see § 151.99



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning sanitary and water facility requirements for
homes parked outside of home park, see M.S.§ 327.28



§ 151.04  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION AND FEES.



   (A)   Permit required.  No person shall establish, maintain or
operate a manufactured home park within the city without first obtaining a
permit therefor from the Council. 



(‘81 Code, § 13-20)



   (B)   Application.



      (1)   No permit for a manufactured home park shall be issued
by the Council unless and until the person requesting the same shall first
make an application to the City Clerk and shall submit therewith all
information and data hereinafter specified.



      (2)   Application shall be in writing, signed by the applicant
and shall include the following information, as to either existing or
proposed facilities, which shall conform to state and city specifications:



         (a)   Location and legal description of the premises to
be used for a manufactured home park;



         (b)   Proof of ownership of all property within the
boundary lines of the proposed manufactured home park;



         (c)   A complete plan of the park in conformity with
this section, including the following:



            1.   All roads and driveways, and street lighting
plan;



            2.   Location and number of sites or lots for
manufactured homes;



            3.   Proposed disposition of surface drainage;



            4.   Proposed water system and sanitary sewer
system;



            5.   Proposed location of all fire hydrants;



            6.   Proposed locations and designs of all signs;
and



            7.   Any other information requested by the
Planning Commission or the City Council.



      (3)   The application and all accompanying plans and
specifications shall be filed with the original and four copies.



(‘81 Code, § 13-21)



   (C)   Investigations and payment of costs.



      (1)   The Council shall make an investigation of the
applicant, the plans, the site and any other related subject as it may deem
necessary and proper. For the purpose of this investigation, the Council may
use the services of regular city officers and employees or it may employ the
services of outside consultants and experts as it may choose.



      (2)   The applicant shall pay all reasonable costs incurred by
the city for review and inspection, including preparation and review of
plans, plats and specifications by the City Engineer, City Attorney and other
legal or other costs of a similar nature upon receipt of a statement therefor
from the City Clerk. This payment shall be in addition to the permit fee
hereinafter provided for.



(‘81 Code, § 13-22)



   (D)   Fees.  The applicant shall pay to the city the fee specified
in the appendix to Chapter 35 at the time the application is filed.  When a
permit is granted hereunder, the applicant shall pay the additional amount
specified in the appendix to Chapter 35.  This fee is imposed for the
purpose of defraying expenses incurred by the city in the administration of
this chapter and the fee shall not be construed to be a license.



(‘81 Code, § 13-23)  (Am. Ord. 317, passed 4-12-84)



   (E)   Bond or deposit; limitation to plan.



      (1)   The Council shall require the applicant to file a bond
or cash deposit in the form and amount as shall be satisfactory to it to
insure the compliance by the applicant with the plans and specifications
before the issuance of the permit.



      (2)   Approval of the permit shall be limited to the number of
manufactured home lots shown on the approved plan presented and any
departures from the original plan at any later date must be approved by the
Planning Commission and the Council.



(‘81 Code, § 13-24)



(Ord. 43, passed 9-14-67)  Penalty, see § 151.99



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning state licenses and permits for home parks and
recreational camping areas, see M.S. §§ 327.15 and 327.16



§ 151.05  AGREEMENTS BETWEEN CITY AND OPERATOR; EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Agreements, rules and regulations.



      (1)   The Council may require the operator to enter into an
agreement with the city at the time the Council issues a permit and
agreement, with all its terms, conditions and provisions, shall be essential
to the permit and shall be enforceable as part of this chapter.



      (2)   The Council may at any time promulgate reasonable rules
and regulations by resolution which shall have the same force and effect as
the provisions of this chapter.



(‘81 Code, § 13-26)



   (B)   Exemptions.  Any person operating a manufactured home park
within the city since prior to the date of the ordinance from which this
chapter is derived, is exempt from enforcement of §§ 151.04(B) through (E)
and 151.30 until the time as a physical change, such as remodeling, expanding
or upgrading of the park is planned, at which time all sections of this
chapter will be enforced, in accordance herewith, which will not apply to
manufactured homes occupied at the time of physical changes. 



(‘81 Code, § 13-27)  (Ord. 43, passed 9-14-67)



§ 151.06  ANNUAL INSPECTION AND FEES.



   (A)   On or before January 10 of each year following the first
12-month period a permit has been in force under this chapter, the operator
shall pay an annual inspection fee to the city.  The inspection fee shall be
as specified in the appendix to Chapter 35 based on the number of occupied
manufactured home lots.  Occupancy of lots for determining this fee shall be
as of January 1.



   (B)   All manufactured home parks established prior to the adoption
of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be subject to the
inspection provisions and shall pay the inspection fees provided.



(‘81 Code, § 13-28)  (Ord. 43, passed 9-14-67; Am. Ord. 317, passed
4-12-84)



§ 151.07  COMPLIANCE; BUILDING CODE.



   (A)   Approval of state required.  Before construction commences,
the holder of the permit is obligated by this chapter to secure the approval
of the Department of Health of the state, and secure approval of the City
Fire Marshall as to the placement of the fire hydrants so that adequate fire
protection is achieved. The holder of the permit is to provide satisfactory
evidence to the Council that all requirements of the state and the city have
been complied with, before the Council will permit the manufactured home park
to operate. 



(‘81 Code, § 13-29) 



   (B)   Compliance with building code.  The construction of a
manufactured home park shall comply with all the provisions of the city
building code applicable thereto.



(‘81 Code, § 13-30)



(Ord. 43, passed 9-14-67)



PARK REQUIREMENTS



§ 151.20  UTILITIES AND SUPPLIES FURNISHED BY PARK OPERATOR.



   (A)   Drainage.  The manufactured home park shall be located on a
well drained site and each lot shall be graded so as to prevent the
accumulation of storm or other waters.  All storm water ponding or pooling
areas shall be controlled by the operator by whatever means necessary to
prevent the breeding of insects. 



(‘81 Code, § 13-31)



   (B)   Water supply and sewerage.  The manufactured home park shall
be serviced by the city water system and a sanitary sewer system connected to
the city’s sanitary sewer system.  The design and specifications of the
systems must meet approval of the city.  Hook-up charges shall be determined
upon issuance of the permit. 



(‘81 Code, § 13-32)



   (C)   Other underground utilities; compliance with requirements. 
Other utilities such as electricity, natural gas and telephone shall be
installed underground in an approved method.  The methods shall be under the
requirements of the state and the city. 



(‘81 Code, § 13-33)



   (D)   Off-street parking.  Off-street parking shall be provided for
at least two spaces per manufactured home lot.  Parking on streets and
roadways shall be prohibited; approved street signs prohibiting same shall be
provided by the owner and installed under the direction of the city. 



(‘81 Code, § 13-38)



   (E)   Recreation and park areas.  All manufactured home parks shall
have a recreation or park area or areas to be established and maintained,
within the site, of not less than 15% of the total manufactured home park
area.  Plans for a recreation area shall be of an approved design. 



(‘81 Code, § 13-42)



   (F)   Tiedowns.  Each manufactured home shall be provided with
tiedown anchors meeting state specifications. The manufactured home shall be
tied down in accordance with manufacturer specifications and recommendations,
or as otherwise approved by the City Building Official. 



(‘81 Code, § 13-43)



   (G)   Mail and newspaper containers.  Mail boxes and newspaper
containers, and posts therefor, shall be furnished by the operator and placed
to conform with the natural landscape of each lot.  All containers and posts
shall be identical in shape, size and color. 



(‘81 Code, § 13-46)



(Ord. 43, passed 9-14-67; Am. Ord. 515, passed 5-23-91)  Penalty, see §
151.99



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning proper support systems and ground anchoring,
see M.S. § 327.32, subd. 6



   For provisions concerning state approval of sanitary facilities in
mobile home parks and recreational camping areas, see M.S. § 327.16, subd. 4.



§ 151.21  LOT AREA AND SIZE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Lot size requirements.  Each lot of a manufactured home park
shall have a minimum gross area of 5,000 square feet, with the lot width at
the manufactured home front facing the street of not less than 50 feet; Twin
10 and Twin 12 manufactured homes shall require a front of 60 feet.



   (B)   Setback requirements.  Each manufactured home placed on a lot
shall be placed with the following minimum setbacks, as measured from the
outside edge of the furthest protrusion:



      (1)   Front.  Fifteen feet from the roadway curb face.



      (2)   Rear or side.  Twenty feet from any adjacent
manufactured home and/or structure attached to a manufactured home.



      (3)   Corner lot.  Setbacks shall be the same as a front
setback along any roadway.



   (C)   Permitted encroachments.  The following accessory and
mechanical appurtenances may encroach into the required setback areas as
follow:



      (1)   Steps, stoops and landings.  Attached steps, uncovered
stoops and landings may intrude up to five feet into the setback area,
provided that they do not exceed 20 square feet in area.  Under no
circumstance shall a step, stoop or landing be located closer than ten feet
to another manufactured home or attachment thereto.



      (2)   Air conditioners.  Air conditioner units may intrude up
to five feet into the setback area.



      (3)   Eaves and overhangs.  An eave or overhang may intrude
up to one foot into the setback area.



(‘81 Code, § 13-34)  (Ord. 43, passed 9-14-67; Am. Ord. 515, passed
5-23-91)



§ 151.22  SCREENING REQUIREMENTS.



   Every manufactured home park shall provide for a minimum setback of at
least 50 feet on all property boundaries.  Setbacks will be planted with a
dense combination of trees, shrubs and bushes as to form a buffer to
adjoining property and state, county and city roadways.  Plans for plantings
shall be approved by the Planning Commission.



(‘81 Code, § 13-35)  (Ord. 43, passed 9-14-67)



§ 151.23  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS; CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Standards and conditions.



      (1)   Construction standards.  All streets and roadways
located within the manufactured home park shall have a concrete curb and
gutter, and shall be hard-surfaced under specifications set forth by the City
Engineer.  Minimum width between curb faces shall be 32 feet for collector
streets and 28 feet for minor streets, unless projected traffic patterns and
density shall determine a greater width, at which time the greater width
shall be determined by the City Engineer.  Roadways shall have unobstructed
access to a public street, road or alley.



      (2)   Maintenance standards.  All streets and roadways shall
be maintained to a level sufficient to allow free vehicular passage for the
residents, their guests, and emergency service responders under all
reasonably anticipated conditions.  The existence of a sufficient level of
maintenance shall be determined as follows:



         (a)   Street surface condition.  The hard surface of
the streets shall not be covered by dirt, sand, gravel or other materials to
the extent that traction between the street surface and vehicle tires is
substantially diminished.  The street shall be maintained in a manner that
horizontal or vertical separations or cracks of the traveled surface are not
of a magnitude which will jar a passing motor vehicle operating within the
speed limit.  Street repair and patching shall also occur whenever a pothole
with exposed base material exists, when a separation or crack results in
crumbling pavement, or when any dip or settlement is pronounced enough to
cause storm water to collect and not drain away.



         (b)   Snow removal and ice control. Snow removal
operations shall occur as necessary to provide safe and unimpeded vehicular
passage of the streets, and shall provide for curb-to-curb snow removal.  At
a minimum, snow removal operations shall be completed within 12 hours after
the end of a snowfall event which deposits more than two inches of snow upon
the street surface.  Snow removal operations shall be conducted in a manner
to achieve as close to a bare pavement surface as possible.  To mitigate
slippery street surfaces, sand and salt shall be applied to control ice where
necessary, but especially at street intersections, sharp curves and other
locations where motorists are likely to brake or turn.



(‘81 Code, § 13-36)  (Am. Ord. 515, passed 5-23-91)



   (B)   Sidewalks.  A concrete sidewalk, not less than 30 inches
wide, shall be constructed adjacent to the street.  Lots located within
areas, such as cul-de- sacs, where in the opinion of the Planning Commission,
sidewalks shall serve no useful purpose, a variance can be granted.  The
variance shall require Council approval. 



(‘81 Code, § 13-37)



(Ord. 43, passed 9-14-67)



Cross-reference:



   Street and Sidewalks, see Chapter 96



§ 151.24  VEHICLE STORAGE.



   No boats, boat trailers, utility trailers, travel trailers or other
vehicles than the personal automobiles of the occupants or their guests shall
be parked on the manufactured home lot and there shall be provided by the
operator a separate area upon which these boats, trailers or other vehicles
shall be parked or held.  This area is to be located away from any public
street and shall be densely screened in an approved manner.



(‘81 Code, § 13-39)  (Ord. 43, passed 9-14-67)



§ 151.25  SPEED LIMITS.



   The streets and roadways shall be designed in accordance with a
ten-mile per hour speed limit.  It shall be unlawful for any type of vehicle
to travel in excess of ten miles per hour within the limits of the
manufactured home park, except that the City Council may by resolution make
findings and designate appropriate speed limits between 10 and 30 miles per
hour on some or all streets, whereupon it shall be unlawful for any type of
vehicle to travel in excess of the speed limit so designated.



(‘81 Code, § 13-40)  (Ord. 43, passed 9-14-67; Am. Ord. 515, passed
5-23-91)



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning ten miles per hour speed limit in mobile home
parks and recreational camping areas, see M.S. § 327.27, subd. 2



§ 151.26  UTILITY BUILDINGS.



   A manufactured home park shall have utility buildings as are required
by state law.  Buildings shall have an approved plan and building permits
will be included within the cost of the permit as stipulated in § 151.04(D).



(‘81 Code, § 13-41)  (Ord. 43, passed 9-14-67)



§ 151.27  OCCUPANT REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Every person operating a manufactured home park within the
city shall provide and keep a suitable guest register for the registration of
all persons provided with accommodations, and each person shall register
therein, as provided by state law.  This register shall contain the
following:



      (1)   Name and lot address of each occupant;



      (2)   Name and address of the owner of the manufactured home;



      (3)   Make, model, year and license of each manufactured home;
and



      (4)   Date of arrival and departure of each manufactured home.



   (B)   This information shall be kept for at least three years after
the date the occupant leaves the manufactured home park and shall be
available at all times to law enforcement officers, health authorities and
all other officials whose duties necessitate the acquisition of information
contained in the register.



(‘81 Code, § 13-451)  (Ord. 43, passed 9-14-67)



Statutory reference:



   For provisions concerning requirements for an attendant in charge of
park and camping areas, see M.S.§ 327.20, subd. 1(1)



   For provisions concerning requirements for registration, see M.S.§
327.10



§ 151.28  FIRE EXTINGUISHERS.



   Each manufactured home in a licensed manufactured home park shall be
equipped with a fire extinguisher.  Unless otherwise required by state
regulation or approved by the Fire Marshal, this extinguisher shall be rated
as “2-A:10-B:C.”  The occupant of each manufactured home shall be
responsible for providing the extinguisher for the manufactured home.



(‘81 Code, § 13-44)  (Ord. 43, passed 9-14-67)



§ 151.29  CONTROL OF PETS.



   No owner or person in charge of any dog, cat or other pet animal shall
permit same to run at large or commit any nuisance within the park at any
time.  All pets must be on a leash at all times when out of doors or kept
within an approved fenced area.



(‘81 Code, § 13-45)  (Ord. 43, passed 9-14-67)  Penalty, see § 151.99



Cross-reference:



   At large dogs prohibited, see § 91.17



§ 151.30  SALES AND DISPLAY LOTS; PERMIT.



   The establishment of a sales lot within the confines of the
manufactured home park is prohibited.  A model home display may be
established within the manufactured home park by special permit, with
approval by the Planning Commission as to the size, number and location.  No
manufactured home display may exceed one manufactured home per manufactured
home lot.  The display lot shall be landscaped by an approved design and
maintained.  No park shall have more than six manufactured home display
lots.  A special permit for establishing a display manufactured home shall
be a contractual yearly agreement which shall expire on January 1 of each
succeeding year.



(‘81 Code, § 13-48)  (Ord. 43, passed 9-14-67)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.31  PLACEMENT AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   (A)   Permit required.  Prior to the placement of any manufactured
home, or construction of an addition or attachment thereto, or erection of
any detached structure, a building permit application shall have been made to
and a permit issued from the office of the City Building Official.  Prior to
the processing of the building permit, written permission from the park owner
shall be supplied to the building official indicating that the manufactured
home, addition or detached structure conforms to park rules or covenants.



   (B)   Primary structure.  Each mobile manufactured home placed
within a park shall meet the minimum standards and be minimally furnished as
follows:



      (1)   Construction standards.  Manufactured homes moved into
a park must carry a seal stating compliance with either ANSI #A119.1 or HUD
CFR 3280.8.  Manufactured homes not carrying a seal may be moved into a
park, provided that they are improved to meet current safety requirements as
listed in M.S. § 327C.07, subd. 3a., prior to final inspection approval and
occupancy.



      (2)   Placement.  Manufactured homes shall be placed in
conformance with the setback requirements stipulated in § 151.21(B) and (C).



      (3)   Manufacturedhome size.  Minimum size of a manufactured
home, without attachments or additions, shall be 400 square feet, with a
minimum width of ten feet.



      (4)   Skirting.  All manufactured homes shall have the base
enclosed by using a commercially available low maintenance steel, aluminum,
vinyl, masonry or insulated skirting material manufactured specifically for
manufactured homes.  Other low maintenance, rot resistant skirting materials
which match the exterior materials of the manufactured home unit may also be
approved by the building official.  The skirting shall be complete prior to
final approval for occupancy.



      (5)   Additions.  All attached steps, stoops, decks, utility
boxes, awnings, patio covers, carports/garages, cabanas, screened porches,
expandable rooms and other additions to the principle unit, must be suitably
anchored to the ground and either commercially made for manufactured homes or
meet the standards of the state’s Building Code.  All additions shall be
set back at least 15 feet from the roadway face of the curb or set back the
same distance as the front of the manufactured home unit, whichever is
greater.  The minimum side and rear setbacks shall be 20 feet between units,
except for decks, steps and uncovered stoops or patios less than 20 square
feet in size which shall be permitted to intrude into the setback five feet
in accordance with § 151.21(B).  Prior to the issuance of a building
permit, permission of the addition from the park management must be certified
to the city on an approved form.



   (C)   Accessory storage buildings and fences. Freestanding accessory
storage buildings and fences shall be permitted as follows:



      (1)   Carports and garages.  A freestanding carport or garage
(one per manufactured home), not attached to a manufactured home, may be
permitted provided that it is suitably anchored to the ground and set back at
least 15 feet from the face of any roadway curb line or the same setback as
the front of the mobile home, whichever is greater.  The rear setback shall
be 20 feet from any manufactured home or attachment thereto (including
permitted intrusions).  The side setback for a freestanding carport or
garage shall be a minimum of six feet from the owner/occupant’s living unit
and ten feet from any other unit or freestanding accessory structure.  Prior
to the issuance of a building permit, permission for the addition from the
park management must be certified to the city on an approved form.



      (2)   Storage shed.  A freestanding storage shed (one per
manufactured home) may be permitted, provided that it does not exceed 100
square feet in area, does not exceed ten feet in height, is set back at least
30 feet from the face of any roadway curb line, is set back at least six feet
from any manufactured home or attachment thereto (including permitted
intrusions), and is suitably anchored to the ground.  Prior to the issuance
of a building permit, permission for the addition from the park management
must be certified to the city on an approved form.



      (3)   Fences.  Fences (chain link, privacy, picket, split
rail or similar fence type constructed of similar quality materials as
determined by the Building Official) may be permitted, provided that they do
not exceed six feet in height and are setback at least 15 feet from the place
of any roadway curb line.  At the discretion of the Building Official,
fences, between manufactured homes may be required to provide an opening or
gate at least three feet in width for the purpose of providing emergency
access to rear yard areas or rear doorways.  If gates are used, latches must
be operable from both sides of the fence and may not be locked.  Prior to
the issuance of a building permit, permission for the fence from the mobile
home park management must be certified to the city on an approved form.



(‘81 Code, § 13-49)  (Ord. 43, passed 9-14-67; Am. Ord. 515, passed
5-23-91)



§ 151.32  LOT LANDSCAPING.



   Except for the areas used for the manufactured home, patio, sidewalk or
hard-surfaced off-street parking, the entire lot shall be sodded and
maintained with grass.



(‘81 Code, § 13-50)  (Ord. 43, passed 9-14-67)



§ 151.33  MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   Manufactured home parks shall be maintained in an attractive state by
the owner or operator so as not to become unsightly with respect to
containers, junk, trash or any other unsightly or unsanitary conditions. No
painting, washing or repairing of automobiles or other vehicles shall be
allowed on the streets or roadways of the manufactured home park.  Any
manufactured home lot that is unoccupied or becomes in disrepair because of
neglect by the occupant shall be the responsibility of the park operator, who
shall maintain or upgrade the lot to its original permit condition.



(‘81 Code, § 13-51)  (Ord. 43, passed 9-14-67)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.34  STORAGE OF COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS.



   (A)   Storage of combustible liquids within or under a manufactured
home is expressly forbidden.



   (B)   All manufactured homes shall be serviced by an underground
installed natural gas.  Therefore, use of propane or butane gas for any
purpose within the confines of the manufactured home park is expressly
forbidden.



(‘81 Code, § 13-52)  (Ord. 43, passed 9-14-67)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.35  TRASH COLLECTION; RECYCLING.



   Trash containers stored outside of manufactured home units must be
placed behind the front entry stoop and be provided with additional screening
if necessary so as not to be visible from the street, except that on the day
of collection the containers may be placed at curbside along the private
manufactured home park street.  If contract trash removal is provided
through the park owner with a master contract rather than contracted by
individual manufactured home unit owners, the master contract must provide
recycling opportunities in accordance with Chapter 50 for each manufactured
home owner.



(‘81 Code, § 13-53)  (Ord. 515, passed 5-23-91)



§ 151.36  ACCESSORY STRUCTURE REMOVAL.



   Upon the removal of any manufactured home from a manufactured home
park, it shall be the responsibility of the park owner to see that all
freestanding or attached accessory structures, fences and debris left on the
mobile home lot are removed within 48 hours after the removal of the unit. 
The City Building Official may approve the retention of all or part of the
accessory structures, if the park owner requests same in writing, can
demonstrate that they will meet the required setbacks from any replacement
manufactured home unit to be placed on the lot, and if they are shown to be
in sound condition.  The park owner must also provide a written commitment
to remove or relocate the accessory structure(s) permitted to remain if the
required setbacks fail to be verified after the replacement manufactured home
is placed.



(‘81 Code, § 13-54)  (Ord. 515, passed 5-23-91)



MANUFACTURED HOME PARK CLOSINGS



§ 151.50  PURPOSE.



   In view of the peculiar nature and problems presented by the closure or
conversion of manufactured home parks, the City Council finds that the public
health, safety and general welfare will be promoted by requiring compensation
to displaced home owners and tenants of such parks.  The purpose of this
subchapter is to define by whom and in what amount compensation for park
relocation or displacement of a manufactured home is paid. This subchapter is
adopted pursuant to the authority granted under M.S. § 327C.095.



(Ord. 669, passed 3-23-00)



§ 151.51  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words and terms when used in this subchapter shall have
the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.



   CLOSURE STATEMENT.  A statement prepared by the park owner clearly
stating the park is closing, addressing the availability, location and
potential costs of adequate replacement rental sites within a 25 mile radius
of the park that is closing and the probable relocation costs of the
manufactured homes located in the park to other parks within the 25 mile
radius.



   DISPLACED RESIDENT.  A resident of an owner-occupied manufactured home
who rents a lot in a manufactured home park, including  members of the
resident’s household, as of the date the park owner submits a closure
statement to the City Planning Commission.



   LOT.  An area within a manufactured home park, designed and used for
the accommodation of a manufactured home.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, not affixed to or part of real
estate, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode,
is eight feet or more in width or 40 feet or more in length, or, when erected
onsite, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis
and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation
when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating,
air conditioning and electrical system contained in it.



   PARK OWNER.  The owner of a manufactured home park and any person
acting on behalf of the owner in the operation or management of a park.



   PERSON.  Any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, incorporated
and unincorporated association or any other legal or commercial entity.



   PURCHASER.  The person buying the manufactured home park from the park
owner.  In the event that the park owner intends to retain ownership and
convert the park to a different use, all references to the purchaser refer to
the park owner.



   RELOCATION COSTS.  The reasonable cost of relocating a manufactured
home from a manufactured home park within the city that is being closed or
converted to another use to another manufactured home park within a 25-mile
radius of the park, as follows:



      (1)   Preparation for move.  Reasonable costs incurred to
prepare the eligible manufactured home for transportation to another site. 
This category includes crane services if needed, but not the cost of wheel
axles, tires, frame welding, or trailer hitches.



      (2)   Transportation to another site. Reasonable costs
incurred to transport the eligible manufactured home to another manufactured
home park within a 25 mile radius.  This category also includes the cost of
insuring the manufactured home while the home is in the process of being
relocated, and the cost of obtaining moving permits provided that the park
owner shall not be required to pay delinquent taxes on a manufactured home if
necessary in order to obtain a moving permit.  This category does not
include the cost of moving  personal property separate and distinct from the
mobile home and separate and distinct from the appliances and appurtenances
of the mobile home.



      (3)   Hook-up at new location. 



         (a)   The reasonable cost of connecting the eligible
manufactured home to utilities at the relocation site, including crane
services if needed.  The park owner shall not be required to upgrade the
electrical or plumbing systems of the manufactured home.



         (b)   Relocation costs do not include the cost of any
repairs or modifications to the manufactured home needed to bring the home
into compliance with the state and federal manufactured home building
standards for the year in which the home was constructed.  Relocation costs
also do not include the cost of any repairs or modifications to the home or
appurtenances needed to bring the home or appurtenances into compliance with
the rules and regulations of the manufactured home park to which the
manufactured home is to be relocated, if those rules and regulations are no
more stringent than the rules and regulations of the park in which the home
is located and the resident was notified of noncompliance with the rules and
regulations of the park in which it is located within 60 days prior to
delivery of the closure statement.



(Ord. 669, passed 3-23-00)



§ 151.52  NOTICE OF CLOSING.



   If the manufactured home park is to be sold with the intent to convert
in whole or in part to another use or the owner of the park requests and
receives rezoning of the property from the city, the park owner shall, at
least nine months prior to conversion to another use or sale to someone with
the intent to convert to another use, provide a copy of a closure statement
to a resident of each manufactured home and to the City Planning Commission.



(Ord. 669, passed 3-23-00)



§ 151.53  NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING.



   The Planning Commission shall submit the closure statement to the City
Council and request the City Council to schedule a public hearing.  The city
shall mail a notice at least ten days prior to the public hearing to a
resident of each manufactured home in the park stating the time, place, and
purpose of the hearing.  The park owner shall provide the city with a list
of the names and addresses of at least one resident of each manufactured home
in the park at the time the closure statement is submitted to the Planning
Commission.



(Ord. 669, passed 3-23-00)



§ 151.54  PUBLIC HEARING.



   A public hearing shall be held before the City Council for the purpose
of reviewing the closure statement and evaluating what impact the park
closing may have on the displaced residents and the park owner.



(Ord. 669, passed 3-23-00)



§ 151.55  CONDITIONS OF CLOSING.



   (A)   As a condition of the closing of the manufactured home park,
the park owner shall pay the relocation costs to displaced residents.  If
the park owner determined within four months prior to the date of closure of
the park that the park will not be closed, the park owner may rescind the
Notice of Closure and shall pay any actual relocation costs incurred by any
of the park’s manufactured home owners.  If the park owner determines at
least four months prior to the date of closure of the park that the park will
not be closed, the park owner may rescind the notice of closure, and not be
liable for any relocation costs.



   (B)   The city shall not issue a building permit in conjunction with
the reuse of the manufactured home park property unless the park owner has
paid the relocation costs and/or the park purchaser has compensated displaced
residents in accordance with the requirements of this subchapter.  Approval
of any application for rezoning, platting, conditional use permit, planned
unit development or variance in conjunction with a park closing or conversion
shall be conditional on compliance with the requirements of this subchapter.



(Ord. 669, passed 3-23-00)



§ 151.56  DISPLACED RESIDENT STATEMENT.



   Within 90 days of receipt of a closure notice, the displaced resident
shall provide the park owner with a written statement of relocation costs,
or, in the alternative, a written statement that the resident cannot relocate
his or her manufactured home to another manufactured home park within a
25-mile radius or chooses not to relocate his or her manufactured home to a
manufactured home park that is outside of Independent School District No.
196.  If a resident determines not to relocate as defined within this
subchapter, the resident must state whether he or she elects to receive
relocation costs under § 151.57 or compensation under § 151.58.



(Ord. 669, passed 3-23-00)



§ 151.57  ELECTION TO RELOCATE.



   (A)   If a manufactured home can be relocated to another
manufactured home park within a 25-mile radius, the park owner shall pay
displaced residents’ relocations costs as defined herein.



   (B)   The park owner shall make relocation payments directly to
contractors providing the relocation service, or shall reimburse the
displaced resident directly after the resident submits to the park owner
proof of payment of relocation costs.  The park owner shall be entitled to
receive adequate documentation of relocation costs, including costs of
proposals, invoices, estimates and contacts for relocation services.



   (C)   If a displaced resident cannot relocate the manufactured home
within a 25-mile radius of the park which is being closed or some other
agreed upon distance, and the resident elects not to tender title to the
manufactured home, the resident is entitled to relocation costs based upon an
average of relocation costs awarded to other residents in the park.



   (D)   A displaced resident compensated under this subchapter shall
retain title to the manufactured home and shall be responsible for its prompt
removal from the manufactured home park.  All rent due and owing to the park
owner, and all property taxes for the current and prior years shall be paid
by the displaced resident prior to removing the manufactured home from the
park.



(Ord. 669, passed 3-23-00)



§ 151.58  ELECTION TO RECEIVE COMPENSATION.



   If a resident cannot relocate his or her manufactured home to another
manufactured home park within a 25-mile radius or chooses not to relocate his
or her manufactured home to a manufactured home park that is outside of
Independent School District No. 196 or some other agreed upon distance and
tenders title to the manufactured home, the resident is entitled to
compensation to be paid by the purchaser of the park in order to mitigate the
adverse financial impact of the park closing.  In such instance, the
compensation shall be an amount equal to the estimated market value or the
tax assessed value of the manufactured home, whichever is greater, as
determined by an independent appraiser experienced in mobile home appraisal
approved by the City Administrator.  The purchaser shall pay the cost of the
appraisal or shall reimburse the city for any advances it makes to such
appraiser for such cost.  The purchaser shall pay such compensation into an
escrow account, established by the park owner, for distribution upon transfer
of title to the home.  The amount otherwise due the displaced resident may
be tendered on the date of transfer of title from the escrow account for
payment on liens and encumbrances.  The resident shall transfer title of the
manufactured home to the park purchaser free and clear of all liens and
encumbrances.  All rent due the property owner and all property taxes for
the current and prior years shall be paid by displaced residents prior to the
removal of the manufactured home from the park by the park purchaser.



(Ord. 669, passed 3-23-00)



§ 151.59  LIMITATION OF RELOCATION COSTS AND COMPENSATION



   The total amount of compensation paid to displaced owners of
manufactured homes shall not exceed the greater of 20% of the County
Assessor’s estimated market value of the manufactured home park, as
determined by the County Assessor for the year in which the park is scheduled
to close, or 20% of the purchase price of the park.



(Ord. 669, passed 3-23-00)



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   In addition to being liable to punishment as provided in §
10.99, failure to comply with all the provisions of this chapter or with all
provisions of a special nature imposed upon the manufactured  home park or
the operator by terms of the permit or the terms of any contract, agreement
or stipulation entered into by the operator or imposed by the Council will
result in a recommendation of revocation of license to the Minnesota
Department of Health.  The terms of this chapter or of any permit, agreement
or stipulation ordered or authorized by this chapter shall be a condition
precedent to issuance of a state license and shall run with the license and
be a part thereof. 



(‘81 Code, § 13-25)  (Ord. 43, passed 9-14-67)



   (B)   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a petty
misdemeanor.  Any person convicted of violating any provision of this
chapter shall be subject to penalties as stipulated in § 10.99. 



(‘81 Code, § 13-55)  (Ord. 515, passed 5-23-91)



CHAPTER 152:  NATURAL RESOURCES MANAGEMENT



Section



General Provisions



   152.01   Findings and purpose statement



   152.02   Definitions



Permits and Plans



   152.15   Natural resources management permit



   152.16   Natural resources management plan; additional requirements



   152.17   Appeals of decisions



   152.18   Exemptions



   152.19   Compliance with plan



   152.20   Emergency corrective actions



   152.21   Conflict with other laws



   152.22   Final “as-built” grade plan



   152.23   Fees



   152.24   Security



   152.25   Variances and alternative protective methods



Forestry



   152.40   City Forester position created; duties



   152.41   Forestry program



   152.42   Maintenance and removal of trees



   152.43   Tree work license



   152.44   Minimum height of tree limbs



   152.45   Shade tree disease regulation



   152.46   Tree preservation requirements



Water Resources



   152.55   Storm and surface water regulations



   152.56   Wetland conservation regulations



   152.57   Protective buffer zone



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 152.01  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE STATEMENT.



   (A)   The City Council finds it is in the best interest of the city
to protect, preserve and enhance the natural resources and environment of the
community and to encourage a resourceful and prudent approach to the
development and alteration of land. 



   (B)   In the interest of achieving these objectives, the city has
established the comprehensive natural resources management regulations herein
to promote the furtherance of the following:



      (1)   Protection and preservation of the city’s natural
resources;



      (2)   Orderly development of land to minimize tree and land
habitat loss;



      (3)   Minimization of the impacts to water bodies, trees and
wooded areas resulting from development during the construction phase and
from the conditions created by its completion;



      (4)   Establishment of standards for water quality and tree
preservation and the mitigation of environmental impacts resulting from tree
removal and water pollutants;



      (5)   Creative land use and environmentally compatible site
design which preserves trees and minimizes tree removal during development;
and



      (6)   Enforcement of natural resources management standards to
promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare of the community.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-9-97; Am. Ord. 864, passed 6-11-09)



§ 152.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   100-YEAR HIGH WATER LEVEL or HIGH WATER LEVEL (HWL).  The high water
level for water bodies within the city for stormwater management based on the
1% probability 24-hour rainfall event.



   APPLICANT.  Any person or entity who is required to submit and
implement a city-approved natural resources management plan under this
chapter.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMP.  Techniques, procedures,
activities,  methods and requirements, whether through practices or
structural means, to effectively prevent or reduce: the degradation of
natural resources; the movement of sediment, pollutants or nutrients from
land surfaces; and the runoff of the same into water bodies.



   BUFFER ZONE or PROTECTIVE BUFFER ZONE.  The area between a line
delineating a water body edge and a line upland from the water body edge
established for the purpose of protecting and preserving the water quality of
the water body.  The width of the buffer zone shall be as set forth in these
regulations.



   CALIPER INCHES.  The length of a straight line measured through the
trunk of a tree 12 inches above the ground.



   CANOPY OF A TREE.  The horizontal extension of a tree’s branches in
all directions from its trunk.



   CRITICAL ROOT ZONE OF A TREE.  The area under a tree which is at and
within the drip line of a tree’s canopy or a distance of one and one-half
feet from the trunk for each inch of the diameter of the tree, measured at
breast height, whichever is greater.



   DIAMETER.  A tree’s trunk as measured 4½ feet above the ground,
wherever this term is used in reference to the measurement of a tree.



   DRIP LINE OF A TREE.  An imaginary vertical line which extends from
the outermost branches of a tree’s canopy to the ground.



   HAZARD TREE.  A tree which has structural defects in the roots, stem,
or branches that may cause the tree or tree part to fail, and such failure
may cause property damage or personal injury.



   ILLICIT DISCHARGE.  Any discharge to the city’s storm sewer that is
not composed entirely of storm water except discharges pursuant to an NPDES
permit (other than the NPDES permit for discharges from the city’s storm
sewer) and discharges resulting from fire fighting activities.



   INDIVIDUAL LOT DEVELOPMENT.  The grading of individually platted lots
for the purposes of new building construction.



   LAND or PARCEL OF LAND OF SUBJECT PROPERTY or SUBJECT PROPERTY.  An
entire lot or parcel, as defined by the zoning regulations of this code, on
or within the boundaries of which a project subject to the requirements of
this chapter is occurring, has occurred or is to occur.



   LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY. 



      (1)   Any excavating, grading, clearing, filling or other
earth change which may result in:



         (a)   The movement of more than 20  cubic yards of soil;



         (b)   Disturbance of 3,500 square feet or more of soil;



         (c)   Any cutting, removal, destroying or loss of 10% or
more of the significant trees of any land; or



         (d)   Any other activity that changes the existing or
natural contour of the land which changes drainage.



      (2)   For purposes of this chapter, excavation or grading for
agricultural purposes on agriculturally zoned property shall not constitute
land-disturbing activity provided the activity is no closer than 16.5  feet
from any delineated edge of any water body.



   LOSS OF SIGNIFICANT TREES.  The loss of a significant healthy tree as
a result of:



      (1)   Land-disturbing activity, whether temporary or
permanent, affecting 50% or more of a significant tree’s critical root
zone, but no more than 30% of a significant oak tree’s critical root zone;



      (2)   Utility construction (such as sewer, water, storm sewer,
gas, electric, telephone and cable TV and trenching) resulting in the cutting
of 50% or more of a significant tree’s roots within the critical root zone,
but no more than 30% of a significant oak tree’s critical root zone;



      (3)   Mechanical injury to the trunk of a significant tree
causing critical loss of the bark, which may result in tree decline; or



      (4)   Compaction to 90% of proctor to a depth of six inches,
or more, of 50% or more of the surface of the soil within a significant
tree’s critical root zone, provided no more than 30% of the surface of the
soil within a significant oak tree’s critical root zone.



   NATIVE PLANT.  A plant which has its original source no further than
300 miles for trees and shrubs or 200 miles for all other plants from the
site of planting.  A NATIVE PLANT does not include a cultivar derived from
native plants.



   NATURAL RESOURCES MANAGEMENT PLAN. Required general information, an
erosion and sedimentation control component, tree preservation component,
protective buffer zone component, and drainage and grading component.



   NEW BUILDING CONSTRUCTION.  The construction of any principle building
or structure upon a parcel of land or platted lot.



   NEW DEVELOPMENT.  The process whereby improvement to an entire site
occurs in one continuous process or in more than one distinct phase,
including but not limited to the following activities: initial site grading,
installation of utilities, construction of public streets, construction or
grading of drainage ways, other grading or filling of any area within the
site, grading of building pad areas; utility hookups; construction of
buildings, parking lots, driveways, storage areas, recreation areas or
private streets and any other construction or land-disturbing activity within
the subject property or site.



   OPERATIONAL PLAN.  A plan adopted  by the city or any other
governmental agency with regulatory authority that governs the use or
management of lands within the city, including, but not limited to:  TMDL
implementation plans, stormwater management plans, comprehensive guide plans,
surface water management plans, lake management plans, watershed management
plans, wetland management plans, forest management plans.  In the event that
any provision of this chapter is contrary to any regulation of an operational
plan, the provision of this chapter shall apply and govern. 



   PROJECT APPLICATION or APPLICATION.  The applicant’s submission of
all required documentation for approval of any activity requiring a permit as
required in this code.



   PROJECT MANAGER.  The applicant or the applicant’s duly authorized
representative who has been conferred the duties by the applicant to
implement, complete and manage the project to which the approved natural
resources management plan applies under this chapter.



   SIGNIFICANT TREE.  Any healthy deciduous tree measuring eight inches
or greater in diameter, or any coniferous tree measuring six inches or
greater in diameter, at four and one-half feet above grade.



   STABILIZED or STABILIZATION.  The process or condition of land surface
maintenance whereby permanent ground cover is established on a property in
order  that erosion is effectively prevented.



   WATER BODY (BODIES).  Any natural or man-made wetland, drainage or
storm water area, stream or lake.



   WATER BODY EDGE.



      (1)   For public waters:  the ordinary high water elevation
(OHW) as established for the water body by the Minnesota Department of
Natural Resources.



      (2)   For wetlands: the line delineated pursuant the methods
for delineation as set forth in Minnesota Rules, Part 8420.



      (3)   For man-made water bodies: the normal or control water
level pursuant to the design specifications as approved by the city.



      (4)   In the event that a water body has more than one of the
above water body designations, the water body edge shall be determined by
that method that produces the highest elevation or largest water body size.



   WETLAND.  Any wetland as defined in M.S. Ch. 103G and the delineation
thereof shall be in accordance with Minnesota Rules, Part 8420.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-9-97; Am. Ord. 712, passed 4-25-02; Am. Ord. 864, passed
6-11-09)



PERMITS AND PLANS



§ 152.15  NATURAL RESOURCES MANAGEMENT PERMIT.



   (A)   Permit required.  A natural resources management permit
(NRMP) shall be required before any land- disturbing activity in connection
with any of the following:



      (1)   New development in any zoning district;



      (2)   New building construction in any zoning district;



      (3)   Any project which requires a building permit and will
result in the expansion of any existing building or impervious surface unless
the city determines that no natural resources, such as trees or water bodies,
will be directly affected by the project; 



      (4)   Any land-disturbing activity or project, other than
commercial excavation, that directly or indirectly affects natural resources,
such as near slopes, trees or water bodies; or



      (5)   The construction or installation of 0.2 or more acres of
impervious surface on any lot.



   (B)   Permit application.  The application for the permit shall be
made in writing to the city on such form as the city may designate and shall
include such information as the city shall require.



   (C)   Review of approval process of permit application. 



      (1)   Projects of five or more acres.  Projects located on a
parcel of land of five or more acres or involving the subdivision of land
shall be submitted to and approved by the City Council.  Projects on platted
lots of less than five acres shall be approved administratively by city
staff, unless city staff presents it to the City Council for its review and
approval.



      (2)   Permit and plan approval.



         (a)   Submittal.  Any application for an NRMP shall be
submitted to the city, along with the natural resources management plan and
required fees, at least 15 business days prior to the city’s consideration
of the application.  The following requirements shall be met:



            1.   A site plan depicting the proposed project
shall be submitted and approved by the city;



            2.   The plan shall be consistent with any
approved subdivision grading plan;



            3.   The plan shall be consistent with the
city’s operational plans or any other applicable operation plan as defined
herein;



            4.   The plan shall not adversely impact
neighboring properties;



            5.   The plan shall not irreparably adversely
impact natural resources;



            6.   The plan shall meet the requirements of this
chapter; and



            7.   The plan shall provide for and include any of
the following requirements if the city determines that the project mandates
all, or a combination thereof, of the following requirements for the
protection of public safety, health and welfare:



               a.   Properly fence any slope of 3:1 or
greater that is adjacent to a project property line and which is deemed
hazardous or dangerous by the city;



               b.   Slope the banks, fill, level off any
depression or mound or otherwise place in such condition at any time so as
not to be dangerous because of sliding or caving banks; and so as to minimize
or stop erosion or dust during or after the grading operation;



               c.   Correct or repair any land surface area
that has unsafe, hazardous or eroding slopes or holes/depressions; and



               d.   Operate construction and grading
equipment only between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m., Monday through
Friday.



         (b)  Approval.  Upon finding that the above requirements
have been met, the city will issue a permit in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.



   (D)  Expiration of permit and plan. Any natural resources management
permit issued pursuant to the requirements of this chapter shall expire one
year from the date of issuance if significant progress of the work covered by
such permit is not accomplished, unless an extension of the permit is
requested in writing by the applicant and approved in writing by the city. 
Notwithstanding the expiration of the permit, the applicant is bound by the
terms of the natural resources management plan requirements to the extent to
restore the land grade and prevent any erosion and illicit discharge.



   (E)   Revocation of permit.  Failure to comply with the approved
terms and conditions of a natural resources management plan shall be grounds
for revocation of the natural resources management permit by the City
Council, following a public hearing.  Written notification of said public
hearing shall be mailed at least ten days prior to said hearing to the
current holder of the permit.  Such notice should outline the violation(s)
considered by the city to be grounds for revocation and inform the current
holder of the permit of the opportunity to be heard at such public hearing.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-9-97; Am. Ord. 712, passed 4-25-02; Am. Ord. 864, passed
6-11-09)



§ 152.16  NATURAL RESOURCES MANAGEMENT PLAN; ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No permit shall be issued unless a natural resources
management plan is submitted to and approved by the city.  All natural
resource management plans shall include the following:



      (1)   General information.



         (a)   Delineation of the subject property and the
location of existing and proposed buildings, structures and impervious
surfaces on the subject property;



         (b)   Description of the construction or land disturbing
activity to be performed on subject property and proposed project schedule;



         (c)   Identification of all water bodies located on and
adjacent to the subject property’s boundaries;



         (d)   Identification of all protective buffer zones
which are required herein in connection with the project for any existing or
proposed water body;



         (e)   Topographical data, including contours at vertical
intervals of not more than two feet, except that contour lines shall be no
more than 100 feet apart;



         (f)   Temporary benchmarks shall be established within
the boundaries of the project area.  Descriptions, reference ties and
elevations of the benchmarks shall be furnished to the City Engineer.  All
elevations, topography and vertical control data shall be tied to sea level
datum, 1929 general adjustments; and



         (g)   The location and size of all existing sanitary,
water, or storm sewer trunks, laterals or services on or adjacent to the
property.



      (2)   Erosion and sedimentation control and pollution
prevention component (ESCC).  As part of the natural resources management
plan:



         (a)   All applicants shall submit an ESCC, which shall
consist of the following:



            1.   Delineation of all areas to be graded or
excavated, and the limits of land disturbing activities;



            2.   Identification of measures to be utilized to
control erosion and sedimentation within and from the subject property during
the project activity as required herein;



            3.   Identification of all permanent erosion
control measures and a completion schedule;



            4.   Identification of the location of dirt or
soil storage or stock pile areas to be utilized on the subject property; and



            5.   Identification of all illicit discharge
prevention measures; and



            6.   Identification of all measures to be utilized
to protect water bodies and buffer zones and prevent pollution;



         (b)   The ESCC of the natural resources management plan
shall identify and require the “best management practices” (BMPs) for
temporary and permanent erosion and sedimentation controls and pollution
prevention that are deemed acceptable by the city.  Required BMPs include,
but are not limited to:



            1.   Perimeter sediment control devices;



            2.   Temporary erosion control practices;



            3.   Storm drain inlet protection devices;



            4.   Rock construction entrance;



            5.   Tree drip line or critical root zone
perimeter protection for trees;



            6.   Removal of all debris, dirt and soil from
impervious ground surfaces, including abutting public or private roadways and
sidewalks, in connection with the subject property;



            7.   Designated concrete washout; and



            8.   Any other erosion and sedimentation control
device or pollution prevention measure as deemed necessary by the city to
prevent pollution or protect public health, welfare, or safety.



      (3)   Tree preservation component, TPC.  As part of the
natural resources management plan:



         (a)   All applicants shall submit a TPC, which shall
consist of the following:



            1.   An accurate inventory of significant trees on
the subject property, including identification of the size, species,
condition and location of each significant tree.  On large wooded sites,
forest measuring methods may be used to determine the total diameter inches
of trees outside the area of the proposed land-disturbing activity;



            2.   Identification of all significant trees
proposed to be removed or that will be lost as a result of the
land-disturbing activity;



            3.   Identification of the number, type and size
of significant trees required to be replaced or for which tree loss
mitigation is required herein;



            4.   Identification of the number, type, size and
location of the required replacement trees as required herein;



            5.   Identification of the number, type, size and
location of significant trees to be preserved; and



            6.   Identification of measures to be utilized to
protect and preserve the significant trees proposed to be preserved.



         (b)   The TPC shall identify and require the following
tree protective measures:



            1.   Protective fencing around the outer edge of
the critical root zone of all significant trees to prevent sedimentation,
trenching, stockpiling, soil compaction or any other root damaging activity
within the critical root zone of any trees; and



            2.   Pruning paint applied to any damaged bark or
branch of any oak tree at any time between and including April 1 and October
31.



      (4)   Drainage and grading component (DGC). As part of the
natural resources management plan:



         (a)   All applicants shall submit a DGC, which shall
consist of the following:



            1.   Identification of proposed contour grading on
the site and the amount to be removed from the site;



            2.   The estimated time required to complete the
work and the amount of material to be moved on the site and the amount to be
removed from the site;



            3.   A map showing the stages or limits of grading
together with the existing or proposed finished elevations based on sea level
readings;



            4.   Identification of proposed building bench
elevations and direction of flow of surface water within each lot;



            5.   Methods of controlling dust;



            6.   Submission of grading and engineering
specifications and reports in accordance with Uniform Building Code Chapter
33 and Appendix Chapter 33;



            7.   Submission of preliminary plans or program
for water supply, sewage disposal, drainage and flood control;



            8.   A planting plan for all vegetated BMPs;



            9.   Identification of and specification for all
permanent storm water management facilities;



            10.   Soil borings, if required by the City
Engineer; and



            11.   Any other information deemed necessary by
the city for compliance with any applicable operational plan, as defined
herein;



         (b)   Drainage and grading design requirements shall be
as follows. 



            1.   No land shall be disturbed and no use shall
be permitted that results in water run-off, causing flooding or erosion on
adjacent property.  The run off shall be properly channeled into a storm
drain, watercourse, ponding area or other suitable facility;



            2.   A drainage plan for all new commercial,
industrial, multiple residential and institutional developments shall provide
for a 3.6 inch rainfall in 24 hours as calculated in accordance with the
modeling SCSTR-20 methodology and compliance with any applicable governmental
entity’s watershed management plan requirements;



            3.   No land disturbing activity or use shall be
permitted that results in loss of flood storage for the 100-year High Water
Level of any waterbody;



            4.   The plan shall meet the water quality,
volume, and rate control standards and policies of the city’s other code
regulations and approved city operational plans. In the event the city code
regulations or city operational plans conflict, the most restrictive standard
shall apply;



            5.   Pond outlets and overflows shall be located
above the seasonably high water table except where it can be demonstrated
there is a risk of seepage damage to existing structures; and



            6.   All infiltration and filtration permanent
storm water treatment devices shall be protected from compaction,
sedimentation, or any other disturbance that may inhibit function.



      (5)   Protective buffer zone component (PBC). As part of the
natural resources management plan, all applicants whose project will require
establishment of a protective buffer zone shall submit a PBC, which shall
consist of the following:



         (a)   Identification of any existing erosion problems
and any weeds or rank vegetation in the area adjacent to existing waterbodies
which would constitute the buffer zone; and



         (b)   A buffer establishment and planting plan, which
shall consist of the following:



            1.   Plant list and/or seed mix to be used;



            2.   The proposed location of the plants;



            3.   The proposed method to remove any noxious
weeds or rank vegetation with the buffer zone;



            4.   The proposed method to correct existing
erosion problems in the buffer zone;



            5.   Method of planting; and



            6.   Any materials used, including but not limited
to erosion and sediment control measures, fertilizers, pesticides, and the
like.



   (B)   In addition to all other plan requirements in this chapter,
any applicant conducting land-disturbing activity that disturbs one or more
acres of total land area or disturbs less than one acre but is part of a
common plan of development or sale that will ultimately disturb at least one
acre shall comply with the following additional requirements:



      (1)   The applicant and property owner, if not the applicant,
shall apply for and be issued a National Pollution Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit from the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA); and



      (2)   The applicant and property owner, if not the
applicant,  shall submit to the city an approved copy of the storm water
pollution prevention plan as required for the NPDES by the MPCA.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-9-97; Am. Ord. 712, passed 4-25-02; Am .Ord. 864, passed
6-11-09)



§ 152.17  APPEALS OF DECISIONS.



   The applicant may appeal any requirement, decision or determination by
the city in connection with any provision of this chapter pursuant to the 
procedures as set forth in the zoning regulations regarding Board of Appeals
and Adjustments.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-9-97; Am. Ord. 864, passed 6-11-09)



§ 152.18  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Public utility and right-of-way maintenance.  The permit
requirements of this chapter shall not apply to public utility and
right-of-way maintenance projects.



   (B)   Emergencies.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply
to emergency activity by any governmental agency or utility company necessary
to protect life or prevent substantial harm to persons or property.



   (C)   BMP requirements.  Notwithstanding the foregoing clauses in
this section, all land disturbing activity shall be completed in accordance
with the BMP standards set forth in this chapter for projects for which an
NRMP is required.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-9-97; Am. Ord. 864, passed 6-11-09)



§ 152.19  COMPLIANCE WITH PLAN.



   (A)   Compliance required.  The applicant shall implement and
comply with the Natural Resources Management Plan (NRMP) prior to and during
any construction or land-disturbing activity under the permit to which this
chapter applies.  All erosion and sedimentation control and tree
preservation measures required under the plan shall be installed and remain
in place until all grading and construction activity is completed and all
areas are permanently stabilized or until a written request for removal of
the protection measures is made to and approved by the city in writing.  No
construction or land-disturbing activity to which this chapter applies or
removal of any significant trees may occur until the NRMP is approved by the
city and except in accordance with the approved NRMP.  Failure to comply
with the approved terms and conditions of an NRMP shall constitute a
violation of this code and a public nuisance.



   (B)   Determination of compliance.  The city or its designated
representative shall have the right to enter and inspect the subject property
in order to determine compliance with the approved NRMP.  The city shall
have the right to order the suspension of any grading or construction
activity on the subject property until compliance with the NRMP has occurred.



   (C)   Finding of noncompliance.  Upon a finding of noncompliance,
the city shall use the following procedure with respect to notification and
corrective measures:



      (1)   The city shall serve upon the property owner and the
NRMP holder, if different than the property owner, by hand delivery or U.S.
mail, a written  notification of the violation(s) of the approved NRMP and
the corrective action required.  The city may serve the notification upon
the project manager for the NRMP holder which shall constitute service of the
notification upon the NRMP holder; and



      (2)   If remedial work is not completed and compliance with
the Plan has not occurred within 48 hours of service of the violation
notification, the city may complete remedial or corrective work and any costs
incurred in connection with taking remedial action or installing corrective
measures may be recovered from the NRMP holder’s performance security or
may be assessed against the property pursuant to M.S. Ch. 429.  In the
alternative, the city may revoke any construction related permit and order
the termination of all construction activity on the subject property until
the subject site is in compliance with the NRMP.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-9-97; Am. Ord. 864, passed 6-11-09)



§ 152.20  EMERGENCY CORRECTIVE ACTIONS.



   In the event circumstances exist such that noncompliance poses an
immediate danger to the public health, safety and welfare, as determined by
the city, the city may take emergency corrective action to prevent any
danger.  The city will take reasonable  action to contact and direct the
property owner of the subject property and the NRMP holder to take any
necessary action to correct the noncompliance.  Any costs incurred by the
city in connection with any emergency action shall be recovered from the NRMP
holder’s performance security.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-9-97; Am. Ord. 864, passed 6-11-09)



§ 152.21  CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS.



   If the requirements of this chapter are in conflict with any other law,
the stricter requirements shall be enforced.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-9-97; Am. Ord. 864, passed 6-11-09)



§ 152.22  FINAL “AS-BUILT” GRADE PLAN.



   Upon completion of grading, all activity and work under a NRMP permit
an "as-built" grading plan shall be prepared and filed with the city, unless
the Public Works Director determines the activity under the NRMP permit does
not require an "as-built" grading plan.  The "as-built" grading plan shall
depict the actual field grade conditions of the subject property and depict
any changes from the original grading plan submitted to and approved by the
city or as existed prior to any work or activity under the NRMP permit.  If
building permits are requested prior to completion of the "as-built" grading
plan, "as-built" grading plans shall be required for the individual lots
associated with those building permits.  All "as-built" grading plans shall
be certified by a registered civil engineer and submitted to the city in a
format as required by the city.  The City Engineer shall review all final
"as-built" grading plans and if determined the grading does not meet city
drainage standards, the permit holder and property owner shall be required to
correct all grades on the property subject to the City Engineer's approval.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-9-97; Am. Ord. 864, passed 6-11-09; Am. Ord. 1036,
passed 12-14-17)



§ 152.23  FEES.



   Fees associated with this chapter are as stated in the appendix to
Chapter 35.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-9-97; Am. Ord. 864, passed 6-11-09)



§ 152.24  SECURITY.



   (A)   Security required.  The applicant shall provide security for
the performance of its obligations pursuant to this chapter.  The security
shall be in a form required by the city, including a letter of credit, cash,
or escrow deposit, and all in a form and substance that shall save the city
free and harmless from any and all actions, claims, suits or liability as a
result of the applicant's performance of work under or in connection with its
NRMP. This security, running to the city, shall be conditioned to pay the
city for any cost and expense incurred by the city in bringing the subject
property into compliance with the approved natural resources management plan,
and/or the cost and expense of repairing any highways, streets or other
public ways within the city, made necessary by the special burden resulting
from the hauling and transporting thereon by the applicant in the removal or
placement of rock, dirt, sand, gravel, clay or other like material.  The
city's costs and expenses shall include any engineering, legal or
administrative expenses.



   (B)   Amount of security.  The amount of security shall be 125% of
the estimated cost to accomplish compliance with the approved natural
resources management plan, or $2,000, whichever is greater, in addition to
any other security performance required by any other regulation in this
code.  The estimated cost shall be subject to approval by the city.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the amount of security for projects that
disturb an area of less than one acre in size on an individual lot or parcel
on which a one-family or two-family dwelling exists and will remain to exist
under the permit shall be in the amount(s) as duly adopted by City Council
resolution.



   (C)   Release of security.  The security may be retained by the
city until all conditions and requirements of the NRMP have been met and
permanent stabilization has been installed and confirmed by the city to be
effectively in place.  No security or any portion thereof will be released
if the project is not substantially completed.  If noncompliance is found,
the city may retain that portion of the security equal to the cost of
bringing the project into compliance with the approved natural resources
management plan.



   (D)   City remedy.  If compliance with the approved natural
resources management plan is not accomplished within the allowable time
period, the city may bring the project into compliance by use of the security.



   (E)   Exemptions.  The city shall be exempt from the requirements
of this section.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-9-97; Am. Ord. 864, passed 6-11-09; Am. Ord. 1036,
passed 12-14-17)



§ 152.25  VARIANCES AND ALTERNATIVE PROTECTIVE METHODS.



   (A)   Variances.  A request for a variance from the application of
any requirement or provision of this chapter shall be made to and considered
by the city pursuant to the provisions for variances as set forth in the
zoning regulations in this code.



   (B)   Violation.  If a variance is granted, any violation of any
condition to which the variance is subject shall be a violation of this
chapter and shall automatically terminate the variance, subject to any
enforcement procedures consistent with a finding of noncompliance.



   (C)   Alternative protective methods authorized.  The city may
permit an alternative protective treatment or management method upon the
city’s determination that the proposed alternative method, with such
further conditions as the city  may impose, will achieve an equal or 
greater degree of natural resource protection than would strict compliance
with the provisions herein.



(Ord. 864, passed 6-11-09)



FORESTRY



§ 152.40  CITY FORESTER POSITION CREATED; DUTIES.



   (A)   Position created.  The city’s Public Works Director shall
be the Forester.  The powers and duties as set forth in this subchapter are
hereby conferred upon the Forester or his or her duly authorized agent.



   (B)   Duties.  It is the duty of the City Forester to coordinate,
under the direction and control of the Council, all activities of the city
relating to the control and prevention of insect-infested and diseased trees,
including but not limited to, emerald ash borer, Dutch elm, and oak wilt
diseases.  The Forester shall recommend to the Council the details of a
program for the control of insect-infested and diseased trees, and perform
the duties incidental to a program adopted by the Council, and other duties
as provided by this chapter.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-9-97; Am. Ord. 818, passed 7-12-07; Am. Ord. 864, passed
6-11-09)



§ 152.41  FORESTRY PROGRAM.



   The forestry program shall provide for inspection of trees on public
and private property for the purposes of enforcement of applicable sections
of this code.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-9-97; Am. Ord. 864, passed 6-11-09)



§ 152.42  MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL OF TREES.



   (A)   Duties.  The city shall have the right to maintain and/or
remove trees while performing maintenance duties within any public
right-of-way or easement.  Maintenance duties shall include, but are not
limited to, sidewalk, path, utility and street maintenance and/or repair. 
The city shall notify property owners adjacent to trees that may be impacted
by the performing of maintenance duties.  In cases of emergency maintenance
within a public right-of-way or easement, the city shall attempt to contact
adjacent property owners when trees may have to be maintained and/or removed,
but shall also consider the general health, safety and welfare of the
community with respect to hazards that may exist.



   (B)   Charges for services.  The city may charge the abutting
property owner or legal possessor the cost incurred by the city for
maintenance and/or removal of trees located within any right-of-way or
easement.  Any charges not paid within 30 days of the due date stated on the
city’s invoice shall be deemed delinquent and subject to collection as a
special assessment to be collected in accordance with M.S. § 429.101.



   (C)   Removal of hazard tree.  Any hazard tree on any private
property, which if it fell may land within any public right-of-way or
property owned by another person or entity, shall be removed immediately and
in no case more than 15 days after being served notice by the city to remove
the tree.  Any such tree shall be deemed a public safety hazard and public
nuisance and subject to the provisions for special charges assessment as set
forth in division (B) herein.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-9-97; Am. Ord. 864, passed 6-11-09)



§ 152.43  TREE WORK LICENSE.



   (A)   License required.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
conduct as a business the cutting, trimming, pruning, removal, spraying or
otherwise treating of trees in the city without first having secured a
license from the city to conduct the business.



   (B)   Application; fee and expiration.



      (1)   Application for a license shall be made at the office of
the City Clerk.



      (2)   The application for a license shall be made at the
office of the City Clerk.



      (3)   The annual fee for the license shall be in the amount
specified in the appendix to Chapter 35.



      (4)   All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter
shall expire on December 31 following the date of issue.



   (C)   Liability insurance.  No license or renewal shall be granted,
nor be effective, until the applicant files with the City Clerk proof of a
public liability insurance policy covering all operations of the applicant
hereunder for the sum of at least $300,000 combined single limit coverage. 
The policy shall provide that it may not be canceled by the insurer, except
after ten days written notice to the city, and if the insurance is so
canceled and the licensee fails to replace the same with another policy
conforming to the provisions of this section, the license shall be
automatically suspended until the insurance shall have been replaced.



   (D)   Conformance required.  All contractors licensed under the
requirements of this section shall conform with the abatement methods as
prescribed by this subchapter, as they relate to emerald ash borer
infestation, and Dutch elm and oak wilt diseases.



   (E)   Revocation of license.  Failure to comply with any part of
the tree treating license shall be grounds for revocation of the license by
the City Council, following a public hearing.  Written notice of the public
hearing shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the hearing to the current
holder of the license.  The notice should outline the violation(s)
considered by the city to be grounds for revocation and inform the current
holder of the license of the opportunity to be heard at the public hearing.



   (F)   Chemical treatment requirements.  Applicants, who propose to
use chemical substances in any activity related to treatment or control of
insect-infested and diseased trees, shall file with the City Clerk proof that
the applicant or employee of the applicant administering treatment has been
certified by the Agronomy Division of the state department of agriculture as
a “commercial pesticide applicator.”  Certification shall include
knowledge of tree disease or insect infestation chemical treatment.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-9-97; Am. Ord. 818, passed 7-12-07; Am. Ord. 864, passed
6-11-09)



§ 152.44  MINIMUM HEIGHT OF TREE LIMBS.



   All limbs of trees or portions of limbs which overhang public streets,
sidewalks or paths and are less than ten feet above the surface of any public
sidewalk or path or are less than 13 feet above the surface of any public
street constitute a nuisance and are prohibited.  When limbs of a tree
overhang both a public sidewalk and a public street, they shall be trimmed to
a height of 13 feet above the surface of the street.  This section shall not
apply to any tree to which pruning or trimming would endanger the tree’s
health as determined by the city, unless a public nuisance exists.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-9-97; Am. Ord. 752, passed 6-10-04; Am. Ord. 864, passed
6-11-09)



§ 152.45  SHADE TREE DISEASE REGULATION.



   (A)   Declaration of policy.  The Council has determined that the
health of ash, elm and oak trees within the municipal limits are threatened
by insect infestation known as emerald ash borer, and fatal diseases known as
Dutch elm and oak wilt.  It has further been determined that the loss of
ash, elm and oak trees growing upon public and private property would
substantially depreciate the value of property within the city, and may
impair the health, safety and general welfare of the public.  It is declared
to be the intention of the Council to control the spread of insect
infestation and diseases affecting trees, and this section is enacted for
that purpose.



   (B)   Insect and disease control programs; coordinator.  It is the
intention of the Council to conduct a program of plant pest and disease
control pursuant to the authority granted by M.S. § 18G.13, as amended. 
The program is directed specifically at the control and elimination of the
emerald ash borer, Dutch elm disease fungus, elm bark beetles and oak wilt
fungus, and is undertaken at the recommendation of the Minnesota Department
of Agriculture, the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources and the
University of Minnesota Extension.



   (C)   Nuisance declared.  The following shall constitute a public
nuisance:



      (1)   Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected
to any degree with the Dutch elm disease fungus Ophiostoma Ulmi, or which
harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus Multistriatus (Eichh.) or
Hyluigopinus Rufipes (Marsh);



      (2)   Any living or standing red oak tree or  part thereof
infected to any degree with the oak wilt fungus Ceratocystis Fagacearum;



      (3)   Any dead elm or red oak tree or part thereof, including
logs, branches, stumps, firewood or other elm or oak material from which the
bark has not been removed or sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle
insecticide or oak wilt fungus deterrent; or



      (4)   Any living or standing ash tree, or any part thereof,
harboring or infested with emerald ash borer beetles or larvae or eggs
thereof (Agrilus planipennis); or any dead ash tree or part thereof,
including logs, branches, stumps, firewood, or other ash tree material from
which the bark has not been removed or sprayed with effective emerald ash
borer insecticide.



   (D)   Inspection and investigation.



      (1)   Annual inspection.  The City Forester or assignee shall
inspect all premises within the city, annually or as often as practicable, to
determine whether any condition exists which is in violation of this chapter.
The Forester shall investigate all repeated incidents of tree disease.



      (2)   Entry on private premises.  The Forester or assignee
may enter upon private premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of
carrying out any of the duties assigned.



      (3)   Diagnosis.  In determining tree disease or insect
infestation, the Forester shall use current technical procedures.



   (E)   Nuisance abatement methods.  In abating any public nuisance
as defined in this section, the Forester shall cause the infected tree or
wood to be sprayed, removed or otherwise effectively treated so as to destroy
and prevent the spread of emerald ash borer, Dutch elm disease fungus, elm
bark beetles, oak wilt fungus or other regulated tree disease.  Any
abatement shall be carried out in the following manner:



      (1)   In trees infected with Dutch elm disease that have the
potential to spread the disease, any portion of the tree larger than two
inches in diameter shall have the bark removed, chipped or covered with at
least four mil plastic, making a tight seal to the ground, until the bark
falls off.



      (2)   Pre-sporulating red oak wood, infected with oak wilt
fungus, that is larger than two inches in diameter shall have the bark
removed, chipped or covered with at least four mil plastic, making a tight
seal to the ground, until the bark falls off.



      (3)   All ash tree wood must be chipped into pieces no larger
than one inch diameter.



      (4)   Other current technical procedures which are accepted by
such agencies as the Minnesota Department of Agriculture, the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources or the University of Minnesota may be
utilized with city approval.



   (F)   Procedure for removal of infected trees and wood.  Whenever
the Forester finds that infestation or disease exists in any tree or wood in
any public or private place in the city, the Forester shall proceed as
follows:



      (1)   If the Forester finds that danger of insect infestation
or spread of tree disease is imminent, the Forester may order any treatment
or tree removal determined to be necessary to abate the nuisance.



      (2)   In all other cases, prior to any treatment or removal,
the Forester shall cause written notice of proposed actions to be sent by
regular mail or personally delivered to the occupant or the owner of the
premises.  Failure to give notice shall not invalidate the city’s
actions.  The Forester may order any treatment or tree removal determined
necessary to abate the nuisance.



   (G)   Payment for abatement.  Any costs incurred by the city in
connection with the city’s abatement of any diseased tree, as permitted in
this section, shall be the responsibility of the property owner.  The city
may charge the property owner or legal possessor the cost incurred by the
city in connection with the abatement of any diseased tree.  Any charges not
paid by the property owner or legal possessor within 30 days of the due date
stated on the city’s invoice shall be deemed delinquent and subject to
collection as a special assessment, which shall be collected in accordance
with M.S. § 429.101.



   (H)   Transporting of infected ash, elm or oak wood.  It is
unlawful for any person to transport within the city any infected,
bark-bearing ash, elm or oak wood determined to be a nuisance by the
Forester.  The Forester shall grant permission for the transportation of the
wood only when the purpose of this chapter is served.



   (I)   Unlawful acts.  A violation of this section is declared to be
a public nuisance and it is unlawful for any person to permit the public
nuisance to remain on any property owned or controlled by the person within
the city.  All public nuisances may be abated by the city and the costs
thereof assessed against the property as prescribed in Chapter 94 of the code.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-9-97; Am. Ord. 712, passed 4-25-02; Am. Ord. 818, passed
7-12-07; Am. Ord. 864, passed 6-11-09; Am. Ord. 930, passed 4-12-12) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.46  TREE PRESERVATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Tree removal and replacement.  Removal or loss of significant
trees shall be in accordance with the city-approved tree preservation
component of the natural resources management plan.  All significant trees
on the property, as identified in the tree preservation component of the
plan, shall be tagged with the coordinating number as stated in the plan
before any project work begins and shall remain tagged until completion of
the project.  Tree removal and replacement shall be as follows:



      (1)   For individual lot development for commercial,
industrial, and institutional uses, 10% of the total number of diameter
inches of significant trees removed must be replaced with caliper inches
within the subject lot.  Trees replaced under this requirement may be used
to satisfy part of the landscape requirement for the lot;



      (2)   For individual lot development for residential use, when
tree removal that occurs within the building footprint, impervious surface
areas (such as driveways and sidewalks), or within 20 feet of foundation
walls and:



         (a)   Exceeds six significant trees, replacement shall
consist of a maximum of 12 caliper inches, located on the subject lot; or



         (b)   Consists of six significant trees or less,
replacement shall consist of a minimum of two caliper inches for every
significant tree removed, located on the subject lot;



      (3)   When tree removal occurs more than 20 feet outside the
foundation walls, replacement shall be a minimum of two caliper inches for
every significant tree removed, located on the subject lot; and



      (4)   For all projects not covered by divisions (1), (2) and
(3) above including, but not limited to, subdivision grading, 10% of the
total number of diameter inches of significant trees removed must be replaced
with caliper inches within the subdivision.  Trees replaced under this
requirement may be used to satisfy part of any landscape plan requirements
under this code.



   (B)   Size, types, diversification of replacement trees. No more
than one-third of the replacement trees shall be of the same species of tree,
without approval of the city.  Box elder, poplar, willow and silver maple
are not permitted as replacement trees.  Replacement trees must be no less
than the following sizes:



      (1)   Deciduous trees shall be no less than two caliper
inches; and



      (2)   Coniferous trees shall be no less than six feet high.



   (C)   Time to perform.  Replacement trees shall be planted prior to
the expiration of the permit or within 30 days of completion of all
construction on the property, whichever first occurs, unless otherwise
approved by the city for reasons of time of planting season. The applicant
shall inform the city when all replacement trees have been planted in order
that the city may inspect the subject property for compliance with the tree
preservation component.



   (D)   Quality of replacement trees. Replacement trees shall be
healthy stock, free of insects and disease and meet the guidelines set by the
American Standards of Nursery Stock.



   (E)   Violation of natural resources management plan-Tree
Preservation Component. The applicant shall comply with the following
requirements if any loss of any significant tree, as defined herein, occurs
in violation of the city-approved tree preservation component of the natural
resources management plan for the subject property:



      (1)   Replace the diameter inches of the significant tree lost
with equal caliper inches in accordance with division (B) of this section; and



      (2)   Any loss of a significant oak tree shall be replaced by
an oak tree and the location of the replacement oak tree shall be determined
by the city.



   (F)   The applicant shall comply with the foregoing requirements
upon a 30-day written notice by the city of the loss of a significant tree in
violation of the city-approved tree preservation component of the natural
resources management plan.



(Ord. 864, passed 6-11-09)



WATER RESOURCES



§ 152.55  STORM  AND SURFACE WATER REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Conformance with operational plans. All construction,
land-disturbing activity, and new development shall comply with any
applicable operational plan.



   (B)   Maintenance agreement.  The property owner of the land for
which a project is proposed and an NRMP is required shall enter into an
agreement with the city which shall be approved by the city and shall provide
for design specifications, the maintenance and inspection requirements and
right of access, for any permanent stormwater management device, facility, or
structure for infiltration and filtration as required by this chapter.  The
agreement shall apply to the current property owner and to any assigns, heirs
or subsequent owners of the property.  The duly executed agreement, and any
amendment thereto, shall be recorded against the property with the Dakota
County Recorder’s Office.



   (C)   Temporary erosion and sediment control standards.



      (1)   All projects requiring an NRMP, regardless of
disturbance size, shall, at a minimum, meet the construction activity
requirements specified in the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency NPDES Permit
for construction activity.  Such minimum standard shall not prohibit the
city from requiring further protection measures as deemed necessary to
prevent pollution or protect human health, welfare, or safety as set forth in
this chapter.



      (2)   No land disturbing activity shall commence without first
properly installing BMPs, unless written permission is granted otherwise by
the city.



      (3)   Temporary erosion and sediment controls shall be
installed and maintained while any disturbance of land is undertaken so as to
prevent and reduce pollution entering any water body or stormwater facility.
Temporary erosion and sediment controls are required even if an NRMP is not
required for the activity and said controls shall be as required herein for
any activity for which an NRMP is required.



   (D)   No person shall deposit or permit the deposit of any illicit
discharge into the city’s stormwater system.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-9-97; Am. Ord. 712, passed 4-25-02; Am. Ord. 864, passed
6-11-09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.56  WETLAND CONSERVATION REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this code, the Minnesota
Wetland Conservation statutes and regulations (commonly referred to
collectively as the Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act), as amended, are
hereby incorporated herein and adopted by reference, including the penalty
provisions thereof.



   (B)   Wetland replacement and mitigation must follow the priorities
and standards set forth in any applicable watershed management operational
plan and the Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act.  When regulations or
standards conflict, the more restrictive standard shall be applied.



   (C)   No excavation in Type 1, 2, 6, and 7 wetlands shall be
permitted unless the applicant demonstrates an environmental benefit to the
wetland with no or minimal loss of wetland function.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-9-97; Am. Ord. 864, passed 6-11-09)



§ 152.57  PROTECTIVE BUFFER ZONE.



   (A)   Scope of application.  This section shall apply to any
property included within any plat for which an application therefor was filed
on or after the effective date of this section or for which an NRMP
application was filed on or after the effective date of this section.  This
section shall not apply to any of the following:



      (1)   Structures located within a protective buffer zone on
the effective date of this section or the remodeling, reconstruction or
replacement of the structures provided that it does not take up additional
land within the protective buffer zone;



      (2)   The construction or maintenance of public drainage
facilities or temporary erosion control



improvements;



      (3)   The construction or maintenance of public utilities,
provided there is no other practical alternate location; or



      (4)   The land-disturbing activity for which the NRMP
application is submitted causes no surface water runoff from the subject
property to discharge toward any abutting water body or the project for which
the NRMP is issued does not create more than 0.2 acres of new impervious
surface.



   (B)   Protective buffer zone required.  A protective buffer zone
shall be established and maintained with a minimum required width consisting
of the area between the line delineating the water body edge and a line
parallel to and upland the following feet from the water body edge:



      (1)   16.5 feet for properties abutting Alimagnet, Lac Lavon,
Long, Keller and Farquar Lakes;



      (2)   16.5 feet for any stormwater pond that was not
constructed within or upon a pre-existing or altered pre-existing wetland,
regardless if the water body may have wetland characteristics; or



      (3)   For any natural wetland or replacement wetland, the
buffer width shall be as identified and set forth on the city’s wetland map
on file with the city’s Public Works Department; for any natural wetland or
replacement wetland that is not identified on the city’s wetland map, the
buffer width shall be as set forth in the city’s October 25, 2007 SWMP in
accordance with the wetland’s management classification and ranking as
determined by the standards in the city’s SWMP.  Notwithstanding the
foregoing buffer width requirements, in the case of a subdivision of land and
an existing principal residential structure is proposed to remain on one of
the newly subdivided lots, the buffer width on the lot with the existing
principal structure may be limited to 16.5, however, if there is at any time
any land disturbing activity requiring an NRMP on the lot with the existing
principal structure, then the buffer width shall comply with the above
prescribed widths.



   (C)   On all public and private property which abuts any water body
for which a protective buffer zone is required under this chapter, a
protective buffer zone shall be preserved or established and maintained in
accordance with the following requirements:



      (1)   When a natural resources management plan is required,
all proposed buffer zones shall be shown on the plan;



      (2)   Any buffer zone that is to be preserved or established
shall have approved erosion and sediment control measures installed and
inspected prior to any land disturbing activity;



      (3)   Vegetation within the buffer shall be established as
follows:



         (a)   Where a continuous growth of perennial vegetation
exists that has been confirmed by city inspection, such vegetation shall be
retained as the buffer with protective measures in place to prevent
disturbance during construction with the following exceptions:



            1.   Where erosion problems exist, correction of
the problem shall be required, and the method thereof, as approved by the
city within the affected segment of the buffer.  Permanent stabilization of
the impacted area must meet the requirements for new buffer establishment; and



            2.   Where the existing vegetation contains weeds
and rank vegetation, such vegetation shall be removed as required by the
city.  Following removal, permanent stabilization of the impacted area must
meet the requirements for new buffer establishment;



         (b)   When the existing vegetation in the buffer zone at
the time of establishing the buffer is not  a continuous growth of perennial
vegetation that has been confirmed and approved by city inspection, a native
plant buffer shall be established as approved by the city.  The buffer
establishment plan shall include a listing of plants to be installed or seed
mix used, method of installation, provision for replanting or seeding where
establishment does not take, a diagram of the planting scheme if varied
within the buffer, a listing of all materials used, and an erosion and
sediment control plan; and



         (c)   Erosion and sediment control measures shall be
maintained until land disturbing activities are complete and all disturbed
areas are permanently stabilized;



      (4)   A security shall be required and remain on deposit with
the city until it is determined by the city that the buffer has been
permanently established according to the provisions of this chapter for a
period of no less than 18 months or two growing seasons after installation;
establishment of a cover crop for temporary erosion control purposes shall
not constitute a successful permanent establishment;



      (5)   When platting, the plat shall show any water body edge
as approved by the city; and



      (6)   The protective buffer zone shall be memorialized in
perpetuity by a written document approved by the city and a certified survey
of the lot, which shall be recorded at the Dakota County Recorder’s Office
against the property by the property owner and which shall establish the
location of the buffer(s), restrictions, allowances, any permitted trail, and
any management requirements.



   (D)   Buffer restrictions.  The owner or occupant of any property
which has a protective buffer zone established thereon shall not conduct or
permit any of the following activities within the protective buffer zone:



      (1)   Vegetation alteration, including but not limited to:
clear-cutting, mowing, burning, introduction of non-native species, plowing,
cutting, grazing, pesticide application, fertilizer application, or
cultivation, unless it meets standards for allowable activities and is
approved in writing by the city;



      (2)   Topographic alteration, including but not limited to
grading, filling, excavation and extractions;



      (3)   Construction, placement or installation of any
structure, including retaining walls, or impervious surface;



      (4)   Dumping or disposing of any material, including but not
limited to yard waste, garbage, soil, mulches; or



      (5)   Installation of beaches, rocks, or boulders.



   (E)   Activities allowed within the buffer area upon written
approval from the city include the following:



      (1)   Removal of noxious weeds and rank vegetation as defined
by the city or plants on state or county noxious weeds lists by pulling,
mechanical control, biological control, or spot herbicide treatments;



      (2)   Removal of diseased plants or limbs, or plants or limbs
that cause a hazard;



      (3)   Mowing, burning, fertilizer application, and pesticide
application to manage and maintain a healthy native plant community as
approved by the city;



      (4)   Native plantings that enhance the buffer;



      (5)   Activities included within an approved wetland
replacement plan;



      (6)   Multi-purpose trails provided the following are met:



         (a)   The trail shall be a pervious surface and consist
of non-polluting materials;



         (b)   A minimum of ten feet of buffer is maintained
between the trail and the edge of the water body;



         (c)   The minimum impact alignment is used for trails
that cross water bodies;



         (d)   The area of the buffer impacted by the trail and
any associated maintained shoulders shall be replaced by adding the total
square footage of the trail and associated shoulders thereof within the
buffer zone to the width of the buffer that is otherwise required;



         (e)   Any impacts to wetlands or public waters comply
with applicable state and local regulations;



         (f)   Installation of the trail is in compliance with
other provisions of the code, including but not limited to floodplain control;



         (g)   No established agreement exists, including but not
limited to conservation easements, that otherwise restricts or prohibits
trail installation or other alterations; and



         (h)   The functions of the buffer to prevent erosion and
treat stormwater runoff prior to entering the adjacent water body are
preserved; stormwater flowing toward the trail is treated prior to entering
the adjacent water body;



      (7)   Beaches on Alimagnet, Long, Farquar, Lac Lavon, and
Keller Lakes are permitted, provided the following requirements are met:



         (a)   The created beach extends no more than half the
length of the shoreline, not to exceed fifty feet, with an upland
encroachment of no more than fifteen feet from the water body edge as defined
within this chapter;



         (b)   Sand installed is clean and weed free;



         (c)   Design is such that no barrier is installed as to
prohibit infiltration into the subsoil;



         (d)   The functions of the buffer to prevent erosion and
treat stormwater flows prior to entering the adjacent water body are
preserved; stormwater flowing toward the beach is treated prior to entering
the lake;



         (e)   The area of buffer impacted by beach installation
is replaced elsewhere along the water body edge and memorialized;



         (f)   Sand applications occur no more than once every
four years;



         (g)   The beach is not placed within a wetland or
otherwise causes the conversion of wetland to non-wetland;



         (h)   Any alterations, including but not limited to sand
applications, below the OHW or NWL comply with state requirements;



         (i)   No established agreement exists, including but not
limited to conservation easements, that otherwise restricts or prohibits
beach installation or other alterations; and



         (j)   Compliance with other provisions of the Code,
including but not limited to floodplain control;



      (8)   Use and maintenance of an unimproved access strip not
more than ten feet in width that uses the minimum impact alignment; and



      (9)   Land disturbing activity that is proposed outside of any
established buffer zone which may impact the buffer zone and/or water body
shall be approved by the city before the activity begins.



   (F)   Protective buffer zone identified. The upland boundary line of
the buffer zone shall be identified by permanent markers, which have been
approved by the city, at each lot line, and one at every 50-foot interval. 
All markers shall be correctly installed prior to the issuance of any NRMP.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-9-97; Am. Ord. 712, passed 4-25-02; Am. Ord. 864, passed
6-11-09)



CHAPTER 153:  SUBDIVISION CONTROL



Section



General Provisions



   153.01   Purpose



   153.02   Filing of conveyance of land



   153.03   [Reserved]



   153.04   Interpretation



   153.05   Conflict with provisions



   153.06   Definitions



Plat Procedures



   153.20   Building permit required; application



   153.21   Petitions



   153.22   Sketch plan



   153.23   Preliminary plat; information



   153.24   Final plat; information



   153.25   Grading of site prior to final plat



   153.26   Effective period of preliminary plat; zoning regulations



   153.27   Related findings



   153.28   Platting additions



   153.29   Public use dedication requirements



   153.30   Landlocked parcels



   153.31   Fees



   153.32   Council vote; plat approval without variance



   153.33   Permits prior to public utilities



   153.34   Property descriptions



   153.35   [Reserved]



   153.36   Model homes



Design Standards and Requirements



   153.50   Design standards



   153.51   Street design



   153.52   Sidewalks, trails or pathways



   153.53   Easements



   153.54   Block dimensions



   153.55   Lot dimensions



   153.56   Building locations



   153.57   Existing buildings



   153.58   Public and park spaces



   153.59   Planting of street trees



   153.60   Environmental protection



   153.61   Underground utilities



   153.62   Required improvements; payments



   153.63   Utilities, streets and sidewalks



   153.64   Noise barriers



Administration and Enforcement



   153.75   Zoning Administrator



   153.76   Board of Appeals and Adjustments



   153.77   Variances and waivers



   153.78   Plats; amendments



   153.79   Fees, costs and escrows



 



   153.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 153.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:



   (A)   To protect and provide for the public health, safety and
general welfare to the city;



   (B)   To guide the future growth and development of the city in
accordance with the comprehensive guide plan, the official map and the
capital improvement program of the city;



   (C)   To provide for adequate light, air and privacy, to secure
safety of the land and undue congestion of population;



   (D)   To protect the character and the social and economic stability
of all areas and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of the
city;



   (E)   To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the city
and the value of buildings and improvements upon the land and to minimize the
conflicts among the uses of land and buildings;



   (F)   To guide public and private policy and action in order to
provide adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools,
parks, playgrounds, recreation and other public requirements and facilities;



   (G)   To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses
of land and buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the city
having particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and
highways, and the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various
uses of land and buildings and to provide for the proper location and width
of streets and building lines;



   (H)   To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for
subdivisions and resubdivisions in order to further the orderly layout and
use of land; and to ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of
subdivided land;



   (I)   To ensure that public facilities are available and will have
sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision;



   (J)   To prevent the pollution of air, streams, ponds; to assure the
adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to
encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the
city in order to preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the city and
the value of the land;



   (K)   To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the city and
to ensure appropriate development with regard to these natural features;



   (L)   To provide for open spaces through the most efficient design
layout of the land;



   (M)   To preserve agricultural and other open lands; and



   (N)   To promote the availability of housing affordable to all
persons and families of all income levels.



(‘81 Code, § B1-1)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



§ 153.02  FILING OF CONVEYANCE OF LAND.



   No conveyance of land to which these regulations are applicable shall
be filed or recorded with the Dakota County Recorder’s Office if the land
is described in the conveyance by metes and bounds or by reference to an
unapproved registered land survey made after April 21, 1961, or to an
unapproved plat made after the regulations became effective.  The foregoing
provision does not apply to a conveyance if the land described:



   (A)   Was a separate parcel of record, as of December 21, 1954;



   (B)   Was a separate parcel of not less than 2½ acres in area and
150 feet in width on January 1, 1966;



   (C)   Is a single parcel of land of not less than five acres and
having a width of not less than 300 feet, as of July 1, 1980;



   (D)   Is a single parcel of commercial or industrial land of not
less than five acres and having a width of not less than 300 feet and its
conveyance does not result in the division of the parcel into two or more
lots or parcels, any one of which is less than five acres or 300 feet in
width; or



   (E)   Is a single parcel of residential or agricultural land of not
less than 20 acres and having a width of not less than 500 feet and its
conveyance does not result in the division of the parcel into two or more
lots or parcels, any one of which is less than 20 acres in area or 500 feet
in width.



(‘81 Code, § B1-2)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



§ 153.03  [RESERVED].



§ 153.04  INTERPRETATION.



   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these
regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of
the public health, safety and general welfare.



(‘81 Code, § B1-5)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



§ 153.05  CONFLICT WITH PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Public provisions.  These regulations are not intended to
interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation,
statute or other provision of law.  Where any provision of these regulations
imposes restriction different from those imposed by any other provision of
these regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of the law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose
higher standards shall control.



   (B)   Private provisions.  These regulations are not intended to
abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or
restriction, provided that where the provision of these regulations are more
restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than the easement,
covenant or other private agreement or restriction, the requirements of these
regulations shall govern.



(‘81 Code, § B1-5)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



§ 153.06  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABUTTING.  As defined in Chapter 155, the city’s zoning chapter.



   ALLEY.  A minor public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of
vehicular access to abutting property.



   ADMINISTRATOR.  The Apple Valley City Administrator.



   APPLICANT.  The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his
representative.  Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the
premises.



   ATTORNEY.  The Apple Valley City Attorney.



   BLOCK.  An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded
by streets or a combination of streets, exterior boundary lines of the
subdivision and/or bodies of water.



   BOND.  Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond or
letter of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the City Council.



   BOULEVARD.  Portion of a street right-of-way between the curb or curb
line and the property line.



   BUILDING.  Any structure having a roof which may shelter or enclose
persons, animals or chattel.



   BUILDING SETBACK.  The minimum horizontal distance from a lot boundary
to the nearest part of the foundation wall, except that no roof, eave or
overhang shall project more than 30 inches into the setback zone.



   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM. A proposed city schedule of future
projects or capital purchases listed in order of priority together with cost
estimates and the anticipated means of financing each project.



   COMMISSION.  The Planning Commission of the City of Apple Valley.



   COMPREHENSIVE GUIDE PLAN.  The duly adopted plan guiding the land use
development of the city.



   CONSTRUCTION PLAN.  The map or drawing accompanying a subdivision plat
and illustrating the specific location and design of improvements to be
installed in the subdivision in accordance with engineering and ordinance
requirements of the city and as conditioned in the approval of the plat.



   COUNCIL.  The Apple Valley City Council.



   COUNTY RECORDER.  The COUNTY RECORDER when referred to abstract or
registered property under the torrens system in Dakota County, Minnesota.



   CUL-DE-SAC.  A local street with only one vehicular outlet and having
an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic.



   DAKOTA COUNTY PLAT COMMITTEE.  A committee established by the Dakota
County, Minnesota, Board of Commissioners to review plats.



   DEVELOPER.  The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his or her
representative.  Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the
premises.



   DWELLING.  As defined in Chapter 155, the city’s zoning chapter.



   EASEMENT.  Authorization by a property owner for the use by another,
and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of his or her property.



   ESCROW.  A deposit of cash in lieu of an amount required and still in
force on a performance or maintenance bond.



   ENGINEER.  The Apple Valley City Engineer.



   EXCAVATION.  As defined in Chapter 155, the city’s zoning chapter.



   FINAL PLAT.  A drawing, in final form, showing a proposed subdivision
containing all information and detail required by state statutes and by this
chapter to be presented to the City Council for approval, and which, if
approved, may be duly filed with the County Register of Deeds.



   FRONTAGE.  The side of a lot abutting on a public street right-of-way.



   GOVERNING BODY.  The Apple Valley City Council.



   GRADE.  The slope specified in percentage terms.



   HIGHWAY, LIMITED ACCESS.  A freeway or expressway, providing a
trafficway for through traffic, in respect to which owners or occupants of
abutting property of lands and other persons have no legal right to access to
or from the same, except at points and in a manner as may be determined by
the public authority having jurisdiction over the trafficway.



   IMPROVEMENTS.  See definition of “public improvements.”



   LICENSED ENGINEER.  A person licensed as a professional civil engineer
by the State of Minnesota.



   LOT.  As defined in Chapter 155, the city’s zoning chapter.



      (1)   CORNER LOT.  As defined in Chapter 155, the city’s
zoning chapter.



      (2)   THROUGH LOT.  As defined in Chapter 155, the city’s
zoning chapter.



   LOT AREA.  As defined in Chapter 155, the city’s zoning chapter.



   LOT DEPTH.  As defined in Chapter 155, the city’s zoning chapter.



   LOT LINE.  As defined in Chapter 155, the city’s zoning chapter.



      (1)   FRONT LOT LINE.  As defined in Chapter 155, the
city’s zoning chapter.



      (2)   REAR LOT LINE.  As defined in Chapter 155, the city’s
zoning chapter.



      (3)   SIDE LOT LINE.  As defined in Chapter 155, the city’s
zoning chapter.



   LOT OF RECORD.  As defined in Chapter 155, the city’s zoning chapter.



   LOT WIDTH.  As defined in Chapter 155, the city’s zoning chapter.



   MODEL HOME.  A dwelling unit used initially for display purposes which
typifies the type of units that will be constructed in the subdivision. 
Dwelling units may be erected, at the discretion of the city, by permitting a
portion of a subdivision to be temporarily developed for this purpose.



   MULTIPLE DWELLING.  A structure used for residential living uses and
having more than one dwelling unit in the same building.



   NONACCESS EASEMENT.  An easement restricting vehicular access from a
public street to public or private property.



   OFFICIAL MAP.  A map duly adopted by the Apple Valley City Council
pursuant to the provisions of Minnesota State Statutes.



   OUTLOT.  A platted lot to be developed for a use which will not
involve a building or be reserved for future replatting before development.



   OWNER.  Any individual, firm, corporation, association, syndicate,
partnership or trust but shall mean the fee owner or owners and may include
others with an interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and
maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under these regulations.



   PEDESTRIAN WAY.  A public pedestrian walkway provided between lots
where required by the city to allow for pedestrian accessibility to streets
or public service areas.  This may also be referred to as a “trailway.”



   PERFORMANCE BOND.  A bond granted by the person(s) platting property
to the city to guarantee the installation of improvements required herin.



   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT.  As defined in Chapter 155, the city’s zoning
chapter.



   PLANNING COMMISSION.  The duly appointed Planning Commission of the
City of Apple Valley, Minnesota.



   PRELIMINARY PLAT. A drawing clearly marked “PRELIMINARY PLAT”
showing salient features of a proposed subdivision as specified in this
chapter.



   PROTECTIVE COVENANT.  A contract between parties which constitutes a
restriction on the use of the property for the benefit of the owners.



   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT.  Any drainage ditch, street, sidewalk, public
utility, pedestrian way, tree or other facility for which the local
government may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and
operation, or which may affect an improvement for which local government
responsibility is established.



   PUBLIC LAND.  Land owned and/or operated by a governmental unit.



   PUBLIC SERVICES.  Nongovernmental services provided by private utility
companies including gas, electric, cable TV, telephone, etc.



   PUBLICATION.  An official notice, as prescribed by state statutes, in
a newspaper so designated for this purpose by the City Council.



   REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION.  This shall mean the Metropolitan
Council of the Twin Cities Metropolitan Area.



   REGISTERED ENGINEER.  An engineer properly licensed and registered in
the State of Minnesota.



   REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR.  A land surveyor properly licensed and
registered in the State of Minnesota.



   REPLAT.  The platting of an area that was previously platted.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by
a public street, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas
pipeline, water main, sanitary sewer or storm sewer main, shade trees or for
another special use.  The usage of the term RIGHT-OF-WAY for landplatting
purposes shall mean that every RIGHT-OF-WAY hereafter established and shown
on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels
adjoining the RIGHT-OF-WAY and not included within the dimensions or areas of
the lots or parcels.  RIGHTS- OF-WAY intended for streets, crosswalks, water
mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, shade trees or any other use involving
maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the maker
of the plat on which the RIGHT-OF-WAY is established.



   SCREENING.  A strip of densely planted or natural growth with shrubs
or trees at least four feet high at the time of planting, of a type that will
form a year-round dense screen at least six feet high or an opaque wall or
barrier or uniformly painted fence at least six feet high.  Either planting
or barrier shall be maintained in good condition at all times and may have no
signs affixed to or hung in relation to the outside thereof.



   SHALL.  Is mandatory.



   SKETCH PLAN.  A sketch of a proposed subdivision showing information
specified in § 153.22.



   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM.  A set of devices whose primary purpose is to
collect solar energy and convert and store it for useful purposes including
heating and cooling of buildings and other energy using processes, or to
produce generated power by means of any combination of collecting,
transferring or converting solar generated energy.



   SOLAR SKYSPACE.  The space between a solar collector and the sun which
must be free of obstructions that shade the collector to an extent which
precludes its cost effective operation.



   STREET.  A public right-of-way which affords a primary means of access
to abutting property.



      (1)   ARTERIAL STREET.  A street which serves or is designed
to serve heavy flows of traffic and which is primarily used as a route for
traffic between communities and/or heavy traffic generating areas.



      (2)   COLLECTOR STREET.  A street which serves or is designed
to serve as a traffic-way for a neighborhood or as a feeder to an arterial
street.



      (3)   DEAD-END or CUL-DE-SAC STREET.  A street with only one
vehicular outlet.



      (4)   HALF STREET.  A street designed to provide access to
only one side of the right-of-way.



      (5)   LOCAL STREET.  A street to serve primarily as an access
to abutting properties.



      (6)   PRIVATE STREET.  A street which is not dedicated to the
city for public use.



      (7)   SERVICE STREET.  A marginal access street which is
generally parallel to and adjacent to a major street.



   STREET PAVEMENT.  The wearing surface of a street.



   STREET WIDTH.  The width of the right-of-way, measured at right angles
to the center line of the street.



   SUBDIVIDER.  Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association
who shall lay out any subdivision or part thereof as defined herein, either
by himself, herself or with others.



   SUBDIVISION.  The division of any parcel of land into two or more
lots, blocks or parcels.  It also includes resubdivision of land and when
appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing.



   SUBDIVISION GRADING.  The movement, compacting, storage or removal of
soil from an approved preliminary or final plat or subdivision, the purpose
of which is to match the grades stipulated on the approved preliminary plat
grading plan.



   SURVEYOR.  A person duly registered as a land surveyor by the state.



   STRUCTURE.  As defined in Chapter 155, the city’s zoning chapter.



   TRAILWAY.  An area so designated on a plat for public trail use in a
manner regulated by the city.



   USE.  As defined in Chapter 155, the city’s zoning chapter.



   VARIANCE.  An exception granted by the City Council from the literal
provisions of these subdivision regulations where unique conditions exist
which do not apply to the area in general.



   YARD.  As defined in Chapter 155, the city’s zoning chapter.



   ZONING DISTRICT.  As defined in Chapter 155, the city’s zoning
chapter.



(‘81 Code, § B1-9)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 521, passed
10-10-91)



PLAT PROCEDURES



§ 153.20  BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   (A)   No building permit shall be granted for the erection of any
building or structure upon lands which are not platted in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter or which was platted as an outlot. 



(‘81 Code, § B1-4)



   (B)   (1)   Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, before
any binding contract is made for the sale of any part thereof, before the
subdivision is recorded with Dakota County and before any permit for the
erection of a structure in the proposed subdivision shall be granted, the
subdividing owner, or his or her authorized agent, shall apply for and secure
approval of the proposed subdivision in accordance with the following
procedure, which includes basically three steps for a subdivision:



         (a)   Sketch plan (optional);



         (b)   Preliminary plat; and



         (c)   Final plat.



      (2)   Certain exceptions to these procedures are detailed in
§§ 153.02 and § 153.03.



(‘81 Code, § B1-10) 



(Ord. 293, § 1, 4-21-83)



§ 153.21  PETITIONS.



   All petitions for preliminary plats and final plats shall be filed with
the City Clerk and shall include all of the information required on the
petition form provided by the city and all of the information required by
this chapter.  It shall be the obligation of the petitioner to provide all
required information and failure to do so may be used as a reason for the
City Council to deny the petition.



(‘81 Code, § B1-11)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



§ 153.22  SKETCH PLAN.



   (A)   Plan optional; review procedure.



      (1)   Subdividers may, at their option, prepare a subdivision
sketch plan for review with the city’s Planning Commission.  For large
acreages in particular, subdividers are urged to avail themselves of this
informal review.



      (2)   The sketch plan will be considered as submitted for
informal discussion between the subdivider and the city’s Planning
Commission and no fee shall be required of the subdivider for the submission
of the sketch plan.  Submission of the subdivision sketch plan shall not
constitute formal filing of a plan with the city.  As far as may be
practical on the basis of the sketch plan, the City Planning Commission will
informally advise the subdivider as promptly as possible of the extent to
which the proposed subdivision conforms to the design standards of this
section and the comprehensive guide plan of the city, and will discuss
possible modifications necessary to secure approval of the plan.



      (3)   To initiate a sketch plan review, the subdivider shall
only be required to submit a letter requesting same, addressed to the City
Planning Commission including ten copies of the proposed sketch plan.  The
sketch plan review shall be placed on the next regular meeting agenda of the
Planning Commission.



(‘81 Code, § B1-12)



   (B)   Information required.  A sketch plan shall contain as a
minimum, the following information:



      (1)   Tract boundaries;



      (2)   North point;



      (3)   Streets adjacent to and on the tract;



      (4)   Significant topographical and physical features;



      (5)   Proposed general street layout;



      (6)   Proposed general land use;



      (7)   Name of owner and/or developer;



      (8)   Zoning on and adjacent to the tract; and



      (9)   Potential park or ponding sites.



(‘81 Code, § B1-31)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



§ 153.23  PRELIMINARY PLAT; INFORMATION.



   (A)   Petition; copies.



      (1)   Information with petition.  The preliminary plat, as a
minimum, shall include the following information and additional information
as may be deemed necessary by the city for review and action on the petition:



         (a)   Eighteen copies of the preliminary plat including
all preliminary plat information required in this chapter;



         (b)   Fees as established by resolution of the City
Council;



         (c)   Abstractor’s certificate of the property owners
within 350 feet;



         (d)   Exact legal description of property; and



         (e)   Completed and signed petition form.



      (2)   Staff review.  Within ten days after the preliminary
plat has been filed with the city, the city staff shall complete the initial
review to determine if all required petition information has been filed.  If
it has not, the petitioner shall be so informed, however, failure by the city
to inform the petitioner does not obligate the city in any manner.



      (3)   Public hearing.



         (a)   When the petition is complete, the City Clerk
shall advertise for a public hearing before the Planning Commission under the
same provisions for which a public hearing is advertised and notices are
mailed for a rezoning ordinance, § 155.400, and shall at the same time,
forward a copy to the school district for review and comment at the public
hearing where deemed appropriate by the school district.



         (b)   The Planning Commission shall hold a public
hearing on the advertised date and time and afford all interested persons an
opportunity to be heard.  Within 30 days of the closing of the hearing, but
in no event later than 90 days after acceptance of the petition by the city,
the Planning Commission shall report its findings or make a recommendation on
the preliminary plat to the City Council.



      (4)   Approval.



         (a)   Within 120 days of acceptance of a petition
submitted in compliance with this chapter, the City Council shall approve or
deny the preliminary plat, unless the subdivider gives written consent,
wherein the City Council shall have additional time to either approve or deny
the preliminary plat.  This provision is intended to be in full compliance
with M.S. § 462.358.



         (b)   Approval shall be for a period of two years after
action by the City Council unless otherwise specified by the City Council. 
Upon expiration of the time limit, all approvals for preliminary plats or
portions thereof for which a final plat has not been recorded with Dakota
County, shall be null and void and a new petition and processing shall be
necessary to revalidate the preliminary plat unless the City Council shall
grant an extension of time prior to the expiration date.



(‘81 Code, § B1-13)



   (B)   Data required.  A preliminary plat shall contain as a minimum
the following data, except where deviations are approved by the City Council
or where a specific variance is granted by the City Council.



      (1)   Identification and description.



         (a)   Proposed name of subdivision, which name shall not
duplicate or be similar to the name of any other plat;



         (b)   Location by section, town, range or by other legal
description;



         (c)   Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider,
surveyor and designer of the plan;



         (d)   North point;



         (e)   Date of preparation;



         (f)   Graphic scale; and



         (g)   Certificate of boundary survey by a registered
engineer if required by the city.



      (2)   Existing conditions.



         (a)   Boundary line of proposed subdivision clearly
indicated;



         (b)   Existing zoning classification;



         (c)   Total acreage;



         (d)   Location, widths and names of all existing or
previously platted streets or other public way, showing type, width and also
conditions of improvements, if any, railroad and utility rights-of- way,
parks and other public spaces, permanent buildings and structures, easements
and section and corporate line within the tract, and to a distance of 100
feet beyond the tract.  Data such as grades, invert elevations and locations
of catch basins, manholes and hydrants, if any, shall also be shown;



         (e)   Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided and
subdivided land within 100 feet, identifying by name and ownership, including
parcels beyond city boundaries;



         (f)   Topographical data, including contours at vertical
intervals of not more than two feet, except that contour lines shall be no
more than 100 feet apart.  Watercourses, marshes, wooded areas, rock
outcrops, power transmission lines and poles, buildings and other significant
features shall also be shown;



         (g)   All elevations, topography and vertical control
data shall be tied to sea level datum, 1929 general adjustments.  Temporary
benchmarks shall be established within the boundaries of the subdivision. 
Descriptions, reference ties and elevations of the benchmarks shall be
furnished to the City Engineer;



         (h)   Reference to recorded subdivision plat or
adjoining platted land by record, name, date and number; and



         (i)   The location and size of all existing sanitary
sewer, water or storm sewer, trunks, laterals or services on or adjacent to
the property.



      (3)   Design features.



         (a)   Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of
streets, easements and other rights-of-way and property lines of residential
lots and other sites;



         (b)   Name and right-of-way width of each street or
other right-of-way;



         (c)   Location, dimensions and purposes of any easements;



         (d)   An identification system for all lots and blocks;



         (e)   Site data including number of residential lots,
lot size, acres in park and similar lot data;



         (f)   Sites, if any, to be reserved for parks and other
public uses;



         (g)   Sites, if any, for multiple family dwellings,
shopping centers, churches, industry or other non-public uses exclusive of
single-family dwellings;



         (h)   Minimum building setback line on all lots and
other sites with the width of lot shown at the minimum front setback line; and



         (i)   Location and description of monuments.



      (4)   Supplementary data to be supplied with preliminary plat.



         (a)   Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land;



         (b)   Certificates, affidavits, endorsements,
photographs or data as may be required by the City Council and/or the
Planning Commission in the enforcement of these regulations;



         (c)   Cross sections and profiles of streets showing
grades as may be required by the City Council and approved by the City
Engineer.  The profiles shall be drawn to city standard scales and
elevations and shall be based on a datum plane approved by the City Engineer;



         (d)   Preliminary plans or program for water supply,
sewage disposal, drainage and flood control;



         (e)   Soil borings, if required by the City Engineer;



         (f)   Evidence that groundwater control is at least ten
feet below the level of finished grades or plan for solving ground water
problems, if required by the City Engineer;



         (g)   The size and dimension of all lots, including lot
area computed in square feet;



         (h)   A lot grading plan showing proposed house bench
elevation and direction of flow of surface water within each lot shall be
provided.  A topographical contour map, including proposed contour grading
at vertical intervals of not more than two feet shall be submitted with the
preliminary plat; and



         (i)   Grading and engineering specifications and reports
in accordance with Uniform Building Code §§ 7006 and 7009 through 7015,
subject to inspection by the City Public Works Director.



(‘81 Code, § B1-32)  (Am. Ord. 521, passed 10-10-91)



(Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



§ 153.24  FINAL PLAT; INFORMATION.



   (A)   Information submitted to Council; requirements.



      (1)   Requirements prior to final plat.  Prior to filing a
final plat, the following information shall have been received and approved
by the City Council:



         (a)   A preliminary plat in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter;



         (b)   An environmental assessment worksheet when
required and subject to the provisions of Minnesota State Statutes (6 MCAR
553);



         (c)   Approval by the Dakota County Plat Committee for
all plats fronting on a Dakota County highway and approval by Minnesota’s
Department of Transportation for all plats fronting upon a state or federal
highway;



         (d)   An engineering feasibility study unless this
requirement shall have been waived by the City Council; and



         (e)   A determination on the method by which park
dedication shall be satisfied for all residential plats.



      (2)   Information with final plat.  The final plat petition,
as a minimum, shall include the following information and any additional
information as may be deemed necessary by the city for review and action on
the petition:



         (a)   Six copies of the final plat, plus one copy of the
hardshell for the permanent files of the city which shall be the same as the
document to be filed with Dakota County;



         (b)   A completed and signed petition form;



         (c)   Fees as established by resolution of the City
Council;



         (d)   Easements or deeds as may be required by the city
for trailways, ponding, parks, utilities or similar public purposes in a form
prescribed by the City Attorney;



         (e)   Performance bond, cash escrow, letter of credit or
similar guarantees to the city related to performance and/or for installation
of public improvements and/or developer to install improvements and filed
with the City Treasurer;



         (f)   A copy of the abstract when required by the city
so that a title search may be conducted by the City Attorney;



         (g)   Design detail as required under § 153.51; and



         (h)   A subdivision agreement, drafted by the city
staff, for consideration by the City Council when taking action on the final
plat.



      (3)   Signing and recording of final plat.



         (a)   Vested rights.  No vested rights in terms of
conveying lots, shall accrue to any plat by reason of preliminary or final
approval until the actual signing of the plat by city officials after all
requirements are met and recorded with Dakota County.



         (b)   Signing of plat. The following signatures shall be
recorded upon the final plat:



            1.   The signature of the Mayor, or in his or her
absence, the acting mayor, attesting to the date upon which the City Council
approved the final plat; and



            2.   The signature of the City Clerk, or in his or
her absence the deputy City Clerk, and seal of the city attesting to the
above-referenced actions by the city and valid signatures.



      (4)   Release of plat.  The final plat shall not be released
by the City Clerk for recording with Dakota County until the following has
been completed:



         (a)   The recording of signatures upon the final plat as
listed in division (A)(3)(b) above;



         (b)   The recording of signatures upon the appropriate
subdivision agreement(s); and



         (c)   The submittal of appropriate financial guarantees
to the city, if any, ensuring the applicant’s performance of the terms of
these regulations.



      (5)   Recording of plat.



         (a)   It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider
to file the plat with the Dakota County Recorder within 60 days after the
plat has been released for recording by the city unless a time extension has
been granted by the City Council.



         (b)   Failure to record the plat within the 60-day
period shall render all approvals by the city null and void until a new
application has been processed and approved by the city or until the City
Council has granted an extension in time in which the final plat shall be
recorded.



      (6)   Proof of recording.  The city shall not take any action
related to the plat such as issuing building permits or awarding public
utility or street contracts on the platted property until the time as the
City Clerk has been satisfied that the plat has been recorded with the Dakota
County Recorder.



(‘81 Code, § B1-14)



   (B)   Data required.  A final plat shall contain as a minimum the
following data, except where deviations are approved by the City Council or
where a specific variance is granted by the City Council:



      (1)   The final plat shall be a reproducible mylar, 20 inches
wide by 30 inches long and shall be at a scale of 100 feet equals one inch or
another standard scale as approved by the City Engineer and in all other
respects shall comply with state statutes.  Where necessary, plat or final
plat may be on several sheets accompanied by a key map showing the entire
subdivision.  For large subdivisions, the final plat may be submitted for
approval progressively; the submittals, unless otherwise approved, shall be
submitted in contiguous sections satisfactory to the City Council.  The
progressive submittal shall in no way be construed as changing the
preliminary plat approval time period unless specifically authorized.  The
final plat shall contain the information required on the preliminary plat,
except that the following information required on the preliminary plat need
not be shown on the final plat:



         (a)   Existing zoning classification;



         (b)   Total acreage;



         (c)   Topographical data, except control data as stated
below;



         (d)   Site data including number of residential lots,
lot size, acres in park and similar lot data;



         (e)   Sites, if any, for multiple family dwellings,
shopping centers, churches, industry or other nonpublic uses exclusive of
single-family dwellings; and



         (f)   Minimum building setback line on all lots and
other sites with the width of lot shown at the minimum front setback line.



      (2)   The following supplementary data shall be supplied with
the final plat:



         (a)   Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines and
property lines of individual lots with accurate dimensions, bearings or
deflection angles and radii, arcs and control angles of all curves;



         (b)   Lot dimensions and area calculations, including
square footage.  Area calculations of lots shall delineate the area of any
dedicated ponding easements in addition to net area of lot exclusive of
ponding easement or public rights-of- way;



         (c)   All elevations, topography, and vertical control
data tied to sea level datum, 1929 general adjustments;



         (d)   Primary control points, with descriptions and ties
to the control points to which all dimensions, angles, bearings and similar
data on the plan shall be referred;



         (e)   Certification by registered land surveyor to the
effect that the plat represents a survey made by him/her and that monuments
and markers shown thereon exist as located and that all dimensional and
geodetic details are correct where the certification is required by the city;



         (f)   Notarized certification by owner and mortgage
holder of record of the adoption of the plat, the dedication of streets and
other public areas;



         (g)   Letter from the county plat committee with
recommendations, if any, on any preliminary plat which abuts a county road;



         (h)   Protective covenants and association articles and
bylaws where applicable in the form of recording, if any; and



         (i)   An attorney’s opinion of title or control of the
property to be subdivided in the application if requested by the city.



(‘81 Code, § B1-33)



(Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 963, passed 4-24-14)



§ 153.25  GRADING OF SITE PRIOR TO FINAL PLAT.



   (A)   Subsequent to preliminary plat approval, the developer may
apply for a subdivision grading permit from the City Council and upon
approval of the permit, may commence construction to the grades and
elevations required by the approved preliminary plat.  The subdivision
grading permit shall be issued under the provisions of the city code and
amendments thereto and in accordance with the fee schedule established within
the appendix to Chapter 35.  Approval of a subdivision grading permit does
not obligate the City Council in any manner to approve a final plat.



   (B)   Subdivision grading prior to or after the approval of a final
plat shall be completed under the requirements of divisions (C) through (F)
and § 153.60.



   (C)   The application for the permit shall be made in writing to the
city on form as the city may from time to time designate, and shall include
information as may be required by the city and shall contain among other
things:



      (1)   The correct legal description of the premises;



      (2)   The name and address of the applicant and owner of the
land;



      (3)   The equipment necessary to complete the removal, storage
or filling;



      (4)   The estimated time required to complete the work and the
amount of material to be moved on the site and the amount to be removed from
the site;



      (5)   The highways, streets or other public roadways within
the city upon or along which the material shall be transported;



      (6)   Method and schedule for compacting and restoration,
consistent with the preliminary plat grading plan, measures to control
erosion during and after the work, and locations of all stockpiles, buried
organic materials and rock outcroppings;



      (7)   A map showing the stages or limits of grading together
with the existing or proposed finished elevations based on sea level readings;



      (8)   A landscape plan which shall provide visual screening
from adjacent property through the use of berms, foliage or fencing as
required in the preliminary plat for the project.  The plan shall include
all grading areas of the proposed permit which are within the required
setback areas of the preliminary plat;



      (9)   The location and surface of access roads used by
equipment;



      (10)   Methods of controlling dust; and



      (11)   The subdivision grading plan which shall provide
information and be in accordance with the requirements of § 153.23(B).



   (D)   The subdivision grading permit shall be valid for the period
approved for the preliminary plat or for a lesser period of time as the
Council may specify when the permit is issued.  Failure to complete
subdivision grading as approved in the permit may be considered grounds for
termination of the preliminary plat.



   (E)   The Council, as a prerequisite to granting all permits, or
after any permit has been granted, may require the applicant or owner of the
premises to:



      (1)   Properly fence any slope of 3:1 or greater that is
adjacent to a project property line and which is deemed hazardous or
dangerous by the city;



      (2)   Slope the banks, fill, level off any depression or mound
or otherwise place in a condition at any time so as not to be dangerous
because of sliding or caving banks and so as to minimize or stop erosion or
dust during or after the grading operation;



      (3)   Properly drain, fill or level off any graded or ungraded
area so as to make the same safe and healthful as the Council may determine;



      (4)   Reimburse the city for the cost of periodic inspections
by the City Engineer, City Building Official or other city employee, for the
purpose of seeing that the terms under which the permit has been issued are
being complied with;



      (5)   Operate construction and grading equipment only between
the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, as per the
requirements of § 155.291(C)(1), unless otherwise stipulated in the
subdivision agreement or by Council approval;



      (6)   Submit a suitable financial guarantee in a form and sum
as the Council may require, running to the city, conditioned to pay the city
the cost and expense of repairing any highways, streets or other public ways
within the city, made necessary by the special burden resulting from the
hauling and transporting thereon by the applicant in the removal of rock,
dirt, sand, gravel, clay or other like material, the amount of the cost to be
determined by the City Council; and conditioned further to comply with all
the requirements of this chapter and the particular permit, and to save the
city free and harmless from all suits or claims for damages resulting from
the negligent grading, removal or storage of rock, sand, gravel, dirt, clay
or other like material within the city;



      (7)   Submit a suitable financial guarantee, as approved by
the Council, of a minimum $5,000 for each acre being graded at any time,
running to the city, conditioned to pay the city the cost and expense of
restoration of any unfinished and expense of grading, providing top soil and
seeding where the applicant or owner shall fail to complete restoration
within the conditions under which the permit was issued; and



      (8)   Comply with other requirements as the Council shall from
time to time deem proper and necessary for the protection of the citizens and
general welfare.



   (F)   Inspections and violations.  At least once a month, or more
often as necessary, the city Public Works Director shall instruct the staff
to inspect all areas where a permit has been issued and report the findings.



(‘81 Code, § B1-16)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 521, passed
10-10-91)



§ 153.26  EFFECTIVE PERIOD OF PRELIMINARY PLAT; ZONING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Effective period of preliminary plat approval.  The approval
of a preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of two years after City
Council approval at the end of which time final plat approval on the
subdivision shall have been obtained from the City Council or a time
extension granted.  Any preliminary plat not receiving final approval within
the period of time set forth herein shall be null and void, and the developer
shall be required to resubmit a new plat for preliminary approval subject to
all new zoning restrictions and subdivision regulations of the city.  See §
153.23(A)(3).



(‘81 Code, § B1-17)



   (B)   Zoning regulations.



      (1)   Every plat shall conform to existing zoning regulations,
the official map and the subdivision regulations.  For one year following
preliminary approval and for two years following final approval, unless the
subdivider and the municipality agree otherwise, no amendment to the City's
comprehensive plan or land use regulations shall apply to or affect the use,
development density, lot size, lot layout, or dedication or platting required
or permitted by the approved plat application.



      (2)   The conformance shall not be interpreted as restricting
the City Council’s authority to allow flexibility in density and
dimensional requirements in areas zoned “Planned Development” (PD) or
“Residential Cluster” (RCL), as provided in the city’s zoning chapter.



(‘81 Code, § B1-18)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 963, passed
4-24-14)



§ 153.27  RELATED FINDINGS.



   In the case of all platting, the Planning Commission and the City
Council shall be guided by criteria, including the following, in approving,
denying or establishing conditions related thereto:



   (A)   The proposed subdivision does comply with applicable
ordinances and the comprehensive guide plan.



   (B)   The design or improvement of the proposed subdivision complies
with applicable plans of Dakota County, the State of Minnesota or the
Metropolitan Council.



   (C)   The physical characteristics of the site including but not
limited to topography, vegetation, susceptibility to erosion and siltation,
susceptibility to flooding, water storage and retention, are such that the
site is suitable for the type of development or use contemplated.



   (D)   The site physically is suitable for the proposed density of
development.



   (E)   The design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are
not likely to cause environmental damage.



   (F)   The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements are
not likely to cause health problems.



   (G)   The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will
not conflict with the easements of record or with easements established by
judgment of court.



   (H)   The completion of the proposed development of the subdivision
can be completed in a timely manner so as not to cause an economic burden
upon the city for maintenance, repayment of bonds or similar burden.



   (I)   The subdivision has been properly oriented for possible solar
energy system use within the subdivision or as it relates to adjacent
property.



   (J)   The design of the subdivision is compatible and consistent
with the platting or approved preliminary plat on adjacent lands.



(‘81 Code, § B1-19)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



§ 153.28  PLATTING ADDITIONS.



   (A)   Prior to granting final plat approval, the City Council may
permit or require the plat to be divided into two or more additions or may
impose conditions upon the filing of the additions as it may deem necessary
to ensure the orderly development of the plat.



   (B)   The city may also require the developer to plat all areas not
developed at the time of platting the first addition into outlots and the
city may require all streets therein to be dedicated at the time the final
plat is approved for the first addition in order to ensure continuity of a
public street system.



(‘81 Code, § B1-20)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



§ 153.29  PUBLIC USE DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Parkland dedication.



      (1)   Dedication required.  As a condition of subdivision
approval, the subdivider shall dedicate to the public a portion of any
proposed subdivision for conservation purposes or for public use as parks,
recreational facilities, playgrounds, trails, wetlands, or open space.  In
lieu of the conveyance of all or a portion of dedicated land for park
purposes as provided above, the city may require and the subdivider shall
pay,  in the city's sole discretion, a cash payment to the city in an amount
equal to the fair market value of the land to be dedicated at the time of the
final approval of the proposed subdivision.



      (2)   Suitability.  The portion of any proposed subdivision
which is proposed to be dedicated shall be reasonably suited for its intended
use and shall be at a location convenient to the public.



      (3)   Area to be dedicated.



         (a)  Areas to be shown on the preliminary plat.  When a
proposed park, trailway, ponding or open space area, as shown on the city's
comprehensive guide plan, park development guide,  comprehensive storm sewer
plan or official map, is located in the whole or in part in a proposed
subdivision, the area or areas shall be shown on the preliminary plat.  The
area or areas shall also be dedicated to the city by the subdivider if the
dedication is required under the provisions of this section.



         (b)   Previous subdivisions.  When the property
proposed to be subdivided has been previously subdivided and a land or cash
in-lieu-of-land dedication was made at the time of the original subdivision,
no additional dedication shall be required if the new subdivision does not
result in an increase in the number of residential dwelling units or amount
of commercial building area.  If the number of residential dwelling units or
amount of commercial building area increases, then the dedication shall be
based on the amount of increase from the original subdivision.



         (c)   Amount to be dedicated.



            1.   The amount of land that shall be dedicated
under this section shall be consistent with the city's comprehensive guide
plan (parks chapter) and in accordance with the following standard:



   The amount of land to be dedicated shall satisfy the parkland standard
of 0.00955 acres per resident and shall be based on the number of residents
expected to reside in the dwelling units to be constructed within a
residential subdivision.  In the case of subdivisions of property proposed
to be used for purposes other than residential, the amount of land area to be
dedicated shall be based on the number of employees expected to work in the
commercial buildings to be constructed within the subdivision, with each
employee equating to a fractional resident as follows:  each retail,
service, office, or institutional employee = 0.25 resident; each industrial
employee = 0.1 resident.  The number of residents in each category of
dwelling unit and the number of employees in each category of non-residential
building is based on data compiled by the city and is as follows:



 


Detached single family

 
3.2 persons per dwelling unit


Attached single family
 
2.1 persons per dwelling unit


Multiple family
 
1.7 persons per dwelling unit


Retail or service
 
2 employees per 1,000 square feet of building area


Office
 
3 employees per 1,000 square feet of building area


Institutional
 
1 employee per 1,000 square feet of building area


Industrial
 
1 employee per 1,000 square feet of building area



 



            2.   No credit shall be granted for the private
construction of recreational facilities within the lands dedicated for public
use unless a specific agreement granting credit is approved by the City
Council.



            3.   Dedication credit may be granted for the
construction of recreational facilities within the subdivision if the city
determines that the existence of such facilities will relieve the city from
constructing such similar facilities in order to achieve the city's adopted
standards for park and recreational amenities.



         (d)   Subdivider's dispute of dedication cash fee.  If
the subdivider disputes the amount of the proposed cash payment in lieu of
the land dedication, the subdivider may challenge the same pursuant to
requirements in M.S. Chapter 462.



   (B)   Stormwater retention and infiltration basins/ponds dedication.



      (1)   Stormwater ponding areas, including wetlands, stormwater
retention or infiltration basins needed as a part of the overall city storm
drainage plan, shall be dedicated as land or easement at the option of the
city and as accepted by the city.



      (2)   Owners or subdividers shall be required, as a
prerequisite to approval of a plat or subdivision, to dedicate, as land or
easement for ponding, a minimum of 5% of the gross area to be platted or
subdivided.  Additional area shall be dedicated to accommodate any increase
in either the rate or volume of stormwater runoff above the levels
established in the Master Stormwater Plan adopted by the city.



   (C)   General dedication requirements.



      (1)  Timing of land dedication.  If a new subdivision is
designed to be platted into more than one addition, all park and other public
use lands contemplated under this section in the total subdivision area,
except streets, alleys or easements other than those leading directly to the
sites, shall be dedicated by the time of approval of the final plat for the
first addition unless otherwise approved by the City Council.  All other
lands contemplated to be dedicated under this division shall be dedicated by
the time of final plat approval by the City Council.



      (2)   Condition of areas to be dedicated.  Areas to be
dedicated for public park, trail or ponding shall be brought to a suitable
condition by the subdivider prior to acceptance by the city.  All dead
trees, trash, junk, unwanted structures or similar undesirable elements shall
be removed by the owner at his or her expense.  On grades or exposed areas
which are not sodded, lawn grass seed shall be sown at not less than four
pounds to each 1,000 square feet of land area.  In the spring, the seed
shall be sown between March 15 and May 15; and in the fall, the seed shall be
sown between August 15 and September 30.  The seed shall consist of a
maximum of 10% rye grass by weight and a minimum of 90% of permanent
bluegrass and/or fescue grass by weight.  All seed shall have been tested
for germination within one year of the date of seeding and the date of
testing shall be on the label containing the seed analysis.  Between October
1 and March 15, and between May 15 and August 15, the applicant shall submit
an agreement in writing signed by the developer that respreading of soil and
seeding of lawn will be done during the immediate following planting season
as set forth in this section and provide a performance bond to guarantee the
seeding.  The condition shall also be in accordance with the city's
resolution on condition of acceptance of public parks in Apple Valley.



      (3)   Title and survey requirements.



         (a)   Lands so dedicated shall be accompanied by a
certificate of survey or shall be designated as a lot or outlot on the plat
as determined by the city.



         (b)   Further, the lands shall be free and clear of all
liens and encumbrances including special assessments as evidenced by an
up-to-date abstract of title or registered property abstract to be submitted
at developer's cost to the city for its examination.



         (c)   The dedication shall be in the form and manner as
prescribed by the City Attorney.



(‘81 Code, § B1-21)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 766, passed
1-27-05)



§ 153.30  LANDLOCKED PARCELS.



   As a general rule, the city shall not permit landlocked parcels or
parcels that are only served by private easements. However the city may
permit the following:



   (A)   Landlocked parcels in a multiple dwelling or commercial
complex provided the parcel(s) have access to a public street by an easement
over another parcel within the same multiple dwelling or commercial complex;
and



   (B)   Landlocked parcels which are unbuildable (outlots) and
reserved as permanent public open spaces such as ponding areas may be
permitted. A scenic easement may be required by the city to ensure that the
property is preserved as open space.



(‘81 Code, § B1-22)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



§ 153.31  FEES.



   Where fees are not specifically stated in this chapter, the fees shall
be established by resolution of the City Council which may revise the fee
schedule from time to time.



(‘81 Code, § B1-23)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



§ 153.32  COUNCIL VOTE; PLAT APPROVAL WITHOUT VARIANCE.



   (A)   City Council vote.  All actions related to this chapter,
including amendments, variances, waivers and plat approvals, shall require a
majority vote of the members of the City Council present at a duly
constituted City Council meeting. 



(‘81 Code, § B1-24)



   (B)   Plat approved without variances.  When a plat as approved by
the city and recorded with Dakota County has a lot or lots which, due to an
inadvertent error, do not meet the minimum required dimensions as required in
this chapter or in the city's zoning chapter, the lots shall have the
following status:



      (1)   The lot(s) shall be considered a legal nonconforming
lot(s);



      (2)   The lot(s) shall not be deemed unique or in a practical
difficulty warranting any other variance and shall not be afforded any
variance or further dimensional variance other than that existing on the
recorded plat;



      (3)   The provisions of this section do not apply to
subdivisions and approved plats pursuant to the planned development or
residential cluster provision, as detailed in § 153.26(B); rather it is only
intended to clarify; and



      (4)   When the recorded plat does not meet the regulations of
the zoning regulations in this code and the subdivisions regulation herein as
a result of the applicant's or developer's misrepresentations on the proposed
plat for approval or the recording of a plat inconsistent with the city
approved plat, the lots shall be considered illegal nonconforming and shall
not be entitled to a building permit.



(‘81 Code, § B1-25)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 963, passed
4-24-14)



§ 153.33  PERMITS PRIOR TO PUBLIC UTILITIES.



   (A)   No permits until contract awarded.  In plats that are to be
served by municipal water and sanitary sewer, the city shall not issue
building permits until a contract has been awarded for the installation of
the water and sewer by the city or by the developer and as approved by the
city.



   (B)   No occupancy until public and/or private utilities
available.  Where building permits are issued as provided in division (A)
above, the building or units therein shall not be occupied, except model
homes, as detailed in § 153.36, until the building(s) are provided with
public sewer and water service, private services (gas, telephone,
electricity, sewer, water) and an improved public street to the extent that
the street is graded and gravel surfaced.



   (C)   City held harmless.  Where a building permit is issued under
division (B) above, the person to whom the permit is issued proceeds at his
or her own risk and the city assumes no obligation to provide public services
within a specified time limit.



(‘81 Code, § B1-26)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



§ 153.34  PROPERTY DESCRIPTIONS.



   Where it becomes necessary to recombine or consolidate properties or
correct property descriptions in order to establish buildable lots the
following procedure may be used:



   (A)   Recombination.  To divide one recorded lot or parcel in order
to permit the adding of a parcel of land to an abutting lot and create two
buildable lots, the proposed subdivision, in sketch plan form, shall be
submitted to the City Council for approval.  No hearing or Planning
Commission review is necessary unless the proposal is referred to the
Commission by the City Planner for clarification.  The proposed lots shall
not cause the remaining portion of the existing lots or parcels to be in
violation of this regulation or the zoning code.  Within 60 days after
approval by the City Council, the applicant shall supply the final plat to
the City Planner for review and approval. After completion of the review and
affixing of signatures, the plat shall be recorded by the applicant with the
Dakota County Recorder within 90 days after approval by the City Planner.



   (B)   Consolidations.  The owner of two or more contiguous parcels
or lots of record may, subject to City Council approval, consolidate the
parcels or lots into one lot of record by recording the consolidation with
Dakota County and filing a copy of a certificate of survey showing same, with
the City Clerk within 30 days of recording.  No hearing or Planning
Commission review is necessary unless the proposal is referred to the
Commission by the City Planner for clarification.  The proposed lots shall
not cause any portion of the existing lots, parcels or existing buildings to
be in violation of this regulation or the zoning chapter.



   (C)   Corrections.  When a survey or description of a parcel or lot
has been found to be inadequate to describe the actual boundaries, approval
of a corrective plat may be requested.  This type of subdivision creates no
new lots or streets.  The proposed corrective subdivision, in sketch plan
form, along with a letter signed by both property owners agreeing to the new
subdivision, shall be submitted to the City Council for approval.  No
hearing or Planning Commission review is necessary unless the proposal is
referred to the Commission by the City Planner for clarification.  The
proposed lots shall not cause any portion of the existing lots, parcels or
existing buildings to be in violation of this regulation or the zoning
code.  A certificate of survey may be required on any proposed lot with
existing buildings in order to determine the placement of the building on the
proposed lot.  Within 60 days after approval by the City Council, the
applicant shall supply the final plat to the City Planner for review and
approval. After completion of the review and affixing of signatures, the plat
shall be recorded by the applicant with the Dakota County Recorder within 90
days after approval by the City Planner.



(‘81 Code, § B1-28)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 452, passed
7-13-89)



§ 153.35  [RESERVED].



§ 153.36  MODEL HOMES.



   Model homes or dwelling units may be permitted in any residential
subdivision subject to the following conditions:



   (A)   The model home area shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission and approved by the City Council.  The approval shall include an
approved site plan detailing the area so designated and temporary
improvements such as public parking areas, nonresidential structures and/or
similar improvements normally associated with a model home area.



   (B)   The model home area shall exist for a time period specified by
the City Council or until the project is 90% sold out or rented out,
whichever shall be sooner.  At the end of the time period, the subdivider
shall be required to restore the area to a normal residential character
unless a time extension is granted by the City Council so that the model home
may serve to advertise another area.



   (C)   The city may require a bond to ensure restoration of a model
home area.



   (D)   Signs in a model home area shall be regulated by the code and
amendments thereto.



   (E)   Individual units, built on speculation, with no exterior
alterations for model home purposes shall be exempt from these requirements.



   (F)   Model homes may be constructed prior to the availability of
public utilities, but not occupied as residential living units until public
utilities are connected to the dwellings.



(‘81 Code, § B1-15)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS



§ 153.50  DESIGN STANDARDS.



   All sketch plans, preliminary and final plats shall provide as a
minimum the following data and shall conform to the design standards set
forth in this section, except where deviations are approved by the City
Council or where a specific variance is granted by the City Council.



(‘81 Code, § B1-30)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



§ 153.51  STREET DESIGN.



   The following design standards are to be followed unless the City
Council shall permit a variance because of unusual circumstances due to the
topography, placement of buildings or other factors making it reasonable to
vary the standards set forth without nullifying the intent and purpose of the
comprehensive plan or this section.



   (A)   The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location
of all streets shall conform to the comprehensive plan and shall be
considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to
topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety and in their
appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by the
streets.



   (B)   Where such is not shown in the comprehensive plan, the
arrangement of streets in the subdivision shall either:



      (1)   Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection
of existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or



      (2)   Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or
adopted by the City Council to meet a particular situation where topography
or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets
impractical.



   (C)   Local streets shall be so laid out that their use by through
traffic will be discouraged and so that they will not tend to function as
collector streets.



   (D)   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
arterial street, the City Council may require marginal access streets,
reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation
along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys or other
treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential property
and to afford separation of through and local traffic.



   (E)   Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad
right-of-way, or limited access highway right-of-way, the City Council may
require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of the
right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the
intervening land.  The distances shall also be determined with due regard
for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.



   (F)   Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be
prohibited except where their control is definitely placed under conditions
approved by the City Council.



   (G)   Street intersections with center line offsets of less than 125
feet shall be avoided.



   (H)   A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between
curves of reverse direction on arterial major and collector streets.



   (I)   When connecting street lines of the same street deflect from
each other at any one point by more than ten degrees, they shall be connected
by a curve with a radius adequate to ensure a sight distance of not less than
150 feet for minor and collector streets, and of the greater radii as the
City Engineer shall determine for special cases.



   (J)   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect, as nearly as
possible, at right angles and no street shall intersect any other street at
less than 60 degrees.



   (K)   Sight easements with tangent distances of 30 feet shall be
provided at street intersections or the City Council may permit property
lines at street intersections to be rounded with a radius deemed necessary.



   (L)   Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown in the
comprehensive plan and where not shown therein shall not be less than as
follows:



          Street Type         Minimum



                                        Right-of-Way
Width



   Principal arterial      150 - 300 feet



   Intermediate arterial      150 - 300 feet



   Minor arterial           100 - 150 feet



   Community collector        80 - 100 feet



   Neighborhood collector   80 feet



   Local access               60 feet



   (M)   Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to
the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformance with the other
requirements of these regulations; and where the City Council finds it will
be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining
property is subdivided.  Wherever a half street is adjacent to a tract to be
subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within the tract.



   (N)   Cul-de-sac dead end streets, designated to be so permanently,
shall not serve more than 15 single- family dwelling units or 25 multiple
dwelling units and shall not be longer than 900 feet and shall be provided at
the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at
least 100 feet and street property line diameter of at least 120 feet.



   (O)   Culs-de-sac shall only be developed where justified by
irregular topography or where adjacent to limited access streets.



   (P)   Street grades, wherever feasible, shall not exceed the
following, with due allowance for reasonable vertical curves:



        Street Type      Percent Grade



   Arterial               5



   Collector            7



   Local               8



   (Q)   No street grade shall be less than 0.5%.  At intersections,
the street grade shall not exceed 2% for the first 100 feet approaching the
intersection.



   (R)   All streets shall be constructed to the minimum load bearing
capacities dictated by the proposed designated use as follows:



      (1)   Residential noncontinuous streets (culs- de-sac) or low
volume continuous noncollector streets, seven-ton per axle load bearing
capacity;



      (2)   Residential, medium-high volume collector streets,
nine-ton per axle load bearing capacity; and



      (3)   All commercial and industrial streets, nine-ton per axle
load bearing capacity.



(‘81 Code, § B1-34)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



§ 153.52  SIDEWALKS, TRAILS OR PATHWAYS.



   Sidewalks, trails or pathways shall be provided in each plat in
accordance with provisions of the city’s pedestrian circulation plan. 
Sidewalks, trails or pathways shall be constructed at the sole expense of the
subdivider.



(‘81 Code, § B1-35)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



§ 153.53  EASEMENTS.



   (A)   Utility and drainage easements abutting public street
rights-of-way and centered on rear or side lot lines shall be at least ten
feet wide or wider as may be required by the city.



   (B)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a ponding area,
watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream there shall be provided a storm
water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the
lines of the water course, and the further width or construction, or both, as
will be adequate for the purpose as determined by the city.  The drainage or
ponding easements shall be laid out and located in such a manner as to
provide reasonable access for maintenance and dredging purposes without undue
infringement upon the property over which access is taken.



   (C)   Trails or pedestrian ways shall be shown as trailways on the
final plat or as separate easements as the city may direct.



   (D)   When double frontage or reverse frontage lots are incorporated
in a plat, a planting screen easement of at least ten feet in width across
which there shall be no right of access may be required along the line of
lots abutting a traffic artery or other disadvantaged use.  The easement
would only be required where the planting screen would be at an elevation as
related to the street or use so as to provide an effective screen.



(‘81 Code, § B1-36)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



§ 153.54  BLOCK DIMENSIONS.



   (A)   The length, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined
with due regard to:



      (1)   Provisions of adequate building sites suitable to the
needs of the type of use contemplated;



      (2)   Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions;



      (3)   Needs for convenient access, circulation control and
safety of street traffic; and



      (4)   Limitations and opportunities of topography.



   (B)   Block lengths shall not exceed 1,200 feet.



(‘81 Code, § B1-37)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



§ 153.55  LOT DIMENSIONS.



   (A)   The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation and the
minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the
subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated and in
accordance with zoning regulations.



   (B)   Lot dimensions shall be as required by the city’s zoning
chapter, except where deviations are approved by the City Council.



   (C)   The subdividing of land shall provide each building lot with a
minimum of 50 feet of frontage directly abutting on a publicly dedicated
street, subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   In no instance shall a private easement satisfy the
above requirement;



      (2)   In the instance of townhouses, apartment complexes or
quadraminiums the area to be owned in common shall satisfy the above
requirement;



      (3)   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be
avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential
development from traffic arteries, or to overcome specific disadvantages of
topography and orientation; and



      (4)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to
the right-of-way line of the abutting street.



(‘81 Code, § B1-38)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



§ 153.56  BUILDING LOCATIONS.



   (A)   Buildings shall be located on each lot in conformance with the
minimum required setbacks, as detailed in this chapter and Chapter 155,
Zoning.  Building locations shall also conform to the bench elevations
established for the plat.



   (B)   Buildings shall not be permitted on outlots. This shall not
preclude the possibility of replatting and creating a buildable lot.



   (C)   Buildings shall not be permitted on publicly dedicated
easements.



(‘81 Code, § B1-39)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



Cross-reference:



   Preliminary plat; information, see § 153.23



§ 153.57  EXISTING BUILDINGS.



   In the subdividing of any land which, through the establishment of new
lot lines, has the effect of splitting any existing structure(s), the
following criteria shall be satisfied:



   (A)   Each lot, with its portion of the original structure, shall
have a separate sanitary sewer and water service with curb box; and



   (B)   Each portion of the original structure to be associated with a
separate lot shall meet the applicable building codes for occupancy
separation as stipulated in Chapter 5 of the Minnesota State Building Code.



(‘81 Code, § B1-40)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



§ 153.58  PUBLIC AND PARK SPACES.



   Public park sites, public building sites or public open spaces shall be
shown as required under § 153.29(A).



(‘81 Code, § B1-41)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



§ 153.59  PLANTING OF STREET TREES.



   When planted, street trees shall be planted not less than 40 feet apart
with a minimum of one tree per lot.  They shall be placed five to seven feet
inside the property line and not in the boulevard.  No trees shall be
planted within 30 feet of the intersection of curb lines on corner lots. 
The minimum size shall measure 1½ inches in diameter at ground line.



(‘81 Code, § B1-42)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



§ 153.60  ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION.



   (A)   In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be shown for
the protection of all natural terrain features of the site, which if
preserved as required herein, will add to the attractiveness and stability of
the proposed development. 



   (B)   No subdivision or plat shall be approved which fails to meet
the following requirements and standards:



      (1)   Proposed filling in a wetland shall only be permitted
upon recommendation of the City Engineer and approval by the city.



      (2)   Dredging of water bodies shall only be permitted upon
recommendation of the City Engineer and approval by the city.



      (3)   No development shall be permitted on land having a slope
before alteration in excess of 12% unless the applicant shall prove that the
following conditions are met:



         (a)   The foundation and underlying material of any
structure including roads, shall be adequate for the slope conditions and
soil type.



         (b)   Adequate controls and protection exist uphill from
the proposed development such that there is no danger of structures or roads
being affected by mud, uprooted trees or other materials and the soil shall
be controlled.



         (c)   All structures other than buildings and roadway
surfaces, but including retaining walls shall meet the following design
criteria:



            1.   Retaining walls or terrace contours shall not
exceed 30 inches in height unless approved by the city.



            2.   Construction shall be of a matter approved by
the city.



            3.   The minimum space between terraces and
retaining walls shall be ten feet.



      (4)   Wetlands and other water bodies shall not be used as
primary sediment traps during or after construction.



      (5)   The proposed development will not increase the runoff
rate of storm water beyond that allowed for in the city’s comprehensive
storm sewer plan so as to cause an adverse effect upon adjacent lands.



      (6)   Erosion protection measures shall make maximum use of
natural in-place vegetation rather than the placing of new vegetation on-site
as erosion control facilities.  The use of natural erosion control devices
shall be preferred to the maximum extent over the construction of artificial
drainage devices including culverts, holding ponds and ditches.



      (7)   The development shall be located in a manner as to
minimize the removal of vegetation and alteration of the natural topography.



      (8)   Any and all erosion control, storm water runoff, utility
access and similar structures shall be designed to be maintained, cleaned out
and otherwise operated without requiring the crossing of private lands with
or by the operation of motorized heavy maintenance vehicles and equipment,
such as bulldozers, trucks and backhoes on slopes in excess of 8%.  As used
in this section, private lands includes any outlots.



      (9)   Trees, other than diseased or damaged trees, shall only
be cut or removed to accommodate acceptable elevations for streets, building
sites, driveways or utilities.  The applicant shall demonstrate that all
grading which takes place will be conducted in a manner that preserves the
root zone aeration and stability of existing trees and provides an adequate
watering area equal to at least one half of each tree’s crown cover.  The
size and species of trees used in reforestation shall be approved by the city.



      (10)   The applicant shall be required to furnish and install
fences wherever the city’s Community Development Director determines a
hazardous condition may exist or an environmentally sensitive area needs to
be protected during construction.  The applicant, of his or her own
volition, shall provide fencing wherever a hazardous condition may exist
during construction prior to any determination made by the city.



      (11)   No cut trees, timber, debris, earth, rock, stones,
rubbish or waste materials of any kind shall be buried in any land or left or
deposited on any lot or street without the approval of the city’s Community
Development Director.  Debris shall also be removed no later than the time
when the performance bond shall be released by the city or at an earlier time
as determined by the city’s Community Development Director.



      (12)   Topsoil removed from lots during construction shall be
stockpiled for respreading over lots and shall not be sold or otherwise
removed from the subdivision area unless the removal of excess topsoil is
approved by the city.



      (13)   Topsoil shall be respread so as to provide at least six
inches of cover originally existing on the site or a minimum of four inches
of cover if the original cover was less.  The site shall also be stabilized
by seeding and/or sodding.



      (14)   On grades or exposed areas which are not sodded, lawn
grass seed shall be sown at not less than four pounds to each 1,000 square
feet of land area.  In the spring, the seed shall be sown between March 15
and May 15; and in the fall, the seed shall be sown between August 15 and
September 30.  The seed shall consist of a maximum of 10% rye grass by
weight and a minimum of 90% of permanent bluegrass and/or fescue grass by
weight.  All seed shall have been tested for germination within one year of
the date of seeding and the date of testing shall be on the label containing
the seed analysis.  All lots shall be seeded from roadside edge of the
unpaved right-of-way back to a distance of 25 feet behind the principal
residence on the lot.  No property shall be occupied until respreading of
soil and seeding of lawn has been completed; except that between October 1
and March 15, and between May 15 and August 15, the applicant shall submit an
agreement in writing signed by the developer and the property owner, with a
copy to the Director of Public Works, that respreading of soil and seeding of
lawn will be done during the immediate following planting season as set forth
in this section and leave an amount in the performance bond accompanying the
plat to guarantee the seeding.



(‘81 Code, § B1-43)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



Cross-reference:



   Tree preservation requirements, see § 152.46



§ 153.61  UNDERGROUND UTILITIES.



   All utilities including transmission service lines shall be required to
be placed underground unless economic, technological or land characteristic
factors make underground placement unfeasible as determined by the City
Council.



(‘81 Code, § B1-44)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



§ 153.62  REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS; PAYMENTS.



   (A)   Required improvements.  The following required improvements
shall be installed in accordance with the engineering policy, standards and
specifications which have been or may in the future be adopted by the City
Council.  Where standards and specifications have not been adopted, the
improvements shall be made in accordance with good engineering practices:



      (1)   Monuments.  Monuments shall be placed at all block and
lot corners, angle points, points of curves in streets and at intermediate
points as shall be required by the city.  The monuments shall be of a
material, size and length as may be approved by the city.  It shall be the
applicant’s responsibility to see that the monuments are maintained in good
order during construction and development.



      (2)   Sanitary sewer systems.



         (a)   Where available, municipal sewer facilities shall
be provided in the development of the subdivision.



         (b)   Prior to providing plans for utilities, analysis
of the soil to the depth of the utility proposed should be made and provided
with the utility report when required by the city.



         (c)   Where municipal sewer facilities are not
available, individual sewage systems shall be provided in accordance with the
code.



      (3)   Water systems.



         (a)   Where available, municipal water facilities shall
be provided in the development of the subdivision.



         (b)   When municipal water facilities are not available,
individual water systems shall be provided in accordance with Minnesota
Department of Health Standards.



      (4)   Streets.  Streets shall be provided for as required in
§ 153.51, except that construction of half streets shall be prohibited.



      (5)   Sidewalks and pathways.  Sidewalks and pathways shall
be provided for as required in § 153.52.



      (6)   Drainage facilities.  Storm sewer, open drainage or
other facilities and easements shall be installed and provided, as will
adequately provide for the drainage of surface waters.



         (a)   Drainage facilities shall be provided as approved
by the City Engineer.



         (b)   Storm sewer and/or other drainage facilities shall
be installed as determined to be necessary by the City Engineer for proper
drainage of the surface waters.  No storm drainage shall be carried over the
street surface a distance greater than 500 feet.



      (7)   Streetlight.  Streetlight shall be installed as
provided by the city’s policy adopted by resolution of the City Council.



      (8)   Trees.  When planted, “street” trees shall be
planted as provided in § 153.59.



      (9)   Driveway approaches.  Concrete or bituminous driveway
surfaces over each boulevard or lots adjacent to streets improved to city
standards shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of the issuance
of building permits.



      (10)   Lawns.  Topsoil shall be respread and lawn grass shall
be established on each lot as provided for in § 153.60(B)(12) through (14)
upon the completion of the paving of adjacent street(s).  In addition, if at
the time of occupancy of a dwelling unit constructed on a lot upon which
seeding has been so provided, and the seeding has not yet resulted in an
established and maintainable lawn, sod shall be installed upon the unpaved
street right-of-way fronting the lot and in any drainage swales adjacent to
the lot.



(‘81 Code, § B1-45)



   (B)   Payment for improvements.  Before the final plat is approved
by the City Council, the applicant shall submit an agreement and performance
bond, irrevocable letter of credit or cash escrow agreement in a reasonable
amount as determined by the City Council to ensure the following:



      (1)   That the applicant shall pay, under terms prescribed in
the agreement, for the cost of all improvements required in the subdivision
and the subdivision’s share of costs of trunk facilities to be extended to
the subdivision, except costs as the city shall agree to assess against
benefitted property wherein no bond shall be required for city-installed
improvements.



      (2)   Guaranteed completion of the required improvements
undertaken by the applicant as approved by the city within a specified time
after commencement of any construction in the subdivision,



or portion thereof less than the entire subdivision to be developed at any
one time as approved by the City Council, provided that the City Council for
good cause, may extend the period of time in which the improvements must be
installed.



      (3)   The performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or
cash escrow agreement herein required shall be equal to one and one-quarter
times the City Engineer’s estimated cost of the required improvements to be
installed by the applicant.



      (4)   If the required improvements to be installed by the
applicant are not completed and paid for within the specified time period or
the period approved by the City Council as hereinabove provided, all amounts
held under the escrow agreement, performance bond or irrevocable letter of
credit, shall be turned over and delivered to the city and applied to the
cost of the required improvements. Any balance after the improvements have
been made and paid for shall be returned to the subdivider.



(‘81 Code, § B1-47)



(Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



§ 153.63  UTILITIES, STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.



   Construction of public utilities, streets and sidewalks, including
sanitary sewer systems, water systems, streets and storm sewers, located on
property or easements dedicated or to be dedicated to the city in the plat,
shall be completed by the city under the supervision of the City Engineer. 
In the alternative, the developer, at the option of the city, may install any
or all of the above-referenced improvements provided the following are met:



   (A)   Plans and specifications shall be approved by the city;



   (B)   The city shall provide inspection and be compensated in return
by the developer;



   (C)   The developer shall provide the city with a cash escrow, bond
or letter of credit in an amount equal to one and one-quarter times the
estimated cost of the improvements;



   (D)   The developer shall submit written proof to the city that all
the improvements have been paid in full prior to release of any portion of
the escrow, bond or letter of credit; and



   (E)   Reproducible copies of the as-built engineering plans shall be
supplied to the city in the approved city format.



(‘81 Code, § B1-46)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



§ 153.64  NOISE BARRIERS.



   Where a plat is located along a freeway, major arterial or other area
which generates high volumes of noise, the subdivider shall be required to
prepare a plan to provide noise abatement.  The plan shall provide for the
construction of earth berms, dense vegetation, walls or the combination
thereof or similar means which shall be reviewed and approved by the city and
required to be constructed by the subdivider as a part of the development of
the plat.



(‘81 Code, § B1-27)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 153.75  ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   The Council shall designate a Zoning Administrator who shall
be primarily responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.



   (B)   The enforcing officer shall enforce this chapter and in
furtherance of the authority may:



      (1)   Enter upon the land or within a building during
reasonable working hours as found necessary to fulfill his or her duties as
the Administrator of this chapter;



      (2)   Conduct inspections of buildings and use of land to
determine compliance with the terms of this chapter;



      (3)   Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter,
including but not limited to maps, amendments, bonds, variances, waivers,
plats, development agreements and applications thereto;



      (4)   Institute in the name of the city appropriate citations
or proceedings against a violator as provided by law; and



      (5)   Establish and enforce necessary or desirable regulations
in writing, clarifying or explaining any provision of this chapter.



(‘81 Code, § B1-48)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



§ 153.76  BOARD OF APPEALS AND ADJUSTMENTS.



   (A)   Members.  The Board of Appeals and Adjustments for the city
shall consist of the individual members of the city’s Planning Commission
as provided by § 155.396, of the city’s zoning chapter.



   (B)   Functions of the Board of Appeals and Adjustments.



      (1)   The board shall make written recommendations to the City
Council on variances, waivers or appeal petitions received under this chapter
within 90 days after having been filed with the city.



      (2)   The Board shall have the duty of hearing all appeals
where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement,
decision or determination by the Zoning Administrator under this chapter.



      (3)   The Board shall have the duty of hearing requests for
variances from the literal provisions of this chapter.



      (4)   The Board shall have the duty of hearing requests for a
waiver of these platting regulations.



   (C)   Procedures and organization.



      (1)   The Board may establish its own rules of procedure which
shall not be inconsistent with or contrary to the statutes of the state or
the ordinances of the city.



      (2)   The Board shall keep written records of its minutes and
the findings and determinations made by it on all matters.



      (3)   Petitions or appeals shall be made on forms pertaining
thereto provided by the city.



      (4)   All findings and determinations of the Board shall be
advisory to the Council and shall have no binding effect.  The City Council
may take action on the findings and recommendations of the Board as it deems
proper under the circumstances.



(‘81 Code, § B1-49)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



§ 153.77  VARIANCES AND WAIVERS.



   (A)   Purpose.  The City Council may, after review and
recommendation by the Board of Appeals and Adjustments, grant variances from
the strict application of the provisions of this chapter and impose
conditions and safeguards in the variances so granted where practical
difficulties or particular hardships result from carrying out the strict
letter of the regulations of this ordinance.  The City Council shall not,
however, grant variances from certain provisions of this chapter as
specifically prohibited by M.S. § 462.358, subd. 3B.



   (B)   Filing a petition.  A petition for a variance or waiver of
platting shall be filed with the city and shall state the exceptional
conditions and the peculiar and practical difficulties claimed as a basis for
the variance or waiver.  The petition shall also include the name and
address of each affected property owner of directly abutting property along
the side of the property under consideration.



   (C)   Referral to the Board of Appeals and Adjustments.  Before
authorization of any variance or waiver of platting, the request shall be
referred to the Board of Appeals and Adjustments for study concerning the
effect of the proposed variance or waiver of platting upon the comprehensive
plan and on the character and development of the neighborhood and for its
recommendation to the Council in connection with the request.  The Board
shall make its recommendation within 90 days after the request is referred to
it and after that time, the City Council may act without the recommendation
from the Board. The Board may recommend conditions related to the variance or
waiver request regarding the location, character and other features of the
proposed building structure or use as it may deem advisable.



   (D)   Issuance.  The Board of Appeals and Adjustments may hold a
public hearing on the variance or waiver request if they deem it necessary or
advisable.  The procedures for the notice and public hearing shall be the
same as that described in § 155.400(D) of the city’s zoning chapter,
except that the public hearing shall be held by the Board.  If the City
Council shall determine that the special conditions applying to the
structures or land in question are particular to the property and do not
apply generally to other land or structures in the district in which the land
is located, and that the granting of the proposed variance or waiver will not
be contrary to the intent of this chapter and the comprehensive guide plan
and that the granting of the variance or waiver will not merely serve as a
convenience to the applicant, but is necessary to alleviate demonstrable
hardships or difficulties, the Council may grant the variance or waiver and
impose certain conditions and safeguards therein.



   (E)   Referral back to the Board of Appeals and Adjustments.  The
City Council may refer any variance or waiver petition back to the Board of
Appeals and Adjustments for further review and recommendation.



   (F)   Denial.  Variances or waivers may be denied by the City
Council and the denial shall constitute a finding and determination that the
conditions required for approval did not exist.  The city shall not accept a
petition for a variance or waiver that has been previously denied for a
period of one year after denial by the City Council.



   (G)   Lapse of variance.  A variance or waiver becomes void one
year after it was granted unless made use of within the year or the longer
time period as the City Council may provide.



(‘81 Code, § B1-50)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83)



§ 153.78  PLATS; AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   The procedures for filing petitions and holding hearings
required for preliminary plats and final plats shall be as described in this
section and §§ 153.20(B), 153.21, 153.22(A), 153.23(A) and 153.24(A).



   (B)   Amendments.  This chapter may be amended by the majority vote
of the City Council only after a public hearing has been held by the Planning
Commission to consider the amendment.  If the Planning Commission has not
made a recommendation within 60 days of the hearing the City Council can act
without a Planning Commission recommendation.



   (C)   Initiation.  Proceedings for a petition or an amendment under
this chapter shall be initiated by:



      (1)   A petition of the owner for a subdivision by preliminary
plat, final plat, waiver or variance;



      (2)   An action of the Planning Commission; or



      (3)   An action of the City Council.



   (D)   Petitions.  All petitions for a subdivision by preliminary
plat which are initiated by the owner or owners of the property shall be
filed with the City Clerk and the application shall be accompanied by an
abstractor's certified property certificate showing the property owners
within 350 feet of the outer boundaries of the property in question.  The
petition shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission.



   (E)   Public hearing, notice and procedure.  The Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing on all petitions for subdivision
affording the parties interested the opportunity to be heard and shall give
not less than a ten-day notice of time and place of the hearing, published in
the designated legal newspaper of the city. The notice shall also include the
description of the land and a summary of the proposed subdivision.  At least
ten days before the hearing, the City Clerk shall mail an identical notice to
the owners of the property and to each of the property owners within 350 feet
of the outside boundaries of the land proposed to be subdivided.  Failure to
give mail notice to individual property owners or defects in the notice shall
not invalidate the proceeding, provided a bona fide attempt to comply with
this section has been made.



(‘81 Code, § B1-51)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 963, passed
4-24-14)



§ 153.79  FEES, COSTS AND ESCROWS.



   (A)   The required fees paid for each required petition shall be as
specified in the Chapter 35 appendix.  Where the fees do not cover costs
incurred by the city in reviewing, investigating, administering and
processing of the petition, the petitioner shall be required to pay
additional fees upon receipt of an itemized invoice from the city.



   (B)   Any costs incurred by the city for any legal services rendered
by its attorneys in connection with any subdivision project under this
chapter shall be paid by the petitioner.



   (C)   When the city determined that a project will necessitate the
outside review or involvement of its consultants such that it will incur
costs in excess of $250, a non-interest bearing cash escrow may be
required.  An escrow account shall be established in accordance with §
35.28.



(‘81 Code, § B1-52)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 317, passed
4-12-84; Am. Ord. 475, passed 3-8-90; Am. Ord. 534, passed 2-13-92)



§ 153.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is provided shall be subject to the fine in § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   In addition to being subject to punishment as
provided in division (A), any person who shall fail to obtain a permit as
herein required, or who shall fail to comply with any of the conditions upon
which the same is issued or who fails to complete the filling or grading
within the time prescribed by the permit, may be enjoined from further work
under the permit.



      (2)   The Council hereby reserves the right to revoke the
permit upon a violation, and upon revocation any continuance of the work
shall be a violation of this code and if the Council shall order any positive
act to be done to conform the work being done with that authorized by the
permit, the same shall be completed before any further filling or grading is
done and within ten days after mailing a notice to do the acts to the person
to whom the permit was issued.



(‘81 Code, § B1-16)  (Ord. 293, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 521, passed
10-10-91)



CHAPTER 154:  SIGN REGULATIONS



Section



   154.01   Objectives



   154.02   Definitions



   154.03   Signs allowed without a permit



   154.04   Signs requiring a permit



   154.05   Prohibited signs



   154.06   Performance standards



   154.07   Sign administration



   Appendix A:  Location prohibitions



   Appendix B:  Temporary sign sizes



   Appendix C:  Signs requiring permits



   Appendix D:  Setback and height



§ 154.01  OBJECTIVES.



   It shall be the intent of the provisions of this chapter to achieve the
following objectives:



   (A)   To establish standards which would permit businesses in the
city a reasonable and equitable opportunity to identify themselves;



   (B)   To preserve and promote civic beauty and not allow signs which
would detract from this objective because of unusual size, shape, height,
location, condition, cluttering or illumination;



   (C)   To insure that signs in the city shall not create a safety
hazard; and



   (D)   To preserve and protect the value of land and buildings, and
to preserve and protect landscapes.



(‘81 Code, § 6-102)  (Ord. 495, passed 9-20-90)



§ 154.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADVERTISING SIGN.  A sign or billboard which directs attention to a
business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered
elsewhere than on the premises.



   ALLIED BUSINESS.  Same or similar business with common name such as
new and used auto sales.



   AREA IDENTIFICATION SIGN.  A ground sign that identifies the name of a
commercial, industrial, or business park development complex consisting of
two or more businesses.



   AREA OF SIGN.  That area within the marginal lines or extreme outside
edge of the surface which bears the advertisement, or in the case of
messages, figures or symbols attached directly to any part of a building,
that area which is included in the smallest rectangle which can be made to
circumscribe any message, figure or symbol displayed thereon.  For a sign
with not more than two back-to-back faces, only the area of one side is
computed in determining the sign area.



   AWNING.  An attached canopy or similar structure designed to provide
cover for entrances, walkways and windows.



   BALLOON SIGN.  An inflatable balloon or device used to draw attention
to a business or product.



   BANDED AREAS.  That portion of a building generally located along the
front which is constructed for purposes of attaching building signs in a
consistent and coordinated manner.



   BANNER.  A temporary display of information on material such as canvas
or plastic.



   BENCH SIGN.  A sign attached to or a part of a sitting bench.



   BILLBOARD SIGN.  See ADVERTISING SIGN.



   BUILDING SIGN.  A sign attached to and not projecting more than two
feet from the exterior wall or roof of a building.



   BUSINESS SIGN.  A sign which directs attention to the business or
profession conducted on the premises.  A “For Sale,” “For Lease” or
“Information” sign shall also be deemed a BUSINESS SIGN.  In order to be
considered a BUSINESS SIGN rather than an advertising sign, all of the gross
surface area of the sign must pertain to the major functions or name of the
business, the trade names of primary products or goods manufactured or sold
on the premises.



   CHANGEABLE SIGN. A sign or portion of a sign that has copy which
recurrently changes or is intended to be recurrently changed for different
message text or graphics. Changeable signs include readerboard signs,
electronic message signs, and electronic graphic display signs as defined
herein.



   CONSTRUCTION SIGN.  A sign used temporarily at the construction site
identifying the contractors and builder.



   COPY AREA.  The smallest vertical rectangle that can be drawn around
the message on a sign.



   DEVELOPMENT COMPLEX.  An area containing more than one building on
either a single parcel or on separate, but contiguous lots of record which
was improved pursuant to a unified site design and overall land use plan
approved by the city.



   DEVELOPMENT SIGN.  A temporary sign located on the site of a new
development, listing owners, developers, builders and similar identifying
information.



   DIGITAL OR LED DISPLAY SIGN.  Any sign or a portion of a sign, of
which letters, numbers or other characters are changeable and visible only
due to electronic, digital or LCD/LED display methods.



   DIRECTIONAL SIGN.  A sign erected upon private property to provide
pedestrian or traffic directions and which bears no advertising information.



   DRIVEWAY MEDIAN.  A raised median intended to divide or channel
vehicular traffic.



   DOUBLE FACE SIGN.  A sign displaying identical information on opposite
sides.



   ELECTRONIC GRAPHIC DISPLAY SIGN. A sign that electronically displays
images, graphics, or pictures, with or without alphanumeric characters,
utilizing a display sign area, in which the characters consist of and are
created by a small number of matrix elements using different combinations of
light emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs, or other
illumination devices within the display area or transmitted digital copy to
the display area which may be a plasma display or other monitor screen.



   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN. A sign that electronically displays
non-pictorial, alphanumeric characters utilizing a display sign area, in
which the characters consist of and are created by a small number of matrix
elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber
optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices within the display area or
transmitted digital copy to the display area which may be a plasma display or
other monitor screen.



   FLASHING SIGN. Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is
not maintained both stationary and constant in intensity and color at all
times when a sign is in use. An electronic message sign does not constitute a
flashing sign.



   FREESTANDING SIGN.  A pylon or ground sign that is not part of the
principal structure.



   GASOLINE PUMP ISLAND CANOPY.  A structure that provides shelter over
gasoline pump islands.



   GRADE OF SIGN.  The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface
of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the sign and a line
ten feet from the sign.



   GROUND SIGN.  A sign erected upon or supported by ground and not
attached to any building.



   IDENTIFICATION SIGN.  A sign which bears the name and/or address of
the occupant of the building.



   ILLUMINATED SIGN.   Any sign that has any illumination directed upon
or within or around the sign or structure.



   INFORMATIONAL SIGN.  A sign that identifies building functions and is
attached thereto, such as car wash bay or drive-in window.



   MAJOR ANCHOR/CENTER SIGN.  A specially designed, masonry clad,
freestanding sign used to identify single-tenant buildings that are in excess
of 50,000 square feet or multi-tenant centers in excess of 100,000 square
feet in building size.  A conditional use permit is required for a MAJOR
ANCHOR/ CENTER SIGN prior to issuance of a sign permit.



   MENU BOARD.  A sign listing drive-up items in conjunction with a
business serving customers in a car.



   MONUMENT SIGN.  A ground sign intended to permanently identify by name
a residential development.



   MOVING DEVICE.  A device which moves or rotates to attract attention
for advertising purposes.



   MULTI-OCCUPANCY BUILDING.  A building designed to be occupied by two
or more separate businesses.



   NON-COMMERCIAL SIGNS.  Any sign that presents a message that is
political, philosophical, social or personal and does not advertise or sell a
service, product or other commercial undertaking.



   PENNANT.  A small flag used for decorative purposes or to attract
attention.



   POLITICAL SIGN.  A temporary sign which displays information
pertaining to an upcoming governmental district, city, county, state or
national election.



   PORTABLE SIGN.  A sign so designed as to be movable from one location
to another and not permanently attached to the ground or to any immobile
structure.  A PORTABLE SIGN may consist of a mobile structure such as a
semi-truck trailer or other device whose primary function during a specific
time period is to serve as a sign.



   PROMOTIONAL SIGN.  A temporary sign which shall not exist for more
than 30 days which promotes civic events or promotions limited to city
celebrations, Christmas tree sales, Fire Department’s Booya and special
school events.



   PYLON SIGN.  A ground sign erected upon a single post or posts or
shafts that converge at a common base with the posts not more than 15 feet
apart, with the display portion mounted on top thereof.



   READERBOARD SIGN.   A sign in which the copy consists of alphanumeric
characters and is created or modified manually.



   REAL ESTATE SIGN.  A sign intended to aid on the sale, rental or lease
of real property.



   REAR IDENTIFICATION SIGN.  A sign located adjacent to the rear
entrance to individual businesses to clearly identify the location for
“deliveries.”  This identification sign shall not be considered in
computing the maximum permitted sign area for a business.



   REVOLVING SIGN.  A sign which rotates at a constant rate of
revolutions per minute.



   ROOF LINE.  That line at which an exterior wall surface of a building
structure departs from a vertical plane.



   SETBACK.  The term setback shall have the same definition as that set
fort in the zoning regulations of this code.  Pylon signs, exclusive of the
supporting structure, may project three feet into the minimum required
setback.



   SIGN.  A name, identification, description, display, illustration,
structure, device which is affixed to, or painted, or represented directly or
indirectly upon a building or other outdoor surface or a piece of land, and
which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person,
institution, organization or business.



   STORY.  That portion of a building included between the upper surface
of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the
topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper
surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.



   TEMPORARY SIGN.  Any sign which is erected for a limited time and/or
special purpose.



   TRAFFIC DIRECTIONAL SIGN.  A sign erected by a public agency for the
purpose of guiding vehicular and pedestrian traffic in a safe and convenient
manner and which bears no advertising information.



(‘81 Code, § 6-103)  (Ord. 495, passed 9-20-90; Am. Ord. 504, passed
2-28-91; Am. Ord. 790, passed 4-27-06; Am. Ord. 876, passed 12-22-09; Am.
Ord. 958, passed 12-26-13; Am. Ord. 964, passed 4-24-14)



§ 154.03  SIGNS ALLOWED WITHOUT A PERMIT.



   The following outdoor signs are permissible without a permit or payment
of permit fees provided the standards and restrictions in this section are
met.



   (A)   Development signs.



      (1)   On-site residential.  One temporary on- site
development sign shall be permitted for each subdivision in any residential
zoning district (including multiple dwelling) under the following conditions:



         (a)   The sign shall only be permitted for a residential
subdivision after a final plat has been filed;



         (b)   The sign shall be located at least 50 feet from
any existing or to be occupied dwelling unit;



         (c)   The sign shall be removed when the residential
subdivision is 95% sold out or the multiple dwelling project is 75% sold or
rented; and



         (d)   Where more than one builder is involved in a
residential subdivision, there still shall be only one sign as described
above, which may list the builders for the subdivision.



      (2)   On-site commercial and industrial.  One temporary
on-site development sign shall be permitted in any commercial or industrial
zoning district under the following conditions:



         (a)   The sign shall only be permitted after the final
plat has been filed;



         (b)   The sign shall not be located upon a developed lot
and shall be removed within three months after the lot upon which it is
located is developed, whereupon it may be moved to another vacant lot within
the subdivision without paying a new fee; and



         (c)   The sign shall be removed when 95% of the lots in
the subdivision are built upon.



      (3)   Construction signs.



         (a)   One temporary construction sign shall be permitted
upon each property, in any zoning district during construction, in addition
to any development signs on site.



         (b)   This sign shall only be permitted after a building
permit has been issued and shall be removed before the building or any part
thereof is occupied.



   (B)   Informational signs.



      (1)   Informational signs, attached to a building, shall be
permitted in order to locate building functions such as a car wash bay or
drive-in window.



      (2)   Informational signs shall meet building sign
requirements for maximum height, shall be allowed for each bay, door, or
window at a size not to exceed six square feet in area each, and shall be in
addition to any other business signs permitted by this chapter.



   (C)   Directional signs.



      (1)   On-site directional signs, not exceeding a maximum of
two square feet per sign and a maximum number of four signs per site, shall
be permitted in any commercial, industrial or institutional zoning district
for the purpose of directing vehicular or pedestrian traffic in a safe and
convenient manner.



      (2)   Off-site directional signs may be permitted by the City
Council to direct the public to emergency facilities.



   (D)   Real estate signs.



      (1)   One temporary sign per street frontage advertising
buildings for rent and for sale shall be permitted in the front yard or front
side of the building.  The sign shall be removed within ten days after the
property is rented or the closing of the sale.



      (2)   Open house signs, which state that a particular house
will be open for inspection by the public for a limited number of hours on a
specific day, may be placed in the city boulevard area only during the open
house hours.  Signs may be placed within a six block radius of the open
house except as noted in division (D)(3).  Signs must be set back a minimum
of five feet from the curb and may not be placed on any sidewalk.



      (3)   Open house and for sale signs may not be placed on the
following described street rights-of- way, easements, roadway surface,
sidewalks, medians and decorative surfaces and are hereby determined to be in
violation of the sign regulations.  Any sign so placed, according to
Appendix A, is a nuisance and traffic hazard.



   (E)   Promotional sign. 



      (1)   Special civic promotions or events.  In promotion of a
special school, city or other civic event, celebration or festival, two
ground signs not exceeding 32 square feet in area, for each sign, are
permissable no more than 30 days before the first day of an event,
celebration or festival and shall be removed immediately upon the completion
of the event, celebration or festival.  Signs permitted under this division
may be located in any zoning district subject to the permission of the
property owner.



      (2)   Christmas tree sale signs.  Any signs in connection
with Christmas tree sales shall be subject to the regulations thereof in
Chapter 114.



   (F)   Pump island signs.  A double faced or a single face sign with
a single side not in excess of three square feet shall be permitted on each
gasoline sales pump island, not to exceed ten feet in height.



   (G)   Pedestrian awning or canopy sign.  A business sign, limited
to one foot in height and six feet in length, may be located upon the front
of a building or canvas awning provided the awning is attached to the
building and meets the minimum building setbacks of the city’s zoning
chapter.  A pedestrian awning or canopy sign may be placed under the canopy,
perpendicular to the pedestrian walkway, provided it is at least eight feet
above the pedestrian walkway.



   (H)   Wall coverage.  The total area of all signs on any side of a
building shall not exceed 20% of the total area of that particular side of
the building as measured from the ground to the bottom edge of the roof. 
Inside window signs shall be excluded from the wall coverage computation but
shall not exceed 50% of the coverage of the window area along any side of a
building.



   (I)   Rear entrance identification signs.  Rear entrance
identification signs not exceeding six square feet in copy area shall be
permitted as building signs located adjacent to the rear entrance to
individual businesses to clearly identify the location for
“deliveries.”  The identification sign shall not be considered in
computing the maximum permitted sign area for a business.



   (J)   Political signs.



      (1)   Temporary political signs may be put up no earlier than
100 days prior to an election and shall be removed within ten days after the
election for which they were applicable.



      (2)   Each sign shall show the name and address of the person
responsible for the placement of the sign, who shall be deemed prima facie
the person who placed the sign and is responsible for its removal.



      (3)   In all cases where campaign signs are not removed within
the time limit allowed or after notice to be removed by the city, the city
may cause the signs to be removed and the costs of removal shall be charged
to the person named on the sign.



      (4)   The size is limited to 32 square feet, except as
prescribed by state statutes.



   (K)   Non-commercial signs.  In any residential district, one sign
per lot, up to 32 square feet is allowed.  This sign may be in addition to
any real estate signs on the property.



   (L)   No trespass/no hunting signs.  No trespass, no hunting and
similar restrictive signs, not to exceed two square feet in area may be
placed upon private property by the owner.



   (M)   Garage sale signs.  Signs advertising garage sales shall be
limited to a maximum of three days for each sale.  There shall be no more
than three sales each calendar year for a household and signs shall not
exceed three square feet in area.



   (N)   Bench sign.  Signs painted upon or otherwise attached to or a
part of a sitting bench at an MTC or MVTA designated bus stop shall be
permitted in any district.



   (O)   Signs erected by the city, county or state.



   (P)   Park and ride site sign(s).  The Metropolitan Transit
Commission or Minnesota Valley Transit Authority shall be permitted to erect
on-site signs to identify park and ride site locations and bus stops with
suitable signs provided permission for the signage has been obtained from the
property owner.



   (Q)   Minnesota zoo signs.  Signs within the Minnesota Zoological
Garden that are not within 100 feet of a public street or road.



   (R)   Address numbers.  Address numbers less than six square feet
in total copy area shall not be subject to the maximum sign area provisions
of this chapter.



   (S)   Public interest landmark signs.  Public interest landmark
signs (such as downtown entry gateways, park signs, plaza areas) may be
erected on property which is owned or controlled by the city and must be
approved by the City Council.



   (T)   Table of temporary sign size regulations. Regulation
concerning size requirements shall be as detailed in Appendix B of this
chapter.



(‘81 Code, § 6-104)  (Ord. 495, passed 9-20-90; Am. Ord. 501, passed
12-13-90; Am. Ord. 555, passed 5-13-93; Am. Ord. 645, passed 4-9-98; Am. Ord.
711, passed 4-25-02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 154.04  SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT.



   The following signs may be erected or maintained, as shown for each
zoning district or land use, only after obtaining a permit from the city and
payment of permit fees, providing the standards and restrictions in this
section are met.



   (A)   Table of types of signs permitted.  The types of signs
permitted upon issuance of a permit shall be as detailed in Appendix C of
this chapter.



   (B)   Building signs; location on building.



      (1)   Building signs shall be affixed to buildings according
to the following requirements:



         (a)   Prior to issuance of a sign permit, the owner of
the building shall designate a signage plan for all sides of single or
multi-occupant buildings.  The signage plan shall include the maximum height
and width of signs, materials and colors to be used on signs and the location
and dimensions of the sign band area.  All building signs shall be affixed
to a building wall, within the designated sign band area, and shall not
exceed the allowable dimensions of this code.  All signs proposed by
building owners or tenants shall adhere to the requirements outlined in the
signage plan for the building.



         (b)   The sign band area shall be located no higher than
the top of the parapet walls or the overhang of the roof.



         (c)   In multi-story buildings, no signs shall be
permitted above the ceiling of the first floor, except as provided in
division (C) below.



         (d)   Primary signs shall be placed on the side of the
building where the main entrance is located.  In buildings with individual
entrances, business identification signs shall be placed within ten feet of
the main entrance to each business.  Signs on the exterior of an enclosed
mall shall be located near entrances closest to the business location.  Sign
locations for each tenant shall be assigned and identified in the signage
plan.



         (e)   Additional building or business identification
signs are permitted under the following conditions:



            1.   The owner/agent shall submit a master signage
plan containing the following information:



               a.   A dimensioned site plan and elevations
of the building or buildings to be included in the master sign plan;



               b.   Computation of the maximum total sign
area, the maximum area for individual signs, the height of the signs, and the
number of free-standing signs allowed in the plan under this ordinance; and



               c.   An accurate indication on the site plan
of the proposed location of each present and future sign of any type.



            2.   The maximum number of signs affixed to a
building by each business within the building shall be controlled through the
master sign plan.



               3.   Additional signs are allowed on a side
of a building which abuts business or industrially zoned property or a public
street, except where the side of the building faces an adjacent public street
which abuts residentially zoned property.  Additional signs shall not be
installed on the same face of the building as the main entrance sign.



            4.   The wall of a building where additional signs
are located shall have sign band, wall materials and/or exterior colors
similar to the main entrance wall and all trash, storage, and loading
facilities along the wall shall be screened from adjacent properties in the
same materials and/or exterior colors.



            5.   In multi-occupant buildings, additional signs
shall be affixed to the building sign band, which is identified in the master
signage plan.



            6.   Additional building signs shall be identical
to the main primary business sign, but shall not be considered as part of the
total square footage allowed for that property or business.



      (2)   Common signage plan.



         (a)   If the owners of two or more contiguous
(disregarding intervening streets and alleys) lots or the owner of a single
lot with more than one building (not including any accessory building) file
with the city a common signage plan conforming with the provisions of this
section, a 25% increase in the maximum total sign area shall be allowed for
each building or lot included.  This bonus shall be allocated as the
owner(s) elect.



         (b)   The common signage plan shall contain all of the
information required for a master signage plan and shall also specify
standards for consistency among all signs on the lots affected by the plan
with regard to color scheme, lettering or graphic style, lighting, location
of each sign on the buildings, materials and sign proportions.



         (c)   Other provisions of a plan may contain other
restrictions as the owners of the development or buildings may reasonably
determine.



         (d)   The plan shall be signed by all owners or their
authorized agents in form as required by the city.



         (e)   A signage plan shall be included with any building
permit authorization, site plan review, nonresidential planned unit
development, exterior remodel or other official plan required for the
proposed development and shall be reviewed simultaneously with other plans.



         (f)   A signage plan may be amended by filing a new plan
that conforms with all of the requirements of the city code in effect at that
time.



         (g)   Existing signs not conforming to plan.  If a new
or amended signage plan is filed for a property on which existing signs are
located, it shall include a schedule for bringing into compliance, within
three years, all signs not conforming to the proposed amended plan or
requirements of this chapter in effect on the date of submission.



         (h)   After approval of a signage plan, no sign shall be
erected, placed, painted or maintained, except in conformance with the plan,
and the plan may be enforced in the same way as any provision of this code. 
In case of any conflict between the provisions of a plan and this code, the
code shall control.



   (C)   Multi-story building signs.  For multi-story buildings, in
all zoning districts, no signs attached to the building, temporary or
permanent, shall be permitted above the first floor except for the following:



      (1)   Building of four stories or more, located in a
commercial or industrial district shall be permitted additional building
signs in addition to any signs otherwise permitted by this chapter.



      (2)   The additional building signs shall be a maximum of two
signs with each sign not to exceed two square feet of sign area for each
1,000 square feet of gross floor area of the building.



      (3)   The two additional building signs shall not be located
upon the same side of the building.



      (4)   The two additional building signs shall be identical in
all respects.



      (5)   The two additional building signs shall not extend above
the highest outside wall or below the fourth floor of the building.



      (6)   The two additional building signs shall not extend
across more than 40% of the width of the side of the building upon which it
is located or 40% of the height for vertical signs.



      (7)   The additional building signs shall only be permitted
after review by the city Planning Commission and approval by the City Council.



   (D)   Monument signs.  A monument sign intended to permanently
identify a multiple dwelling or single-family residential development shall
be permitted under the following conditions:



      (1)   There shall be an entity established to the satisfaction
of the city such as homeowners association, which shall be clearly
responsible for the perpetual maintenance of the monument sign and its
environs with corresponding powers to raise maintenance capital; or



      (2)   In the alternative, there shall be a $1,000 fee paid to
the city and a ground easement surrounding the monument sign granted to the
city in order that the city may remove the monument sign and its environs if
it is not maintained or if it otherwise becomes necessary to remove the sign.



      (3)   The monument sign shall not exceed 40 square feet of
copy area.



      (4)   The monument sign shall be a minimum of 30 feet from any
existing or future residence.



      (5)   The city, at the discretion of the City Council, may
deny a permit for a monument sign where it is determined that the monument
sign may create an undue burden upon the city by virtue of its size,
location, building materials or potential need for maintenance.



   (E)   Major anchor/center signs.



      (1)   Major anchor signage.  One major anchor/center sign may
be permitted to identify tenants or building occupants in excess of 50,000
square feet, subject to subsection (3) below.



      (2)   Shopping center signage.  Two major anchor/center signs
may be permitted for a center in excess of 150,000 square feet, subject to
the provisions of subsection (3) below.



      (3)   Conditional use permit.  All major anchor/center sign
structures are subject to a conditional use permit, as provided in § 155.399
of the code, and site plan approval by the City Council.  The following
criteria shall apply to all major anchor/center signs:



         (a)   The property on which the sign is to be located
shall be zoned “RB” or “SC” and the sign shall abut County Road 42
(150th Street), County Road 23 (Cedar Avenue), or a portion of the Downtown
Ring Route.



         (b)   The major anchor/center sign(s) shall be the only
freestanding sign(s) permitted for the business or center.  Signs may be
placed on any lot within the planned unit development or subdivision provided
the sign applicant controls the land by easement or title.



         (c)   A maximum of 75% of the sign structure exterior
face shall be encased in the same style and color brick, or other approved
exterior material, used on the face of the principle building.  A minimum of
25% of the exterior face of the sign structure shall be encased in a brick,
title, glass or steel rail similar in design and color to the city’s
downtown streetscape improvements.  This material shall be concentrated
between the finished ground grade and 42 inches above the grade.



         (d)   The sign shall be set back a minimum of 13 feet
from the property line, pathway easement or public street right-of-way
line.  Signs may be no closer than 300 feet to the nearest freestanding sign
on the same side of the right-of-way, nor closer than 50 feet to a corner
intersection of two right-of-way lines.



         (e)   The maximum height of the sign structure shall be
28 feet above finished grade. Architectural design details, similar to the
design of the principle building, may extend five feet above the maximum
height, 28 feet, of the sign.  Sign area shall not exceed 180 square feet
per side of the sign, two sides maximum.



         (f)   All signage shall have individual, internal
backlit letters and symbols.  Additional sign lighting may be ground
lighting, the source of which is concealed from view.



         (g)   Landscaping plans for the area around the base of
the sign shall be completed and reviewed as part of the conditional use
permit/site plan approval process.



   (F)   Area identification sign.  Area identification sign(s) shall
be located in the following manner:



      (1)   Area identification sign(s) shall be located upon the
property of the development complex it is identifying.



      (2)   Area identification sign(s) shall be located along a
public street frontage.



      (3)   Area identification signs shall be located a minimum of
50 feet apart from any other area identification sign or pylon sign.



      (4)   No more than one area identification sign for a
particular complex shall be located along the same street frontage.



      (5)   An area identification sign(s) may identify individual
businesses within the complex, subject to all of the following regulations: 



         (a)   The area identification sign is located in a
non-retail commercial, industrial or business park zoning districts.



         (b)   The lot on which the area identification sign is
located and the lot on which the business that is identified on the area
identification sign must be located within the same zoning district or within
the same planned development.



         (c)   The lot on which the area identification sign is
located and the lot on which the business that is identified on the area
identification sign must be located on separate lots within the same
development complex, but served by and have direct access to the same public
street.



         (d)   The lot on which the business that is identified
on the area identification sign must have 50 feet or less frontage on the
public street providing direct access, and less than 400 feet frontage on an
arterial or collector road thereby limiting direct visibility of the building
in which the business is located.



         (e)   The sign copy for an individual business(es) on
the area identification sign shall be permitted only as part of the area
identification sign subject to the following requirements:



            1.   The area identification sign structure as a
whole shall not exceed 8 feet in height or 20 feet in length.



            2.   The area identification sign structure shall
consist of the same style and color brick, stone, or other approved exterior
material used on the face of the principal building.  The exterior face
shall be encased in the same style and color brick, or other approved
exterior material, used on the face of the principal building(s).



            3.   The area identification sign shall have a
maximum copy area of 110 sq. ft.



            4.   The copy area for all individual businesses
to be identified shall not exceed 60% of the total copy area of the area
identification sign.



   (G)   Gasoline pump island signs.



      (1)   Gasoline pump island canopies shall be entitled to two
signs in addition to those otherwise permitted on the principal structure.



      (2)   Canopy signs shall not exceed ten feet in length or 20
square feet each and shall not be placed on the same side of the canopy.



      (3)   Lettering on the signs shall not exceed two feet in
height or the average height of the letters on the sign attached to the
principal structure, whichever is less.



      (4)   Canopy signs shall be placed in a manner that will allow
a six-inch minimum border between the top, bottom and sides of a canopy face.
The sign area is determined by measuring the text only.  Stripes or colors
do not contribute to the sign area computation.



   (H)   Building sign substitution.  A ground sign may be substituted
for all permitted building signs when all of the following conditions are met.



      (1)   The lot must be in a limited business zone (LB) or be a
limited business use in a planned development zone.



      (2)   The lot must be a through lot with double street
frontage, but may not be a corner lot.



      (3)   The building’s architecture must be of a style or
character which does not lend itself to the use of a building sign.



      (4)   Any existing building signs must be removed and no
otherwise permitted building signs shall be erected.



      (5)   The ground sign must be located on the side of the lot
abutting the minor or interior roadway.



      (6)   The ground sign must meet the size, height and setback
requirements for the primary ground sign permitted on the site.



      (7)   The ground sign shall be in addition to all other
permitted ground signs.



   (I)   Other signs.  The following additional signs are permitted
under this section, subject to the restrictions thereof.  Professionally
manufactured banners, streamers and balloon signs are permitted, upon the
issuance of a permit from the city therefor, in commercial, industrial and
institutional zoning districts for the purposes of promoting special
promotions, sales or events.  Such temporary signs shall also be permitted
on properties located in the “M-4” to “M-8” zoning districts that are
used for multiple residential apartments or rental unit buildings under
single ownership in order to advertise such  properties or units for rent or
lease.  Any banner, streamer and balloon sign shall be located upon the site
of the promotion, sale or event and shall be removed no later than 15 days
after the first day of the special promotion, sale or event and will not be
permitted in any one location more than 30 days per calendar year.  Such
temporary signs shall not include lit, portable, or handmade signs.



   (J)   Menu boards.  Menu boards subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   A maximum of one menu board shall be permitted on a
parcel of land with a restaurant providing drive-up window service. 
Restaurants providing drive-up through window service shall be permitted one
menu board per drive-through lane up to a maximum two menu boards.



      (2)   When one menu board exists for a drive-through window
service, the menu board shall be a maximum of 50 square feet in area; if more
than one menu board exists, each menu board shall be a maximum of 36 square
feet in area and may be in addition to any other signs permitted by this
chapter.



      (3)   The menu board shall be single-sided and oriented in
such a manner so that the signs provide information to the patrons using the
drive-through facility only, and do not provide supplemental advertising to
pass-by traffic.



      (4)   The menu board signage shall be completely enclosed
within one sign area.



      (5)   Order confirmation signage no greater than one square
foot and incorporated into the drive-through speaker pedestal shall not be
calculated as part of the menu board signage area. Order confirmation signage
greater than one square foot shall be incorporated into menu board and
calculated as part of said board's sign area.



   (K)   Digital or LED display sign for motor fuel sales price sign. 
A portion of an approved sign for a motor fuel sales use may include a
digital or LED display sign, provided the following requirements are met:



      (1)   The display shall be steady, stationary, shielded
artificial light sources that emanate directly from the interior of the sign.



      (2)   The digital or LED display depicts only the motor fuel
sale price.



      (3)   The display does not cause glare for motorists,
pedestrians or neighboring premises.



      (4)   The digital or LED copy may not exceed 16 inches in
height.



      (5)   The digital or LED copy may not compromise more than 25%
of the total area of the approved sign.



   (L)   Changeable signs subject to the following requirements:



      (1)   Only readerboard signs and electronic message signs are
permitted;



      (2)   The sign and the structure on which it is located shall
be permanently installed and shall not be a portable sign;



      (3)   The sign shall not be located within any residential or
multiple family residential district;



      (4)   No graphic(s) or picture shall be present on the display
area or as the background of the sign display area;



      (5)   If the changeable sign is an electronic message sign,
the following requirements shall be met:



         (a)   The text or message on the sign shall be
maintained as one color;



         (b)   The background of the display area shall be
maintained as a solid, single color; and



         (c)   The message shall be static, but may be changed at
20-minute intervals, and the message text shall not scroll or ticker across
the sign display area. The only exception to this provision shall be for
time, date, and temperature information which may be considered one display
message and may change every three seconds.



      (6)   There shall be no illuminated border around or within
the display area;



      (7)   No changeable sign shall be affixed to the building; and



      (8)   Electronic message signs used in connection with public
roadway operations by the state, county or city shall not be subject to the
permit or permit fee required herein.



(‘81 Code, § 6-105)  (Ord. 495, passed 9-20-90; Am. Ord. 536, passed
2-27-92; Am. Ord. 555, passed 5-13-93; Am. Ord. 645, passed 4-9-98; Am. Ord.
711, passed 4-25-02; Am. Ord. 783, passed 9-22-05; Am. Ord.790, passed
4-27-06; Am. Ord. 939, passed 2-28-13; Am. Ord. 958, passed 12-26-13; Am.
Ord. 964, passed 4-24-14)



§ 154.05  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   (A)   Painting directly on exterior walls.  Signs shall not be
painted directly on any exterior building surface but shall be on a separate
frame.  Signs, letters and symbols may be attached directly to a wall by
adhesive or mechanical means.



   (B)   Paper signs.  There shall be no paper cardboard or similar
signs, notices or flyers, pasted, tacked or otherwise affixed to the exterior
wall or window of any building.



   (C)   Sequential flashing copy or display and flashing, rotating,
strobe light. There shall be no use of sequential flashing (illuminated) copy
or display or flashing, rotating, strobe lights or similar devices. This
provision does not apply to:



      (1)   Electronic message signs for which a permit was issued
hereunder subject to compliance of all the regulations thereof set forth in
this chapter;



      (2)   Traffic control devices in connection with roadway
operations by the state, county, or city; or



      (3)   Illuminating devices that are required to be installed
pursuant to federal or state safety regulations.



   (D)   Portable or movable signs.  There shall be no use of a sign
so designed as to be movable from one location to another, such as, but not
limited to, readerboards, semi-truck trailer or other device whose function
is to serve as a sign.



   (E)   Overhanging signs.  No permanent or temporary signs shall be
upon or overhang the public right-of-way or the boundary of adjacent property
except traffic signs erected by the city, county or state.



   (F)   Open house, for sale and the like. Open house, garage sale and
for sale signs shall not be placed on the following described street
rights-of-way, easements, roadway surface, sidewalks, medians and decorative
surfaces.  Any sign so placed, as detailed in Appendix A of this chapter, is
hereby determined to be in violation of the sign regulations, a nuisance and
a traffic hazard.



   (G)   Advertising or billboard signs; prohibited.  No sign which
directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment shall be
placed or located within any street rights-of-way.  No sign shall be on
property other than the premises on which the business, commodity, service or
entertainment is located.



   (H)   Independent or imitating signs. Any sign, signal, marking or
device existing independently or with a sign or any illumination on any sign
which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles any official traffic
control device or railroad sign or signal, or emergency vehicle signs is
prohibited.



   (I)   Interfering signs. Any sign, signal, marking, or device
existing independently or with a sign or any illumination on any sign which
attempts to direct the movement of traffic or which obstructs from view or
interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device,
street sign, or railroad sign or signal is prohibited.



   (J)   Electronic graphic display sign. Electronic graphic display
signs are prohibited.



(‘81 Code, § 6-106)  (Ord. 495, passed 9-20-90; Am. Ord. 501, passed
12-13-90; Am. Ord. 504, passed 2-28-91; Am. Ord. 645, passed 4-9-98; Am. Ord.
958, passed 12-26-13)



§ 154.06  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Lighting regulations.



      (1)   All illuminated signs shall have an indirect or diffused
light source and be designed so as not to direct rays of light onto public
streets or adjacent property creating a public nuisance or safety hazard.



      (2)   There shall be no flashing signs permitted in any
district, except for signs or traffic control devices in connection with
roadway operations by the state, county or city.



      (3)   No illuminated sign shall change in either color or
intensity of light except for signs or traffic control devices in connection
with roadway operations by the state, county or city.



      (4)   Lighted, revolving signs shall be permitted, but the
bottom of the sign surface shall be a minimum of 12 feet above the street
grade and a minimum of 100 feet from the center of any public street
intersection.



      (5)   Between sunrise and sunset, the maximum luminance of all
illuminated signs shall be 7,500 nits, and between sunset and sunrise, the
maximum luminance shall be 500 nits. Additionally, the sign shall not exceed
0.3 foot candles above ambient light levels 100 feet from the sign face. All
signs with an electronic message or electronic graphic display must be
equipped with an automatic dimmer control or other mechanism that
automatically controls the sign’s brightness to comply with this
requirement. These signs must also be equipped with a means to immediately
turn off the display or lighting if it malfunctions, and the sign owner or
operator must immediately turn off the sign or lighting when notified by the
city that it is not complying with the standards in this section.



   (B)   Changeable copy. A maximum of two-thirds of the total area of
sign allowed for a freestanding sign may be a changeable sign as permitted
herein.



   (C)   Placement of signs on driveway island or entrance.  No
permanent or temporary sign shall be located upon a driveway median for a
distance of a minimum of 30 feet from a public street right-of-way.



   (D)   Change of sign. Upon any change or replacement of a sign or
any portion thereof, including the sign’s structure, a new permit shall be
required. If the sign does not exceed the size requirement as provided in
this chapter and the change is in copy only, an application and drawings must
be submitted, but the permit fee will not be required. This provision does
not apply to the changing of copy on a changeable sign, but does apply to a
changeable sign if the sign structure, design or method of changing copy is
revised or replaced.



   (E)   Nonconforming signs; continuation of previously permitted
signs.  Existing signs, other than temporary signs, which were permitted
under sign regulations in effect prior to enactment of the ordinance from
which this chapter is derived, may be kept as and where they were then
located, even though they may not conform to these regulations. Upon
replacement of the sign, there must be compliance with these regulations,
unless the replacement is 100% identical to the original.



   (F)   Illegal sign.  When an illegal sign(s) exists upon a parcel
of land or business property, the city may refuse to issue a permit for any
other sign on that property until the illegal sign(s) is removed.



   (G)   Exposed structural components; preventing adverse effect upon
adjacent property.  Exposed backs of all signs and the sign structure must
be painted a neutral color and otherwise be maintained so as not to have an
adverse effect upon the adjacent property.



   (H)   Signs which interfere with traffic signs, signals or
devices.  No sign shall be installed, which, by reason of position, shape,
color or wording would interfere with the proper functioning of any official
traffic sign, signal or device.



   (I)   Maintenance; refuse and removal.



      (1)   All signs shall be maintained in good condition and the
areas around them kept free from debris, bushes, high weeds and from anything
else which would be a nuisance.



      (2)   All business signs shall be removed from the building
and property by the owner of the property within ten days after business or
use is terminated except for framework that is expected to be used for a
future business sign.



      (3)   All signs shall contain current information.  Outdated
signs or signs with outdated information shall be removed by the owner.



      (4)   When any sign is removed, the enforcing officer shall be
notified and the entire surrounding area shall be cleared of all debris and
unsightly projections and protrusions.



      (5)   Signs not in compliance with code.



         (a)   When a sign placed on private property is not in
compliance with this code and has not been removed by the owner or operator
of a business, the city shall have the right to remove the sign, after ten
days written notice and charge the cost of removal to the owner or
operator.  Where a safety hazard exists, the city may remove the sign
without notice.



         (b)   When a sign placed on public property is not in
compliance with this code, the city shall have the right to remove the sign
immediately and store the sign for not less than 60 days, whereupon the city
may dispose of the sign in a manner similar to other abandoned property.



   (J)   Table of setback and height requirements.  The minimum
setbacks and maximum heights shall be required for all signs, as detailed in
Appendix D.



(‘81 Code, § 6-107)  (Ord. 495, passed 9-20-90; Am. Ord. 501, passed
12-13-90; Am. Ord. 555, passed 5-13-93; Am. Ord. 958, passed 12-26-13)



§ 154.07  SIGN ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Compliance with chapter.  No sign shall be erected,
installed, constructed or painted in the city, except in compliance with this
chapter and unless it shall conform to and meet the requirements of this
chapter.



   (B)   Enforcing officer.  The City Building Official and inspectors
or any other city employee duly appointed by the City Council shall be the
enforcing officer of this chapter.



   (C)   Permit applications.  The application for a sign permit shall
be made upon forms provided by the city and shall state or have attached
thereto, the following information:



      (1)   Name, address and telephone number of applicant and
owner of the sign;



      (2)   Location of building, structure or lot to which or upon
which the sign is to be attached or erected;



      (3)   Position of the sign or other advertising structures in
relation to nearby buildings or structures;



      (4)   A scaled drawing or photograph of the plans and
specifications and method of construction or attachment to the building or in
the ground;



      (5)   Copy of stress sheets and calculations showing the
structure is designed for dead load and wind velocity in the amount required
by the city’s Building Code and if requested by the city building official;



      (6)   Name of person erecting the structure; and



      (7)   Other information as the city may require.



   (D)   Permit fees.  Permit fees for business and monument signs
shall be as specified in the appendix to Chapter 35.



   (E)   Variance; authorized.  To provide reasonable flexibility in
the sign regulations, the Council may approve a variance for a sign otherwise
not permitted by these regulations where an exception would not be
inconsistent with the intent of the sign regulations.



   (F)   Variance; conditions to granting.  No variance shall be
granted unless the Council shall find that either condition (a) or (b)
hereinafter set forth exists:



      (1)   All of the following requirements must be met:



         (a)   Special conditions exist which are peculiar to the
land, structure, building involved and which are not applicable to other
lands, structures or buildings in the same district;



         (b)   The special conditions and circumstances do not
result from the actions of the applicant;



         (c)   A literal interpretation of the provisions of
these regulations would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by
other properties in the same district and the terms of these sign regulations;



         (d)   That granting the variance requested would not
confer on the applicant any special privilege for a use not common to other
lands, structures or buildings in the same district; and



         (e)   The proposed use of the property shall have an
appearance that will not have an adverse effect upon adjacent properties and
there will be no deterrence to development of vacant land.



      (2)   Any proposed signage beyond the maximum square footage
permitted would have the primary function of providing a public service.



   (G)   Variance; requests, fees.  All requests for variances shall
be made in writing to the city on the form provided by the city and the
request shall include the fee specified in the appendix to Chapter 35.  All
information required when applying for a sign permit, as outlined in this
division shall be required before the request for a variance is considered by
the Council.



(‘81 Code, § 6-108)  (Ord. 495, passed 9-20-90)



APPENDIX A:  LOCATION PROHIBITIONS



   Any “open house” or “for sale” sign placed on the following
street rights-of-way, easements, roadway surfaces, sidewalks, medians and
decorative surfaces are in violation of this chapter.



 


Street

 

Prohibited Location



147th Street West
 
From Galaxie Avenue to Pennock Avenue


153rd Street West
 
From Galaxie Avenue to Pennock Avenue


Cedar Avenue
 
From 147th Street West to 153rd Street West


County Road #42
 
From Galaxie Avenue to Pennock Avenue


Galaxie Avenue
 
From 147th Street West to 153rd Street West


Pennock Avenue
 
From 147th Street West to 153 Street West



 



(‘81 Code, § 6-104)  (Ord. 495, passed 9-20-90; Am. Ord. 501, passed
12-13-90; Am. Ord. 555, passed 5-13-93)  Penalty, see § 10.99



APPENDIX B:  TEMPORARY SIGN SIZES



   The following are size regulations for all temporary signs.



 

Sign Description
 
Pylon Sign
 
Ground Sign
 
Building Sign
 
Maximum Area (sq. ft.)


Construction
 
—
 
1
 
—
 
32 in any district


Real estate
 
—
 
1
 
1
 
6 in residential district; 16 other districts


Development
 
—
 
1
 
—
 
80 in any district


Noncommercial
 
—
 
1
 
—
 
32 in any district


Promotional
 
—
 
1
 
—
 
32 in any district



 



(‘81 Code, § 6-104)  (Ord. 495, passed 9-20-90; Am. Ord. 501, passed
12-13-90; Am. Ord. 555, passed 5-13-93)  Penalty, see § 10.99



APPENDIX C:  SIGNS REQUIRING PERMITS



   The following signs may be erected or maintained, as shown for each
zoning district or land use, only after obtaining a permit from the city and
payment of permit fees, providing the standards of § 154.03 are met.



 

Zoning District
 
Pylon Sign
 
Ground Sign
 
Building Sign
 
Maximum  Area (sq. ft.)




Residential
 
—
 
1
 
—
 
40


Agriculture and Multiple Residential
 
—
 

1 or 1

 
40


Institutional
 
—
 
1
 
1
 

Building: See Note 4
Ground: 60



Neighborhood Convenience Center
 
—
 
1
 
1/business
 
40 each


  Gasoline sales
 

1 or 1

 
1
 

Building: See Note 1
Ground: 40
Pylon: 80



Limited business
 


  Single occupant
 
—
 

1
See Note 3

 
1
 

Building: See Note 2
Ground: 40



  Multi-occupant
 
—
 

1
See Note 3

 
1
 

Building: See Note 2
Ground: 60



General business
 


  Single occupant
 

1 or 1

 
1
 

Building: See Note 1
Ground: 110
Pylon: 110



  Multi-occupant
 

1 or 1

 
1/business
 

Building: See Note 1
Ground: 110
Pylon: 110



Retail business
 


  Single occupant
 

1 or 1

 
1
 

Building: See Note 1
Ground: 110
Pylon: 110



  Multi-occupant; under  50,000 sq. ft.
 

1 or 1

 
1/business
 

Building: See Note 1
Ground: 110
Pylon: 110



  Multi-occupant; over 50,000 sq. ft.
 

2 or 2

 
1/business
 

Building: See Note 1
Ground: 180
Pylon: 180



Shopping center; regional
 
Same as retail business


Visitors business
 
Same as retail business


Industrial and sand and gravel
 
Same as retail business


Planned development
 
The ordinance establishing each planned development district shall be used to
determine the most applicable zoning district designated for each lot and
signs shall be permitted by the most applicable zoning district as determined
by the city’s building official.


NOTES TO TABLE

1 - Area of sign for building sign(s) may be equal to:
   1 sq. ft. of area of sign per 25 sq. ft. of the sign permit-holder's
occupied floor area of the building if occupied area is 5000 sq. ft. or less;
plus an additional 1 sq. ft. of area of sign per 100 sq. ft. of the sign
permit-holder's occupied floor area of the building over 5000 sq. ft.
   Maximum allowed:  500 sq. ft. area of sign per building
   Minimum allowed: 40 sq. ft.
2 - Area of sign for building sign(s) in limited business district may be
equal to: 
   1 sq. ft. of sign per 100 sq. ft. of total building floor area.
   Maximum allowed:  200 sq. ft. of area of sign per building
   Minimum allowed:  40 sq. ft.
3 - See § 154.04(H) regarding a second permissible ground sign as a
substitution for all building signs.
4 - Sign area for buildings in institutional districts:
   1 sq. ft. of area of sign per 100 sq. ft. of the total building floor
area
   Maximum allowed:  An aggregate of 500 sq. ft. for all building signs
on lot.
   Minimum allowed:  40 sq. ft.




 



(‘81 Code, § 6-105)  (Ord. 495, passed 9-20-90; Am. Ord. 504, passed
2-28-91; Am. Ord. 536, passed 2-27-92; Am. Ord. 555, passed 5-13-93; Am. Ord.
971, passed 6-26-14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



APPENDIX D:  SETBACK AND HEIGHT



   The following minimum setbacks and maximum heights shall be required
for all signs.



 

Type of Sign
 
Minimum Setback; Public Street Right-of-Way Line (feet)
 
Minimum Setback; Other Yards (feet)
 
Maximum Height (feet)




Advertising
 
Minimum required building setback
 
Minimum required building setback
 
12


Business building
 
Minimum required building setback
 
Minimum required building setback
 
Highest outside wall


Construction
 
13
 
10 and minimum of 50 feet from a residence
 
8


Development; residential, commercial and industrial
 
13, except signs over 100 sq. ft. shall be set back 20 feet
 
10 and minimum of 50 feet from a residence
 
12


Garage sale, political and promotional
 
18 from gutter line or outside edge of roadway
 
10
 
8


Ground sign*
 
13
 
10
 
8


Major anchor; center*
 
13
 
10
 
28


Menu boards
 
20
 
10
 
8


Monument sign
 
13
 
10
 
8


Pylon sign*
 
13
 
10
 
24


Real estate
 
13
 
10
 
8


Noncommercial
 
13
 
10
 
8


NOTES TO TABLE

* - A pylon sign must be a minimum of 50 feet from any other pylon sign. 
Any pylon or ground sign must be 300 feet away from any major anchor/center
sign.




 



(‘81 Code, § 6-107)  (Ord. 495, passed 9-20-90; Am. Ord. 501, passed
12-13-90; Am. Ord. 555, passed 5-13-93)



CHAPTER 155:  ZONING



Section



General Provisions



   155.001   Intent and purpose



   155.002   Rules and language construction



   155.003   Definitions



   155.004   Application



   155.005   Division and establishment of districts



   155.006   Zoning map



Agricultural District



   155.020   Permitted uses



   155.021   Conditional uses



   155.022   Accessory uses



Residential Cluster District



   155.035   Permitted uses



   155.036   Conditional uses



   155.037   Accessory uses



   155.038   Individual lots



One-Family Residential District



   155.050   Purpose



   155.051   Permitted uses



   155.052   Conditional uses



   155.053   Permitted accessory uses



Two-Family Residential District



   155.065   Purpose



   155.066   Permitted uses



Multiple-Family Residential District



   155.075   Purpose



   155.076   Permitted uses



   155.077   Conditional use permits



   155.078   Conditional uses



   155.079   Accessory uses



   155.080   Area requirements and standards



Limited Business District



   155.090   Purpose



   155.091   Permitted uses



   155.092   Conditional uses



   155.093   Permitted accessory uses



   155.094   Business districts near residential neighborhoods



Neighborhood Convenience Center District



   155.105   Purpose



   155.106   Permitted uses



   155.107   Conditional uses



   155.108   Accessory uses



   155.109   Location of new centers



   155.110   Site design standards



   155.111   Landscaping



   155.112   Outdoor lighting



   155.113   Architectural form, scale and materials



   155.114   Hours of operation



   155.115   Phasing of improvements



General Business District



   155.125   Purpose



   155.126   Permitted uses



   155.127   Conditional uses



   155.128   Accessory uses



   155.129   Minimum standards



Restricted General Business District



   155.140   Purpose



   155.141   Permitted uses



   155.142   Conditional uses



   155.143   Accessory uses



   155.144   Additional lot requirements



Retail Business District



   155.155   Purpose



   155.156   Permitted uses



   155.157   Conditional uses



   155.158   Permitted accessory uses (“RB”)



Regional Shopping Center District



   155.170   Purpose



   155.171   Permitted uses



   155.172   Conditional uses



   155.173   Permitted accessory uses



Visitor Business District



   155.185   Purpose



   155.186   Permitted uses



   155.187   Conditional uses



   155.188   Permitted accessory uses



Limited Industrial District



   155.200   Purpose



   155.201   Permitted uses



   155.202   Performance standards



   155.203   Conditional uses



   155.204   Permitted accessory uses



   155.205   Additional lot requirements



General Industrial District



   155.215   Purpose



   155.216   Permitted uses



   155.217   Performance standards



   155.218   Conditional uses



   155.219   Permitted accessory uses



   155.220   Additional lot requirements



Business Park District



   155.230   Purpose



   155.231   Permitted uses



   155.232   Conditional uses



   155.233   Accessory uses



   155.234   Additional requirements and conditions



   155.235   Minimum standards and requirements



Institutional District



   155.245   Purpose



   155.246   Permitted uses



   155.247   Permitted accessory uses



   155.248   Conditional uses



   155.249   Minimum area standards and requirements



Planned Development District



   155.260   Purpose



   155.261   Designation



   155.262   Permitted uses



   155.263   Site coverage



   155.264   Density



   155.265   Individual lots



   155.266   Criteria



   155.267   Revisions and changes



   155.268   Administration; purpose



   155.269   Petition



   155.270   Final development plans



   155.271   Excavation permit



Sand and Gravel District



   155.285   Purpose



   155.286   Definitions



   155.287   Criteria for zoning approval



   155.288   Permitted uses



   155.289   Conditional uses



   155.290   Notification process



   155.291   Performance standards



   155.292   Reclamation, restoration and rehabilitation



   155.293   Nonconforming uses



Shoreland District



   155.305   Purpose



   155.306   Permitted uses



   155.307   Permitted accessory uses



   155.308   Conditional uses



   155.309   Setback and area requirements



   155.310   Alterations



   155.311   Grading, filling or alterations of natural topography



   155.312   Excavations



   155.313   Water quality management plan



   155.314   Planned unit developments



   155.315   Performance standards



   155.316   Nonconforming sewer systems



   155.317   Water supply



   155.318   Notification procedure



General Regulations



   155.330   Nonconforming uses and structures



   155.331   Lot provisions



   155.332   Accessory buildings and structures



   155.333   Required yards and open spaces



   155.334   Height limitations



   155.335   Traffic visibility



   155.336   Public utility service



   155.337   Land reclamation and mining



   155.338   Structures in public rights-of-way



   155.339   Platting required



   155.340   Burying utilities



   155.341   Placements of houses on residential lots



   155.342   Use not provided for



   155.343   Public safety



   155.344   Performance standards



   155.345   Special provisions



   155.346   Building and site design



   155.347   Natural features



   155.348   Screening



   155.349   Landscaping



   155.350   Drainage requirements



   155.351   Fences; permits and locations



   155.352   Swimming pools



   155.353   Lighting arrangements



   155.354   Off-street loading areas



   155.355   Open sales lots



   155.356   Motor fuel station design



   155.357   Prepared food outlets



   155.358   Special promotions



   155.359   Adult establishments



   155.360   Property maintenance regulations



Parking Requirements



   155.370   Purpose



   155.371   Compliance with existing structures



   155.372   Calculations



   155.373   Parking in residential districts



   155.374   Joint parking facilities



   155.375   Use of off-street spaces



   155.376   Sale of parking areas



   155.377   Proof of future parking



   155.378   Off-street parking; design and maintenance



   155.379   Minimum required spaces



   155.380   Parking mobile homes for habitation



   155.381   Reserved



   155.382   Accessory unit dwelling



   155.383   Outdoor dining areas



Wireless Communication Towers



   155.385   Towers and antennas site design and maintenance



Administration and Enforcement



   155.395   Zoning Administrator; appointment and duties



   155.396   Board of Appeals and Adjustment



   155.397   Variances



   155.398   Building permit; certificate of occupancy



   155.399   Conditional use permits



   155.400   Zoning amendments



   155.401   Interim use permits



   155.402   Building permit reviews



   155.403   Petition forms



   155.404   Fees and escrows



Temporary Family Health Care Dwellings



   155.500   Opt-out of temporary family health care dwelling zoning
laws



 



   155.999   Penalty



   Appendix A:     Requirements for Agricultural and Single-Family
Districts



   Appendix B:     Requirements for Multiple- Family Districts



   Appendix C:     Requirements for Business and Industrial Districts



   Appendix D:     Requirements for Sand and Gravel Districts



   Appendix E:     Requirements for Yards and Open Spaces



   Appendix F:     Planned Development Designations



   Appendix G:   Planning



   Appendix H:   Requirements for Shoreland Overlay



Cross-reference:



   Parking Regulations, see Chapter 71



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 155.001  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted for the purpose of:



   (A)   Protecting the public health, safety and general welfare;



   (B)   Dividing the city into zones and districts restricting and
regulating therein the location, height, number of stories, size of buildings
and other structures, and percentage of lot which may be occupied, the size
of yards and other open spaces, and the density and distributions of
population;



   (C)   Promoting orderly development of the residential, business,
industrial, recreational and public areas;



   (D)   Providing adequate light, air and convenience of access to
property;



   (E)   Limiting congestion in the public rights-of- way;



   (F)   Preventing the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of
structures by regulating the use of the land and buildings and the bulk of
building in relation to the land and buildings surrounding them;



   (G)   Providing for the compatibility of different land uses and the
most appropriate use of land throughout the city;



   (H)   Providing for more orderly transition from a rural to an urban
or suburban environment;



   (I)   Providing for the administration of this chapter and
amendments thereto;



   (J)   Defining the powers and duties of the administrative officers
and bodies, as provided hereinafter; and



   (K)   Prescribing penalties for the violation of the provisions of
this chapter or any amendment thereto.



(‘81 Code, § A1-1)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.002  RULES AND LANGUAGE CONSTRUCTION.



   The language set forth in the text of this chapter shall be interpreted
in accordance with the following:



   (A)   The singular number includes the plural and the plural the
singular.



   (B)   The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the
future, the present.



   (C)   The word “shall” is mandatory and the word “may” is
permissive.



   (D)   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.



   (E)   Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the
text of this chapter, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the
definition thereof.



   (F)   All measured distances expressed in feet shall be rounded to
the nearest foot.



(‘81 Code, § A1-2)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.003  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABUTTING.  Making contact with or separated only by public
thoroughfare, railroad or public right-of-way.



   ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE.  A use or structure subordinate to and
serving the principal use or structure on the same lot and customarily
incidental thereto.



   ADDITION.  An extension or increase in floor area or height of a
building or structure.



   ANTENNA.  A device used for transmitting or receiving electromagnetic
waves, including but not limited to: Television or video, AM/FM radio, analog
or digital, microwave, cellular or personal communications service (PCS),
telephone or data, or similar signals.



   APARTMENT.  A multi-family building containing dwelling units in a
stacked configuration having common walls and floors/ceilings.



   AUTOMOBILE REDUCTION YARD.  A lot or yard where one or more unlicensed
motor vehicles, or the remains thereof, are kept for the purpose of
dismantling, wrecking, crushing, sale of parts, sale of scrap, storage or
abandonment.



   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR.  General repair, rebuilding or
reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers, including body work,
framework, welding and major painting service.



   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR.  The replacement of any part or repair of
any part which does not require removal of the engine head or pan, engine
transmission or differential; incidental body and fender work, minor painting
and upholstering service.  Above stated is applied to passenger vehicles and
trucks not in excess of 7,000 pounds gross weight.



   BREWER TAPROOM.  Shall have the meaning as the term is defined in the
alcohol licensing regulations in Chapter 111 of this Code.



   BUILDING.  Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering
any use or occupancy.



   BUILDING COVERAGE.  The proportion of the square footage of a lot
covered by all existing and proposed building(s) at the time of the issuance
of a building permit.  The portion of the lot encumbered by any city or
county easement not constituting public right-of-way as defined herein shall
be included for purposes of determining total lot area.



   BUILDING HEIGHT.  The vertical distance above “grade” as herein
defined to the highest point of a flat roof or a mansard roof, or to the
highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof as measured from the first
above-grade, habitable floor.  The height of any building shall not include
walk-out basement, underground parking garages, or the like.  When used to
compute setbacks between multiple residential buildings, the building height
shall be measured to the eave line of the adjacent building faces.



   CARPORT.  An automobile shelter having one or more sides.



   CHURCH.  A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses,
where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which buildings
and uses are maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to
sustain regular public worship.



   COCKTAIL ROOM.  Shall have the meaning as the term is defined in the
alcohol licensing regulations in Chapter 111 of this Code.



   COMMERCIAL.  Any use occurring and permitted within a business zone
(LB, LB-1, NCC, GB, GB-1, RB, SC and VB).



   COMMISSION.  The Planning Commission of the City of Apple Valley.



   CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.  A permit specially and individually granted
by the City Council after review thereof by the Planning Commission for any
conditional use so permitted in any use district.



   CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS, MANUFACTURED.  A material which is created
from constituent parts which are reduced, pulverized, chemically treated or
otherwise altered and then combined in a manufacturing process to form a new
material.  Examples of such materials include but are not limited to
chipboard, plywood, hardboard sheets, vinyl sheets, aluminum or steel sheets,
stucco, brick, concrete, concrete block and pre-cast panels.



   CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS, NATURAL.  A non-manufactured material existing
in nature which is prepared for use only by cutting, forming or machining. 
Examples of such materials include but are not limited to wood planks,
timbers and stone.



   CONTINUUM OF CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY.  A structure or several
structures developed as a single facility in which residential housing is
provided for persons over the age of 55 and the residential units in the
structure or within the campus consist of multiple levels of housing and care
options, which consist of comprehensive, intensive, or full care living and
one or both the following: independent living; and assisted living, and may
have on-site nursing and a community dining room for the residents.



      (1)   INDEPENDENT LIVING.  The level of housing and care
provided whereby the resident lives in a single unit dwelling that includes
complete, permanent independent living facilities for the resident,
including, but not limited to: living, sleeping, cooking, eating, and
sanitation provisions and does not receive any personalized medical
supportive services or care from the facility staff.



      (2)   ASSISTED LIVING.  The level of housing and care
provided whereby the resident resides in a single unit dwelling that includes
complete, permanent independent living facilities for the resident,
including, but not limited to: living, sleeping, cooking, eating, and
sanitation provisions and receives some personalized medical supportive
services or care from the facility staff, but not full, 24-hour medical care.



      (3)   COMPREHENSIVE, INTENSIVE OR FULL CARE LIVING.  The
level of housing and care provided whereby the resident may live in an
individual or shared unit and receives 24-hour personal and medical care from
on-site nursing and personal assistance staff.



   COUNCIL.  The City Council of the City of Apple Valley.



   DAY-CARE FACILITY.  Any facility, public or private, which for gain or
otherwise regularly provides seven to 16 persons with care, training,
supervision, habilitation, rehabilitation or developmental guidance on a
regular basis, for periods of less than 24 hours per day, in a place other
than the person’s own home for persons of school age or older.



   DAY-CARE HOME.  Any facility, public or private, which for gain or
otherwise, regularly provides six or less persons with care, training,
supervision, habilitation, rehabilitation or developmental guidance on a
regular basis, for periods of less than 24 hours per day, in a place other
than the person’s own home for persons of school age or older.



   DEVELOPMENT PLAN.  A plan guiding the development of the property to
the ultimate land use.  The plan shall include but is not limited to: site
analysis information, staging plan, grading plan, drainage plan and end use
plan.



   DISTILLED SPIRITS. Shall have the meaning as the term is defined in the
alcohol licensing regulations in Chapter 111 of this Code.



   DRIVEWAY.  A paved area on private property that intersects with the
roadway of a public street and is intended to provide vehicle access from the
public roadway to private property.



   DRIVEWAY APPROACH.  An area between the curb or pavement edge of a
public street and the private property line intended to provide access for
vehicles from a roadway or public street to a driveway on private property.



   DWELLING.  A building or one or more portions thereof occupied or
intended to be occupied for residence purposes, but not including rooms in
motels, hotels, nursing homes, boardinghouses, mobile homes, tents, cabins or
trailer coaches.



      (1)   ATTACHED DWELLING.  A dwelling which is joined to
another dwelling at one or more sides by a party wall or walls.



      (2)   DETACHED DWELLING.  A single dwelling unit not attached
to another dwelling or structure.



      (3)   UNIT DWELLING.  A single unit providing complete
independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.



   ESSENTIAL SERVICES.  Underground and overhead gas, electrical, steam
or water distribution systems; collector, communication, supply or disposal
systems including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits,
cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants or
similar equipment and accessories in conjunction therewith, including city
buildings.



   EXCAVATION.  The removal, filling with, or storage of rock, sand,
dirt, gravel, clay or other like materials.



   EXCAVATING PERMIT.  A permit to remove, excavate or store rock, sand,
dirt, gravel, clay or other like material, issued by the city.



   FAMILY.  An individual, or two or more persons related by blood,
marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit; or a
group of not more than five persons not so related maintaining a common
household and using common cooking and kitchen facilities.



   FAMILY-CARE HOME.  A residential structure typical of those in the
neighborhood having a maximum of six residents needing the adult care and
supervision of a “supervised residential program” or “social
rehabilitation program,” plus a minimum of two or more adults who operate
the dwelling unit as a family home.  The FAMILY-CARE HOME typically may be a
single-family detached dwelling, attached townhouse, rental or owned
apartment, or similar unit to those of the immediate neighborhood where it is
located.  The unit must be acceptable to the licensing requirements of the
state, federal government or other governmental licensing agency and the
Minnesota Uniform Building Code.



   FARM.  A parcel of land having an area of ten acres or more or five
acres for truck farms which is under cultivation or is fenced and utilized as
pasture.



   FENCE.  Any partition, structure, wall or gate erected as a dividing
marker, barrier or enclosure and located along the boundary or within the
required yard.  A FENCE in excess of six feet in height shall be subject to
a building permit as required by the Minnesota State Building Code.



   FLOOR AREA.  The area included within the surrounding exterior wall of
a building or portion thereof, exclusive of vent shafts and courts.  The
FLOOR AREA of a building or portion thereof not provided with surrounding
exterior walls shall be the usable area under the horizontal projection of
the roof or floor above.



   GARAGE, PRIVATE.  A detached or attached accessory building which is
used primarily for storing passenger vehicles.



   GARAGE SALE.  Any display of goods and/or salesperson’s samples and
sale of the goods on a property customarily used as a residence. The
person(s) conducting the sale shall be a resident(s) of the immediate
neighborhood.



   GOVERNMENTAL MAINTENANCE FACILITY. A building(s) or a portion thereof
in which a governmental entity, other than the city, operates and provides
the maintenance, upkeep, and repair of its fleet of motor vehicles or other
equipment or implements that are used in and for the operation of the
governmental unit.



   GRADE.  The average level of elevation of the finished surface of the
ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the building and the
property line, or when the property line is more than five feet from the
building, between the building and a line five feet from the building.



   HOME OCCUPATION. 



      (1)   Any gainful occupation meeting all of the following
requirements when engaged in only by persons residing in their dwelling, when
that occupation is conducted within the principal structure, when evidence of
the occupation is not visible from the street, when no signs are present
other than those permitted in the district in which it is located, over-
the-counter retail sales are not involved, and entrance to the home
occupation is gained from within the structure.  A professional person may
use his or her residence for consultation, emergency treatment or performance
of religious rites, but not for the general practice of his or her profession
when the general practice will involve the need for more than three parking
spaces for the occupant and visitors.  No accessory buildings or attached
garage shall be used for HOME OCCUPATIONS. 



      (2)   HOME OCCUPATIONS include professional offices, minor
repair services, photo or art studio, dressmaking, nurseries, child day-care
centers or teaching limited to six students at any one time and similar
uses.  A HOME OCCUPATION shall not be interpreted to include tourist homes,
restaurants or similar uses, however, these may be allowed as otherwise
permitted under this chapter.



   HORTICULTURE.  The production and storage of fruits and vegetables.



   INDUSTRIAL.  Any use occurring and permitted within an industrial zone
(I-1 and I-2).



   INSTITUTIONAL.  Any use occurring and permitted within an
institutional zone (P).



   INTERIM USE.  A temporary use of property until a particular date,
until the occurrence of a particular event or until zoning regulations no
longer permit it.



   JUNK VEHICLE.  Any vehicle that:



      (1)   Is three years or older;



      (2)   Is extensively damaged, with the damage including such
things as broken or missing wheels, motor, drive train, or transmission,
doors, or windows;



      (3)   Is apparently inoperable;



      (4)   Does not have a valid, current registration; and



      (5)   Has an approximate fair market value equal only to the
approximate value of the scrap in it.



   JUNKYARD.  An area where used, waste, discarded or salvaged materials
are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, abandoned, packed,
disassembled or handled, including but not limited to scrap iron, and other
metals, rags, paper, rubber products, bottles and lumber.  Storage of the
materials in conjunction with a permitted manufacturing process when within
an enclosed area or building shall not be included.



   KENNEL.  Any premise where three or more dogs, at any one time, over
three months of age, are present as owners’ pets, pets accepted for
boarding, breeding, training or sale, except when located in a pet shop or
veterinary clinic.



   LAND RECLAMATION.  Depositing 400 cubic yards or more of materials so
as to elevate the grade.



   LANDSCAPE MATERIAL.  Trees, shrubs and vines. Sod, grass seed, fences,
retaining walls, patios and other physical site and grading work is
specifically excluded from this definition.



   LOADING BERTH.  An unobstructed area provided and maintained for the
temporary parking of trucks and other motor vehicles for the purpose of
loading and unloading goods, wares, materials and merchandise.



   LOT.  A parcel of land legally described and of record in chain of
title whether subdivided or otherwise legally described.



   LOT AREA.  The area of a lot in a horizontal plane bounded by the lot
lines but not including any area occupied by the waters of a duly recorded
lake or river or area which has been dedicated as public thoroughfare or road.



   LOT AREA PER UNIT.  The number of square feet of lot area required per
dwelling unit.



   LOT, CORNER.  A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two or
more intersecting streets, or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment
of a continuous street, the interior angle of which does not exceed 135
degrees.



   LOT COVERAGE.  The total area of a lot which, when viewed from
directly above, is or would be covered by a building, structure, or
impervious surface.



   LOT, THROUGH.  A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting
two substantially parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot.



   LOT DEPTH.  The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line
and the rear lot line of a lot.



   LOT LINE.  A lot line is the property line bounding a lot.



      (1)   FRONT LOT LINE.  That boundary of a lot which abuts an
existing or dedicated public street, and in the case of a corner lot, it
shall be the shortest dimension on a public street.



      (2)   REAR LOT LINE.  That boundary of a lot which is
opposite the front lot line.  If the REAR LOT LINE is less than ten feet in
length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the REAR LOT LINE shall be a
line ten feet in length within the lot connecting the side lot lines and
parallel to the front lot line.



      (3)   SIDE LOT LINE.  Any boundary of a lot which is not a
front lot line or a rear lot line or a lot line along a public street.



   LOT OF RECORD.  Part of a subdivision approved by the city, the plat
of which has been duly recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds or
Registrar of Titles, prior to the adoption of this chapter which meets the
minimum requirements of state law and all city ordinances in effect upon the
date of the recording.



   LOT WIDTH.  The distance measured between lot lines, parallel to the
front lot line at the minimum required front yard setback.



   MICRODISTILLERY.  Shall have the meaning as the term is defined in the
alcohol licensing regulations in Chapter 111 of this Code.



   MINING.  The extraction of sand, gravel or other material from the
land in the amount of 400 cubic yards or more and removal from the site.



   MOTEL.  A building or group of buildings used primarily as a temporary
residence of a motorist, tourists or travelers.



   MOTORCYCLE.  Any motor vehicle licensed for on-street operation,
having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on
not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, including motor
scooters and bicycles with motor attached, other than those vehicles defined
as motorized bicycles in M.S. § 169.01, but excluding a tractor.



   MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL.  A building or area in which freight brought
by motor truck or rail is assembled and/or stored for routing to interstate
or intrastate by motor truck.



   MOTOR FUEL STATION. A place or business engaged in only the sale of
motor fuels, incidental petroleum products and dispension of services
generally associated with the operation and maintenance of motor vehicles.



   MULTIPLE RESIDENTIAL.  Any dwelling which is jointed to another
dwelling at one or more sides by a party wall or walls including apartments,
townhouses and duplexes.



   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.  Any structure permitted by existing city
ordinance upon the effective date of its construction which would not conform
to the applicable regulations if the structure had been erected under the
provisions of subsequent ordinance(s).



   NONCONFORMING USE.  Use of land, building or structures which does not
comply with all the regulations of city ordinances governing the zoning
district in which the use is located, adopted subsequent to the initiation of
the use.



   NON-PASSENGER VEHICLE.  Any motor vehicle measuring eight feet or more
in overall height or 22 feet or more in overall length including any
ancillary racks, cranes, storage compartments and the like; or any vehicle
with a manufacturer's nominal rating carrying capacity of one ton or more, or
any vehicles or trailers not customary or incidental to the use or occupancy
of residential properties, such as, but not limited to: dump trucks; step
vans; cargo trucks; tow trucks; semi trailer tractors; fire trucks; boom
trucks; tank trucks; hearses; and the like.  Recreational vehicles and
equipment are specifically excluded from this definition.



   NURSERY, DAY.  A use where care is provided for pay for more than
three children in addition to the family residing on the premises.



   OPEN SALES LOT.  Land devoted to the display of goods for sale, rent,
lease, advertising or trade, where the goods are not enclosed within a
building.



   OVERHEAD UTILITY CORRIDOR.  A corridor officially designated in the
city’s comprehensive plan for overhead utility lines or electric
transmission lines carrying in excess of 15 kilovolts.



   PARKING AREA or PARKING LOT.  The paved surface area on a lot for the
purpose of temporary storage of vehicles, including any drive aisles or
lanes. PARKING AREA or PARKING LOT does not include and is separate and
distinct from the term driveway for purposes of parking spaces for single
family and two-family dwellings.



   PARKING SPACE.  A suitable surfaced or permanently maintained area of
sufficient size to store one vehicle either within or outside of a building.



   PASSENGER VEHICLE.  Any motor vehicle licensed for on-street use
measuring less than eight feet in overall height and less than 22 feet in
overall length designed and commonly used for personal or work-related
day-to-day transportation purposes carrying not more than 15 persons,
including the driver.  A PASSENGER VEHICLE includes automobiles, SUVs, vans,
and pick-up trucks with a manufacturer's nominal rating carrying capacity of
one ton or less and commonly known as a pick-up truck and a van designed with
no barrier separation between the operator area and the remainder of the
cargo carrying area with a manufacturer's nominal rating carrying capacity of
one ton or less.  PASSENGER VEHICLE(S) shall not include buses, motorcycles,
motorized bicycles, motorized foot scooters, motor scooters, non-passenger
vehicles as defined in this section, school buses, trailers as defined in
this section, recreational equipment or recreational vehicles as defined in
this section.  A handicap-equipped van used for personal purposes shall be
deemed a PASSENGER VEHICLE regardless of height.



   PERFORMANCE STANDARD.  Criteria established to control height, bulk,
setback, land coverage and density of buildings as well as noise, odor, toxic
or noxious matter, vibration, fire, explosive hazards or glare of heat
generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.



   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT.  An urban development often having two or more
principal uses and having specialized performance standards relating to an
overall approved development plan to provide for an optimal land use
relationship.  In SH, shoreland districts, the term PLANNED DEVELOPMENT also
applies to any commercial, industrial or multiple (attached) residential use.



   PROCESSING.  The crushing, washing, compounding or treating of rock,
sand, gravel or similar materials.



   PROTECTED WATERS.  Any waters of the state which serve a beneficial
public purpose, as defined in M.S.§ 105.37, subd. 6.  However, no lake,
pond or flowage of less than ten acres in size and no river or stream having
a total drainage area less than two square miles shall be regulated for the
purpose of these regulations.  A body of water created by a private user
where there was no previous shoreland, as defined herein, for a designated
private use authorized by the Commissioner of Natural Resources shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter.  The official determination of
the size and physical limits of drainage areas of rivers and streams shall be
made by the Commissioner of Natural Resources.  The official size of lakes,
ponds or flowages shall be the areas listed in the Division of Waters’
Bulletin 25, “An Inventory of Minnesota Lakes,” or in the event that
lakes, ponds or flowages are not listed therein, official determination of
size and physical limits shall be made by the Commissioner of Natural
Resources in cooperation with the municipality.



   PUBLIC HEARING.  Unless otherwise specifically redefined, a PUBLIC
HEARING pursuant to a notice published once in the official newspaper of the
city at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing, which notice shall
specify the general purpose, time and location of the hearing.  Any hearing,
after publication, may be continued, recessed or adjourned, from time to
time, without further publication or notice thereof.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.  A strip of land platted, dedicated or
established for public street and utility purposes, which may also have
sidewalk and trails located therein.  An easement for public purposes other
than for street or roadway shall not be deemed as a PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY for
purposes of setback, building coverage, or impervious surface regulations in
this chapter and Chapter 154 (sign regulations).



   PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION FACILITY.  A designated land area containing a
parking lot or a ramp or a waiting area with an enclosed structure consisting
of a minimum of four vertical walls and a roof, all of which the primary use
is for riders of bus transit to await, board and exit the bus.



   PUBLIC UTILITY BUILDING, STRUCTURE or SERVICE FACILITY.  An occupied
structure, building or mechanical facility owned and operated by a public or
private utility company which occupies less than 500 square feet of land area.



   PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICES.  The providing of electric power, gas,
telephone, sanitary sewer and water and storm sewer.



   PUBLICATION.  Notice placed in the official city newspaper stating
time, location and date of meeting and description of topic.



   RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT, PRIVATE OUTDOOR.  Equipment designed for
outdoor use and used solely for the private enjoyment of the resident. 
Includes swing sets, trampolines, playhouses and similar equipment provided
that it is designed for outdoor use.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.  Any self-propelled motor vehicle licensed for
on-street use, non-motorized vehicle, or those vehicles towed by a motor
vehicle, and shall include but not be limited to: travel trailers, including
those with telescope or fold down; chassis-mounted campers; motor homes; tent
trailers; sleeping campers; converted buses that provide temporary human
living quarters; jet skis; waverunners; snow mobiles; boats; ATVs; motocross
bikes; and the like.  Any recreational vehicle stored and/or parked on a
trailer is considered one RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  Class I RECREATIONAL
VEHICLES measure less than eight feet in height overall and 22 feet in length
overall.  Class II RECREATIONAL VEHICLES measure eight feet or greater in
height overall and/or 22 feet or greater in length overall, but shall not be
any longer than 40 feet overall.



   REHABILITATION.  To restore the area of a mining or excavation
operation into a safe and useful condition and otherwise progress in a
constructive manner.



   RESIDENTIAL-CARE FACILITY.  A residential structure typical of those
in the neighborhood having from 7 to 16 residents needing the adult care and
supervision of a supervised residential program or social rehabilitation
program plus a minimum of one adult supervisor for every four residents.



   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.  A zoning district providing for one-family or
multiple family homes.  Includes RCL, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, M-1A, B and
C, M-2A, B and C, M-3A, B and C, M-4A, B and C, M-5A, B and C, M-6A, B and C,
M-7A, B and C and M-8A, B and C districts unless stated otherwise.



   RESTAURANT.



      (1)   CLASS I.



         (a)   CAFETERIA.  A traditional restaurant, as defined
below, except that food is selected by a customer while going through a
serving line and taken to a table for consumption.



         (b)   CASUAL RESTAURANT.  An eating facility where some
table service may be provided by waitstaff, food is prepared after an order
is placed by a customer, reusable dinnerware such as utensils, plates and
cups are used.  Bussing of the tables is done by restaurant staff.  No
drive-thru service is provided.



         (c)   TRADITIONAL RESTAURANT.  An eating facility where
full table service is provided at the table whereupon a customer orders food
from printed menus and the main food course is served and consumed while
seated at a single location.  The restaurants also have dining areas with
formal or semi- formal decor and appointments utilizing traditional or
reusable food utensils, plates, cups and glasses.  This may provide
additional incidental services such as food delivery and retail
over-the-counter prepared food sales.  In addition, the CLASS I RESTAURANT
shall not be prohibited by law, private restrictive covenant, or otherwise
from obtaining a full liquor license.



      (2)   CLASS II.



         (a)   CARRY-OUT AND DELIVERY RESTAURANT.  Food is
prepared for consumption off the premises only.



         (b)   FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT.  An eating facility where a
majority of the customers order food and are served at a counter and then
take their food to a table, counter, outdoor seating area or off the premises
for consumption.  The food is either pre- prepared or quickly prepared and
served with non- reusable food packaging and non-reusable utensils, plates
and cups.  Customers typically bus their own tables and 45% more of the
floor area is devoted to food preparation.  Any eating facility with
drive-thru service shall be deemed a fast food restaurant.



      (3)   CLASS III. 



         (a)   NEIGHBORHOOD RESTAURANT.  An eating facility,
including bagel shop, sandwich shop, coffee house, lunch counter,
delicatessen, ice cream shop, where all of the following exist:



            1.   Restaurant does not exceed 2,500 square feet
in size; and



            2.   Hours of operation shall be limited to 6:00
a.m. to 11:00 p.m. daily.



         (b)   The restaurant does not serve foods that require
the installation of a Type I ventilation hood, grease and smoke removing, as
defined in the Uniform Mechanical Code.



   SETBACK.  The minimum horizontal distance required between the
measuring line and the nearest point of a foundation of a building, structure
or improvement located or to be located on the lot.  The SETBACK is measured
at a right-angle from the measuring line to the closest point of the
foundation of a building, structure or improvement at the time the building,
structure, or improvement is installed or erected pursuant to a required
permit.  The term “measuring line” is defined as the lot (yard) line or
the edge of an abutting public right-of-way as defined herein if closer in
distance to the improvement than the lot line, or other location as otherwise
indicated in this chapter, from which the setback is to be measured.



   SHORELAND.  Land located within the following distances from public
waters:



      (1)   One thousand feet from the ordinary high water mark of a
lake, pond or flowage; and



      (2)   Three hundred feet from a river or stream, or the
landward extent of a floodplain designated by ordinance on a river or stream,
whichever is greater.  The practical limits of shorelands may be less than
the statutory limits where the limits are designated by natural drainage
divides at lesser distances, as shown on the official zoning map of the
Municipality of Apple Valley.



   SIGN.  As defined in Chapter 154.



   SMALL BREWERY.  A brewer who manufactures not more than 250,000
barrels of malt liquor for wholesale per year.



   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY.  A small wireless facility shall have the
meaning as the term is defined in the public right-of- way management
regulations of Chapter 97 of this code.



   SOCIAL REHABILITATION PROGRAMS. 



      (1)   Programs which provide supervised care and
rehabilitation services in a family home environment to individuals who have
demonstrated behavior patterns not consistent with society’s norms and
law.  Residents in the program shall be referred by medical experts, courts
or trained counselors as the individuals will benefit from the rehabilitation
programs and family home environment.  The following programs providing
supervised care and rehabilitation opportunities to adults and children with
the following problems are included in SOCIAL REHABILITATION PROGRAMS:



         (a)   Chemical dependency, including alcoholism;



         (b)   Juvenile delinquency;



         (c)   Runaway children or young adults;



         (d)   Women’s emergency residential program;



         (e)   Single parent residential program; and



         (f)   Children’s emergency residential program.



      (2)   A SOCIAL REHABILITATION PROGRAM shall be licensed by the
state, federal government or other governmental licensing agencies.



   SPECIAL USE PERMIT.  A permit that specifically and individually is
granted by the City Council for a temporary use with a specified termination
date not to exceed one year.



   SPORTS TRAINING FACILITY.  An establishment that provides athletic
training for specific sports and athletic activities, supervised by
specialized coaches and trainers who are present for all training sessions.



   STORABLE SWIMMING OR WADING POOL.  A pool with nonmetallic, molded
polymeric walls or inflatable fabric walls, constructed on or above the
ground and is so constructed that it may be readily disassembled for storage
and reassembled to its original integrity.



   STORY.  That portion of a building included between the upper surface
of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the
topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper
surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.  If the finished
floor level directly above a basement, cellar or unused under floor space is
more than six feet above grade as defined herein for more than 50% of the
total perimeter or is more than 12 feet above grade as defined herein at any
point, the basement, cellar or unused floor space shall be considered a story.



   STREET.  A public right-of-way which affords a primary means of access
to abutting property.



   STRUCTURE.  That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building
of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts
joined together in some definite manner.



   (1)   PERMANENT STRUCTURE.  A structure built of materials in a
manner that would commonly be expected to remain useful for a substantial
period of time. 



   (2)   TEMPORARY STRUCTURE.  A structure built of materials in a
manner that would commonly be expected to have a relatively short useful
life, is readily movable, and is not placed upon a foundation, footings or
attached to a structure requiring a foundation or footings.



   SUPERVISED RESIDENTIAL PROGRAMS. 



      (1)   Programs which provide a supervised care in a family
home environment for a permanent or temporary residency for those adults and
children (referred by medical or trained counselors) who are in need of
supervised care.  SUPERVISED RESIDENTIAL PROGRAMS are exclusively for
individuals with these disabilities:



         (a)   Mentally retarded;



         (b)   Mentally ill;



         (c)   Physically handicapped; or



         (d)   Elderly.



      (2)   A SUPERVISED RESIDENTIAL PROGRAM shall be licensed by
the state, federal government or other governmental agencies.



   SWIMMING POOL, HOT TUB OR SPA.  Any outdoor structure which is
intended for swimming, wading or recreational bathing and contains, or is
capable of containing, water over 24 inches deep.  The structure may be
constructed, installed or located in-ground, above-ground or on-ground and
may include permanent or temporary swimming pools, hot tubs and spas.  Any
regulation applicable or with reference to the term SWIMMING POOL within this
chapter shall include and be applicable to an outdoor hot tub or spa.



   SWIMMING POOL BARRIER.  A fence, wall, building wall or combination
thereof which completely surrounds the swimming pool and obstructs access to
the swimming pool.



   TEMPORARY SEASONAL OUTDOOR RECREATIONAL FACILITY(IES).  A privately
owned outdoor facility or structure for recreation purposes in conjunction
with a commercial use and that is readily movable and not permanently placed
upon a foundation or footings or attached to a structure requiring
footings.  The use of the recreational facility is seasonal in that it is
usable during commonly accepted months of the year, and may include
facilities such as outdoor volleyball courts, bocce ball courts, basketball
or other sport court, and horseshoe pits.



   THOROUGHFARE.  Those streets as shown on the city’s thoroughfare
plan at the right-of-way width indicated.



   TOWER.  Any ground or roof mounted pole, spire, structure, or
combination thereof taller than 15 feet, including supporting lines, cables,
wires, braces, and masts, intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an
antenna, meteorological device, or similar apparatus above grade (except
amateur radio antennas).



   TOWNHOUSE.  Single-family building having one or more walls in common
with another single- family building oriented so all exits open directly to
the outside.



   TRAILER.  Any vehicle or device licensed for on-street use designed
for carrying property on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle.  A Class I TRAILER measures less than eight feet in overall height
and less than 22 feet in overall length, measured from the hitch to the rear
tail lights.  A Class II TRAILER measures eight feet or greater in height
overall and/or 22 feet or greater in length overall, but shall not be any
longer than 40 feet overall.  Any recreational vehicle stored and/or parked
on a trailer is considered one recreational vehicle.



   USE.  The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon
is designated, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied.



      (1)   USE FOR ACCESSORY, SPECIAL or CONDITIONAL.  See
definitions contained herein.



      (2)   PERMITTED USE.  A use which may be lawfully established
in a particular district or districts, provided it conforms with all
requirements, regulations and performance standards, if any, in the districts.



      (3)   PRINCIPAL USE.  The main use of land or buildings as
distinguished from subordinate or accessory uses.  A PRINCIPAL USE may be
either permitted or conditional.



   VARIANCE.  An exception granted by the City Council from the literal
provisions of this chapter where unique conditions exist which do not apply
to the area in general.



   YARD.  A required open space on a lot which is unoccupied and
unobstructed by a building from its lowest ground level to the sky except as
expressly permitted by this chapter.  A YARD shall extend along a lot line
and at right angles to a lot line to a depth or width specified in the yard
regulations for the district in which the lot is located.



   ZONING DISTRICT.  An area or areas within the limits of the city for
which the regulations and requirements governing use, lot and size of
building and premises are uniform.



(‘81 Code, §A1-3)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 514, passed
5-23-91; Am. Ord. 644, passed 3-12-98; Am. Ord. 654, passed 12-10-98; Am.
Ord. 704, passed 12-13-01; Am. Ord. 756, passed 7-8-04; Am. Ord.760, passed
10-14-04; Am. Ord. 823, passed 10-25-07; Am. Ord. 834, passed 2-28-08; Am.
Ord. 857, passed 3-26-09; Am. Ord. 861, passed 6-11-09; Am. Ord. 874, passed
12-22-09; Am. Ord. 941, passed 3-28-13; Am. Ord. 957, passed 12-26-13; Am.
Ord. 998, passed 10-22-15; Am. Ord. 1039, passed 2-8-18)



§ 155.004  APPLICATION.



   (A)   In interpretation and application, the provisions shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare.



   (B)   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter
are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions
imposed by any other law, ordinance, statute, resolution or regulation of any
kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher
standards or requirements shall prevail.



   (C)   Except as specifically provided in this chapter, no structure
shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or altered and no
structure or land shall be used for any purpose nor in any manner which is
not in conformity with this chapter.



(‘81 Code, § A1-4)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.005  DIVISION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.



   (A)   In order to carry out the purpose and provisions of this
chapter, the city is hereby divided into the following zoning districts and
groups of districts:



      (1)   A, an agricultural district;



      (2)   RCL, a residential cluster district;



      (3)   R-1, a one-family residential district;



      (4)   R-2, a one-family residential district;



      (5)   R-3, a one-family residential district;



      (6)   R-4, a one-family residential district;



      (7)   R-5, a two-family residential district;



      (8)   M-1A, B and C, multiple-family districts;



      (9)   M-2A, B and C, multiple-family districts;



      (10)   M-3A, B and C, multiple-family districts;



      (11)   M-4A, B and C, multiple-family districts;



      (12)   M-5A, B and C, multiple-family districts;



      (13)   M-6A, B and C, multiple-family districts;



      (14)   M-7A, B and C, multiple-family districts;



      (15)   M-8A, B and C, multiple-family districts;



      (16)   LB, a limited business district;



      (17)   LB-1, a limited business district;



      (18)   NCC, a neighborhood convenience center district;



      (19)   GB, a general business district;



      (20)   GB-1, a general business district;



      (21)   RB, a retail business district;



      (22)   SC, a regional shopping center district;



      (23)   VB, a visitor’s business district;



      (24)   I-1, a limited industrial district;



      (25)   I-2, a general industrial district;



      (26)   P, an institutional district;



      (27)   SG, a sand and gravel district;



      (28)   SH, a shoreland overlay district; and



      (29)   PD, a planned development district(s).



   (B)   Reference in this chapter to R districts shall include RCL,
R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, M-1A, B and C, M-2A, B and C, M-3A, B and C, M-4A, B
and C, M-5A, B and C, M-6A, B and C, M-7A, B and C and M-8A, B and C;
reference to B districts include LB, LB-1, NCC, GB, RB, SC and VB; and
reference to I districts shall include I-1 and I-2.



(‘81 Code, § A1-26)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 385, passed
4-23-87; Am. Ord. 465, passed 10-26-89; Am. Ord. 471, passed 1-11-90)



§ 155.006  ZONING MAP.



   (A)   The boundaries of the zoning districts are hereby established
as shown on that certain map entitled, Zoning Map of Apple Valley, Minnesota,
which is properly approved and filed in the office of the City Clerk,
hereinafter referred to as the “zoning map.”



   (B)   The map and all of the notations, references and other
information shown thereon shall have the same force and effect as if fully
set down herein and are hereby made a part of this chapter by reference and
incorporated herein as fully as if set forth herein at length.



   (C)   District boundaries (boundary lines) as indicated on the map
follow lot lines, the center lines of streets or alleys, the center lines of
streets or alleys projected, the center of watercourses or the corporate
limit lines, all as they exist upon the effective date of this chapter.  If
district boundary lines do not follow any of the above described lines, the
district boundary lines are established as drawn on the zoning map, except
where a district boundary line divides a lot of record which was in single
ownership at the time of enactment of this chapter and places portions of the
lot of record in two or more use districts, any portions of the lot when it
is less than the required minimum width for a lot as specified in the
applicable district on either side of the dividing district boundary line may
be used for any use of either use district.



   (D)   Appeals from the Zoning Administrator’s determination and
questions of doubt concerning the exact location of district boundary lines
shall be heard by the Board of Zoning Appeals.



   (E)   Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by
official action of the city, the zoning district abutting the center line of
the alley or public way shall not be affected by the proceeding.



(‘81 Code, § A1-27)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 865, passed
8-13-09; Am. Ord. 866, passed 8-13-09; Am. Ord. 867, passed 8-13-09; Am. Ord.
868, passed 8-13-09; Am. Ord. 879, passed 2-11-10; Am. Ord. 883, passed
3-25-10; Am. Ord. 884, passed 3-25-10; Am. Ord. 892, passed 8-26-10; Am. Ord.
893, passed 8-26-10; Am. Ord. 894, passed 8-26-10; Am. Ord. 895, passed
8-26-10; Am. Ord. 896, passed 8-26-10; Am. Ord. 897, passed 8-26-10; Am. Ord.
898, passed 8-26-10; Am. Ord. 899, passed 8-26-10; Am. Ord. 901, passed
9-23-10; Am. Ord. 918, passed 6-9-11; Am. Ord. 921, passed 7-14-11; Am. Ord.
926, passed 10-27-11; Am. Ord. 932, passed 4-12-12; Am. Ord. 935, passed
8-23-12; Am. Ord. 936, passed 8-23-12; Am. Ord. 946, passed 5-23-13; Am. Ord.
947, passed 5-23-13; Am. Ord. 949, passed 9-12-13; Am. Ord. 950, passed
10-10-13; Am. Ord. 959, passed 1-23-14; Am. Ord. 966, passed 6-12-14; Am.
Ord. 975, passed 7-10-14; Am. Ord. 977, passed 11-13-14; Am. Ord. 979, passed
12-11-14; Am. Ord. 981, passed 2-12-15; Am. Ord. 982, passed 2-12-15; Am.
Ord. 987, passed 4-23-15; Am. Ord. 990, passed 6-11-15;  Am. Ord. 992,
passed 7-9-15; Am. Ord. 994, passed 7-9-14; Am. Ord. 995, passed 8-13-15; Am.
Ord. 1004, passed 1-28-16; Am. Ord. 1008, passed 4-28-16; Am. Ord. 1011,
passed 6-23-16; Am. Ord. 1012, passed 7-14-16; Am. Ord. 1015, passed 8-25-16;
Am. Ord. 1016, passed 8-25-16; Am. Ord. 1018, passed 8-25-16; Am. Ord. 1025,
passed 12-22-16; Am. Ord. 1027, passed 4-13-17; Am. Ord. 1030, passed
7-27-17; Am. Ord. 1031, passed 7-27-17; Am. Ord. 1041, passed 3-22-18)



AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT



§ 155.020  PERMITTED USES.



   Within any agricultural district, no structure or land shall be used,
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



   (A)   All types of agricultural pursuits including the keeping,
raising or production of livestock and accessory farm residences;



   (B)   Commercial greenhouses and nurseries;



   (C)   Stands for the sale of agricultural products provided the
products are at least in part raised on the premises;



   (D)   One-family detached dwelling meeting the standards of the
Uniform Building Code, placed on permanent foundation and having no
horizontal axis less than 18 feet in length; and



   (E)   Public parks and playgrounds.



(‘81 Code, § A1-28)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 465, passed
10-26-89)



§ 155.021  CONDITIONAL USES.



   Within any agricultural district, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except by
a conditional use permit for:



   (A)   Any conditional use in the R, single-family districts, as
listed in § 155.052 and regulated therein; and



   (B)   Riding stables, boarding stables, ski hills and similar uses.



(‘81 Code, § A1-28)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 465, passed
10-26-89)



§ 155.022  ACCESSORY USES.



   Within any agricultural district, any accessory use permitted in the R,
single-family districts, as listed in § 155.053, shall be permitted.



(‘81 Code, § A1-28)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 465, passed
10-26-89)



RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER DISTRICT



§ 155.035  PERMITTED USES.



   Within any RCL district, no structure or land shall be used, except for
one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council:



   (A)   Single-family dwellings meeting the standards of the Uniform
Building Code, placed on permanent foundations and having no horizontal axis
less than 18 feet in length; and



   (B)   Any permitted use in the R, single-family districts, as listed
in § 155.051 and regulated therein.



(‘81 Code, § A1-29)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 465, passed
10-26-89)



§ 155.036  CONDITIONAL USES.



   Within any RCL district, no structure or land shall be used for any
conditional use in the R, single-family districts, as listed in § 155.052
and regulated therein or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except by
conditional use permit.



(‘81 Code, § A1-29)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 465, passed
10-26-89)



§ 155.037  ACCESSORY USES.



   Within any RCL district, any accessory use permitted in the R,
single-family districts, as listed in § 155.053, shall be permitted.



(‘81 Code, § A1-29)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 465, passed
10-26-89)



§ 155.038  INDIVIDUAL LOTS.



   Deviation from the applicable requirements for lot area, lot
dimensions, yards, setbacks, location of parking areas and public street
frontage may be allowed but only if the deviation is specifically stated in
the applicable subdivision agreement.



(‘81 Code, § A1-29)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 465, passed
10-26-89)



ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS



§ 155.050  PURPOSE.



   These districts are for the purposes of permitting detached
single-family residential dwellings.  The districts are intended for those
areas which are designated “single-family” in the comprehensive guide
plan, with the specific district relating to the natural features and
characteristics of the site and the surrounding property.



(‘81 Code, § A1-30)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 465, passed
10-26-89)



§ 155.051  PERMITTED USES.



   Within any R-1, R-2 and R-3 district, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



   (A)   One-family detached dwellings meeting the standards of the
Uniform Building Code, placed on permanent foundations and having no
horizontal axis less than 18 feet in length;



   (B)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



   (C)   Public utility buildings and structures; or



   (D)   Community-based family-care home, day care home licensed under
M.S. § 245.812, or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state.



(‘81 Code, § A1-30)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 465, passed
10-26-89)



§ 155.052  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Within any R-1, R-2 and R-3 district, no structure or land
shall be used for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City
Council, except by a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Off-street parking, for passenger vehicles only, when
the proposed site of the off-street parking abuts on a lot which is in
another zoning district.  For screening requirements see § 155.348;



      (2)   Cemeteries; and



      (3)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812, when:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes; and



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community or an
effective natural or manmade barrier exists between facilities.



      (4)   Accessory unit dwelling (AUD) subject to the regulations
thereof in the R-1 district only.



      (5)   Wireless communication towers and small wireless
facilities as regulated elsewhere in this chapter.



   (B)   The conditional use permit shall be reviewed at one-year
intervals.



(‘81 Code, § A1-30)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 465, passed
10-26-89; Am. Ord. 729, passed 6-26-03; Am. Ord. 760, passed 10-14-04; Am.
Ord. 1039, passed 2-8-18)



§ 155.053  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   Within any R-1, R-2 and R-3 district, no accessory structures or use of
land shall be permitted, except for one or more of the following uses or uses
deemed similar by the City Council:



   (A)   Private parking space and permanent garage structure, one
attached and one detached.  The area of an attached garage shall not exceed
the combined area of any living space located on the first floor of the
primary residence.  Detached garages shall not exceed 750 square feet and
shall not exceed 16 feet in height.  Temporary vehicle storage structures
shall not be permitted;



   (B)   One accessory structure in addition to any garage(s) except
that it shall not exceed 120 square feet in area if a detached garage exists
on the same lot.  If there is no detached garage on the property, there may
be not more than two accessory structures of which one shall not exceed 750
square feet and the other shall not exceed 120 square feet.  In the event a
detached garage is constructed, any accessory structures existing on the same
lot shall be removed or modified such that only one accessory structure
remains which must be 120 square feet or less in area.  Landscape features,
such as statuary and the like; easily movable seasonal temporary structures
not intended to remain erected for 12 months, such as party tents and the
like; and backyard play equipment, such as swing sets, trampolines, slides,
and the like, shall not count towards the number of permitted accessory
structures as provided in this division;



   (C)   Private swimming pool, tennis court and play apparatus for the
use of the occupants of the premises;



   (D)   Signs, as regulated in Chapter 154;



   (E)   Buildings, trailers, unscreened trash dumpsters, or portable
storage units temporarily located on the subject lot only for the purposes of
construction on the premises for a period of time not to exceed time
necessary for such construction, or for the sale of new homes in a new
housing development.  Trash dumpsters shall be removed from the subject lot
when full;



   (F)   Gardening and other horticultural uses where no sale of
products is conducted on the premises;



   (G)   Decorative landscape features;



   (H)   The keeping of household pets and service animals, as defined
and regulated elsewhere in this code, by the occupants of the premises for
non-commercial purposes. Any animal which is not a household pet or service
animal as defined elsewhere in this code is not permitted, except horses may
be kept in R-1 Districts provided that any accessory building used for
housing horses shall be located no less than 100 feet from the nearest
residence;



   (I)   Repair and maintenance of motor vehicles owned by the
occupant; see screening requirements, § 155.348; and



   (J)   Garage sales limited to three consecutive days and not to
exceed three per calendar year, per residence.



(‘81 Code, § A1-30)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 465, passed
10-26-89; Am. Ord. 760, passed 10-14-04; Am. Ord. 962, passed 2-27-14)



TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT



§ 155.065  PURPOSE.



   This district is for the purposes of permitting attached single-family
residential dwellings in a two-unit configuration.  The district is intended
for those areas which are designated “low density” in the comprehensive
guide plan.



(‘81 Code, § A1-31)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 465, passed
10-26-89)



§ 155.066  PERMITTED USES.



   Within the R-5 district, no structure or land shall be used, except for
one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council:



   (A)   Any permitted, conditional or accessory use in the R, single
family districts, as listed in §§ 155.051 through 155.053 and regulated
therein; except accessory unit dwelings (AUDs) shall not be allowed as a
permitted, conditional or accessory use; and



   (B)   Two-family dwelling.



(‘81 Code, § A1-28)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 465, passed
10-26-89; Am. Ord. 729, passed 6-26-03)



MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT



§ 155.075  PURPOSE.



   The multiple-family residential districts, M-1A, B and C, M-2A, B and
C, M-3A, B and C, M-4A, B and C, M-5A, B and C, M-6A, B and C, M-7A, B and C,
and M-8A, B and C, are established for the following purposes:



   (A)   The M-1 districts are intended for those areas which are
designated for “low density” in the comprehensive guide plan, where a
very low density of townhomes is expected in close proximity to detached
single-family dwelling units.  Property within these districts is
characterized by very irregular terrain, in excess of 20%, an unusual number
of trees and/or other natural features which will restrict the location of
buildings and parking lots.



   (B)   The M-2 districts are intended for those areas which are
designated for “low density” in the comprehensive guide plan, where a low
density of townhomes is expected.  Property within these districts is
characterized by rolling terrain, from 10 to 20%, mature vegetation or other
natural features which restrict somewhat the placement of buildings and
parking lots.



   (C)   The M-3 districts are intended for those areas which are
designated for “low density” in the comprehensive guide plan, where a low
density of townhomes is expected.  Property within these districts is
characterized by relatively level or gently rolling topography, and proximity
to either neighborhood or community collector roads or to arterial roads.



   (D)   The M-4 districts are intended for those areas which are
designated for “medium density” in the comprehensive guide plan, where a
moderate density of townhouse or apartment dwelling units is expected. 
Property within these districts is characterized by relatively level
topography, and proximity to either neighborhood or community collector roads
or to arterial roads.



   (E)   The M-5 districts are intended for those areas which are
designated for “medium density” in the comprehensive guide plan, where a
moderate density of townhouse or apartment dwelling units is expected. 
Property within these districts is characterized by relatively level
topography, and proximity to either neighborhood or community collector roads
or to arterial roads.



   (F)   The M-6 districts are intended for those areas which are
designated for “medium density” in the comprehensive guide plan, where a
moderately high density of townhouse or apartment dwelling units is
expected.  Property within these districts are characterized by relatively
level topography, the minimal presence of significant mature vegetation and
proximity to either neighborhood or community collector roads or to arterial
roads.



   (G)   The M-7 districts are intended for those areas which are
designated for “high density” in the comprehensive guide plan, where a
high density of apartment dwelling units is expected.  Property within these
districts is characterized by relatively level topography, relative absence
of significant mature vegetation and close proximity to arterial or community
collector roads.



   (H)   The M-8 districts are intended for those areas which are
designated for “high density” in the comprehensive guide plan, where a
very high density of apartment dwelling units is expected.  Property within
these districts is characterized by level topography, complete absence of any
significant vegetation and close proximity to arterial roads and the central
business district.



(‘81 Code, § A1-33)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 465, passed 10-26-89)



§ 155.076  PERMITTED USES.



   Within a multiple-family residential district, M-1, M-2, M-3, M-4, M-5,
M-6, M-7 and M-8, no building or land shall be used, except for one or more
of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council:



   (A)   Any use permitted in the R districts as regulated therein. 
One-family detached dwellings are only permitted in M-1 districts; lot
standards for a single-family uses in an M-1 district shall be the same
standards as for an R-3 district;



   (B)   Townhouse dwellings, M-1, M-2, M-3, M-4, M-5 and M-6 only,
provided they are serviced by public sanitary sewer and water systems and
provided that no single structure contains in excess of six dwelling units in
M-1 and M-2 zones or 12 dwelling units in M-3, M-4, M-5 or M-6 zones;



   (C)   Apartment buildings, M-4, M-5, M-6, M-7 and M-8 only, provided
they are serviced by public sanitary sewer and water systems;



   (D)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



   (E)   Public utility buildings and structures; or



   (F)   Community-based family-care home, day- care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812, or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state.



(‘81 Code, § A1-33)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 465, passed 10-26-89)



§ 155.077  CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.



   In the multiple-family residential districts, M-1, M-2, M-3, M-4, M-5,
M-6, M-7 and M-8, conditional use permits may be issued in accord with the
following:



   (A)   Purpose.  Certain uses can be unsuitable in multiple-family
residential districts because of inherent characteristics (such as traffic,
noise, appearance, glare), commercial character or other conditions that
would tend to adversely affect the residential character of the area and
reduce property values. Nevertheless, those uses, under certain
circumstances, may not be detrimental provided they are properly located and
developed.



   (B)   Criteria.  No conditional use permits shall be granted in a
multiple-family residential district unless the City Council shall find that:



      (1)   The proposed use will not cause a traffic hazard or
congestion;



      (2)   Adjacent residential areas will not be adversely
affected because of traffic generation, noise, glare, appearance or other
nuisance characteristics;



      (3)   Nuisances generated by the use will not have an adverse
effect upon existing and/or future development of adjacent areas.  When
permits are granted, they shall be periodically reviewed to ensure continued
compliance with this requirement; and



      (4)   The use is consistent with other uses and the purpose
for the multiple-residential district in which it is located.



(‘81 Code, § A1-33)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 465, passed 10-26-89)



§ 155.078  CONDITIONAL USES.



   If the above conditions are met, conditional use permits may be issued
in the multiple-family residential districts for the following uses or uses
deemed similar by the City Council:



   (A)   Any use permitted as a conditional use in the R districts as
regulated therein.



   (B)   Community-based family-care home or day- care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812, or community-based residential
care facility when:



      (1)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building and
housing codes.



      (2)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities.



      (3)   The conditional use permit shall be reviewed at one-year
intervals.



   (C)   Apartment or townhouse dwelling units constructed with exposed
vertical exterior finish materials other than those provided under § 155.346
when:



      (1)   The proposed materials represent the same or similar
materials used on at least 66.7% and of the existing buildings within 350
feet of the site.



      (2)   The proposed materials are demonstrated to be of
comparable grade and quality as those otherwise required.



      (3)   The materials have the appearance of wood siding having
a maximum plank width of 12 inches.  Under no circumstance shall sheet or
corrugated aluminum, iron, steel, asbestos, sheet plywood or similar
materials be used which have no three-dimensional relief, nor shall plain or
painted plain concrete block be used.  Any decorative concrete block shall
be colored only by means of a pigment impregnated throughout the entire block.



   (D)   Increased density, in an M-8 district only, when located
adjacent to or within the central business district as identified in the
comprehensive plan, as follows:



      (1)   In a four-story building, a maximum of 28 dwelling units
per acre may be permitted.  With applicable density bonuses, this may be
increased to 32 units per acre.  Up to a 50% increase in building setbacks
may be required.



      (2)   In a five-story building, a maximum of 36 dwelling units
per acre may be permitted.  With applicable density bonuses, this may be
increased to 40 units per acre.  Up to a 100% increase in building setbacks
may be required.



   (E)   Mobile home parks for the purpose of installing manufactured
houses, as defined by M.S. §§ 327.31 to 327.35, in an M-7 district only.



   (F)   Wireless communication towers and small wireless facilities as
regulated elsewhere in this chapter.



(‘81 Code, § A1-33)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 465, passed 10-26-89; Am. Ord. 760, passed 10-14-04; Am.
Ord. 1039, passed 2-8-18)



§ 155.079  ACCESSORY USES.



   In the multiple-family residential districts M-1, M-2, M-3, M-4, M-5,
M-6, M-7 and M-8, the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City
Council shall be permitted as accessory uses:



   (A)   Any accessory use permitted in the R districts;



   (B)   Accessory uses customarily associated with and incidental to
the conditional uses permitted in the multiple dwelling districts; and



   (C)   Putting greens, shuffleboard courts, picnic areas, community
buildings and similar recreational or service areas for use by the residents
of the premises.



(‘81 Code, § A1-33)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 465, passed 10-26-89)



§ 155.080  AREA REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS.



   In the multiple-family residential districts, all improvements and
lands shall be subject to the following minimum area and dimensional
requirements:



   (A)   Lot area.  Densities are predicated upon the availability of
public water, storm sewer and sanitary sewer service; without the service,
densities shall be limited to one dwelling unit per ten acres.  Appendix B,
division (C) shall be used to compute the minimum lot area exclusive of
street right-of-ways, in square feet and the computation shall be subject to
the following: Ponding area or similar unbuildable areas shall not comprise
more than 10% of the total site area.



   (B)   Density bonus. 



      (1)   Certain design and construction features serve to reduce
the real and perceived impacts of crowding prevalent in multiple-residential
dwelling units and building complexes.  These features enhance individual
unit privacy, offer an improved outdoor environment and foster a sense of
pride and commitment to its residents.  These traits contribute to
neighborhood stability and positive social relationships which are found to
be beneficial to the community as a whole. 



      (2)   To the extent that these features are incorporated, the
maximum density permitted in each of the zoning districts shall be increased
in accordance with the following, except that the increased density shall not
exceed that listed under “with bonus” as stipulated in division (A)
above.  Where only a portion of the dwellings or buildings are provided with
these features, the increase in density shall be prorated.



         (a)   Common open space: 1.0 units/acre.  This bonus
shall be granted when multiple-residential buildings in a complex are
arranged in a manner which creates significant open space between them.  In
order to be eligible, the open space so created must have a minimum area of
two times the lot coverage of the buildings which face the space, be
configured in a regular shape, be recognizable as a defined common or
sheltered area, and be designed or contain features which encourage social
interaction among the residents of the complex.



         (b)   Private outdoor space: 0.50 units/acre.  This
bonus shall be granted when multiple-residential buildings are designed so
that each dwelling unit is provided with a contiguous private outdoor
space.  In order to be eligible, the private spaces must be designed to be
screened or sheltered so that its occupants are not visible from any other
dwelling unit, other private open space, or any passer- by on adjacent
private or public property.



         (c)   Sound suppression: 1.50 units/acre.  This bonus
shall be granted when multiple residential buildings are constructed with
upgraded sound suppression materials in the walls, ceilings and floors which
separate individual dwelling units.  In order to be eligible, the STC rating
must be increased by ten from that specified as the minimum in the Minnesota
State Building Code.



         (d)   Basements: 0.25 units/acre.  This bonus shall be
granted when multiple-residential buildings are constructed with a full
basement under each dwelling unit rather than a crawl space or slab-
on-grade.  In order to be eligible, the basement must exist under the entire
ground floor area, excepting therefrom any garage area.



         (e)   Oversize garages: 0.50 units/acre. This bonus
shall be granted when multiple-residential buildings are constructed with
oversize garage areas for storage purposes.  In order to be eligible,
townhouse garages must each be a minimum of 550 square feet.  Apartment
garages must each be a minimum of 250 square feet or, in the alternative,
each apartment dwelling unit must be provided with a locking storage locker
of at least 50 square feet.



         (f)   Private amenities: 1.0 units/acre. This bonus
shall be granted when multiple-residential buildings are constructed with
upgraded living amenities within each dwelling unit.  In order to be
eligible, each dwelling unit must be provided with a functional fireplace
(0.50 units/acre) or 1¾ bathrooms (0.50 units/acre).



   (C)   Height regulations.



   (D)   Maximum coverage of the site.  All buildings, including
accessory buildings, shall not cover more than the percentages listed in
Appendix B.



   (E)   Maximum impervious surface.  See § 155.350.



   (F)   Setback regulations.



      (1)   Public streets and property lines. The minimum setbacks
from adjacent property and public streets shall be as set out in Appendix B.



      (2)   Setback between multiple-residential buildings.  For
the purposes of this  division, the term “side” shall refer to the short
sides of a structure and the terms “front” or “rear” shall refer to
the long sides of the structure.



         (a)   Minimum setbacks between sides of
multiple-residential buildings shall be 15 feet or a distance equal to half
the combined height of the adjacent building faces, whichever is greater.



         (b)   Minimum setbacks between the front or rear of
multiple-residential buildings shall be 50 feet or a distance equal to the
combined height of the adjacent building faces, whichever is greater.  This
requirement also applies to situations where a front or rear faces a side.



   (G)   Screening.  See § 155.348.



   (H)   Landscaping.  See § 155.349.



   (I)   Parking.  See §§ 155.370 through 155.379.  Notwithstanding
§ 155.379, within C districts enclosed garage spaces need to be provided
only at the rate of one stall per dwelling unit for either townhouse or
apartment units and garage space may be located in a structure detached from
the multiple-residential building.



   (J)   Building materials.  See § 155.346.  Within C districts,
the provisions set forth in § 155.078(C) for alternate materials shall be
permitted by right without the need for a conditional use permit.



   (K)   Balconies.  Within A and B districts, where private balconies
for individual dwelling units are included, they shall be incorporated into
the overall building design so as to provide architectural relief through the
use of privacy walls beneath protruding dormers, or some similar treatment.



   (L)   Rooflines.  Within A or B districts, roofs shall have a
minimum pitch of one to three.



   (M)   Building elevations along public streets. Within A and B
districts, no more than 50% of the length of a building elevation which faces
a public street can be used for garage doors.



(‘81 Code, § A1-33)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 465, passed 10-26-89)



LIMITED BUSINESS DISTRICT



§ 155.090  PURPOSE.



   Limited business districts are areas where uses are primarily
restricted to office and professional services.



(‘81 Code, § A1-34)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 625, passed 3-27-97)



§ 155.091  PERMITTED USES.



   Within any LB district, no structure or land shall be used, except for
one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council:



   (A)   Municipal buildings including police, fire, emergency
management, and the like, but not public works;



   (B)   Professional offices, banks and savings and loan;



   (C)   Offices of a general nature where the operations do not
include over-the-counter retail sales or warehousing from the site;



   (D)   Clinics for human care;



   (E)   Institutional uses, such as library, swimming pool, church,
public schools, religious centers, health centers and community building;



   (F)   On-sale wine and/or 3.2% liquor in conjunction with a
restaurant facility; or



   (G)   Coin-operated amusement devices in conjunction with a
restaurant facility or private club.



(‘81 Code, § A1-33)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 625, passed 3-27-97)



§ 155.092  CONDITIONAL USES.



   Within any LB district, no structure or land shall be used for the
following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except by
conditional use permit:



   (A)   Nursing homes, rest homes, retirement homes or hospitals for
human care, day-care centers and private schools;



   (B)   Funeral homes and mortuaries;



   (C)   Art, interior decorating, photographic or music studio
provided no retail sales are made of products not manufactured on the site;



   (D)   Radio and television studios;



   (E)   Private clubs and lodges not operated for a profit;



   (F)   Historical buildings, museums, art institutes, galleries and
playhouses;



   (G)   Off-street parking when the principal site of the off-street
parking abuts on a lot which is in another zoning district;



   (H)   On-sale liquor in conjunction with a restaurant facility;



   (I)   Nurseries and greenhouses;



   (J)   Restaurants, Class I only; and



   (K)   Buildings constructed with exposed vertical exterior finish
materials other than those provided under § 155.346 when:



      (1)   The proposed materials represent the same or similar
materials used on at least 66.7% of the existing buildings adjacent to the
site;



      (2)   The proposed materials are demonstrated to be of
comparable grade and quality as those otherwise required; and



      (3)   Under no circumstance shall sheet  or corrugated
aluminum, iron, steel, asbestos, sheet plywood, plain or painted concrete
block or similar materials be used.  Any decorative concrete block shall be
colored only by means of a pigment  impregnated throughout the entire block.



   (L)   Open air recreational shelter, gazebo, and pavilion accessory
structures, in conjunction with institutional uses and private clubs and
lodges not operated for a profit, subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   The design shall adhere to commercial building
requirements in accordance with building and site design regulations in this
chapter, including the encasement of the support columns in brick, stone or
decorative block.



      (2)   The structure shall be constructed over an area surfaced
with concrete.



      (3)   The building area of the structure shall not exceed 30%
of the primary building or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less.



      (4)   The structure shall meet structure height and setback
requirements set forth in this chapter.  The City Council may require
screening or an increased setback from adjacent residential properties if it
determines that the proposed use could have the potential to adversely impact
said properties.



      (5)   No signage on a structure shall be allowed.



      (6)   Use of electronic sound system or audio equipment is
subject to the regulations of the same elsewhere in the City Code.



      (7)   Lighting for structure shall not project a glare onto
adjacent properties or streets.



      (8)   Equipment or materials not directly related to the use
of the structure shall not be stored outside or inside the structure and no
equipment or material for any use shall at any time be stored outside the
structure.



      (9)   Paths and sidewalks, a minimum of five feet in width,
shall be provided to assure that users can move safely and conveniently from
the primary building and parking areas to the recreational building.



      (10)   Portable trash receptacles shall be weighted or
anchored.



      (11)   All landscaping shall be in accordance with the
landscaping regulations and requirements set forth in this chapter.



      (12)   All parking requirements and regulations shall be met
in accordance with the parking requirements set forth in this chapter.



      (13)   The structure shall be permitted only on the same lot
as the primary use.



   (M)   Towers as regulated in § 155.385.



(‘81 Code, § A1-34)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 625, passed 3-27-97; Am. Ord. 749, passed 4-22-04; Am. Ord.
760, passed 10-14-04)



§ 155.093  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   Within any LB district, the  following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



   (A)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading spaces, as
regulated by this chapter;



   (B)   Buildings, trailers, unscreened trash dumpsters, or portable
storage units temporarily located on the subject lot only for the purposes of
construction on the premises for a period of time not  to exceed time
necessary for such construction, or for  the sale of new homes in a new
housing development.  Trash dumpsters shall be removed from the subject lot
when full.



   (C)   Public telephone booths and other essential public service
facilities provided all yard requirements are met.



   (D)   Outdoor dining area, subject to the regulations set forth in
this chapter.



(‘81 Code, § A1-34)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 625, passed 3-27-97; Am. Ord. 760, passed 10-14-04; Am.
Ord. 794, passed 8-24-06)



§ 155.094  BUSINESS DISTRICTS NEAR RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS.



   (A)   Purpose.  LB-1 districts are located at the periphery of
residential neighborhoods and are intended to provide a limited range of
office and professional service uses.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  Within any LB-1 district, no structure or
land shall be used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses
deemed similar by the City Council:



      (1)   Municipal building including police, fire, emergency
management, and the like, but not public works;



      (2)   Professional offices not including medical services;



      (3)   Offices of a general nature not including medical
services where the operations do not include over-the-counter retail sales or
warehousing from the site;



      (4)   Spaces used for medical care, except that the use shall
be limited to 3,000 square feet or 35% of the total gross floor area of the
building, whichever is more;



      (5)   Institutional uses, such as library, swimming pool,
church, public schools, religious centers, and community building; and



      (6)   Financial service uses including banks and savings and
loans which do not have drive-up or drive-thru service.



   (C)   Conditional uses.  Within any LB-1 district, no structure or
land shall be used for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City
Council, except by conditional use permit:



      (1)   Nursing homes, rest homes, retirement homes or hospitals
for human care, day-care centers and private schools;



      (2)   Funeral homes and mortuaries;



      (3)   Art, interior decorating photographic  or music studio
provided no retail sales are made of products not manufactured on the site;



      (4)   Radio and television studios;



      (5)   Historical buildings, museums, art institutes, galleries
and playhouses;



      (6)   Off-street parking when the principal site of the
off-street parking abuts on a lot which is in another zoning district; and



      (7)   Buildings constructed with exposed vertical exterior
finish materials other than those provided under § 155.346 when:



         (a)   The proposed materials represent the same or
similar materials used on at least 66.7% of the existing buildings adjacent
to the site;



         (b)   The proposed materials are demonstrated to be of
comparable grade and quality as those otherwise required; and



         (c)   Under no circumstances shall sheet or corrugated
aluminum, iron, steel, asbestos, sheet plywood, plain or painted plain
concrete block or similar materials be used.  Any decorative concrete block
shall be colored only by means of a pigment impregnated throughout the entire
block.



   (D)   Accessory uses.  Within any LB-1 district, accessory uses
permitted in the LB district by the City Council shall be permitted accessory
uses.



(‘81 Code, § A1-34.1)  (Ord. 385, passed 4-23-87; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89)



NEIGHBORHOOD CONVENIENCE CENTER DISTRICT



§ 155.105  PURPOSE.



   NCC districts are located at the periphery of residential neighborhoods
and are intended to provide a limited range of over-the-counter convenience
retail and service uses to serve the daily and weekly needs of the adjoining
residents.



(‘81 Code, § A1-35)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 462, passed 10-12-89; Am. Ord. 471, passed 1-11-90)



§ 155.106  PERMITTED USES.



   Within any NCC district, no structure or land shall be used, except for
one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council:



   (A)   Dairy, grocery or convenience store not to exceed 5,000 square
feet of floor area;



   (B)   Class I or Class II restaurant, lunch counter or delicatessen
facilities not to exceed 3,000 square feet of gross building floor area.  No
Class II fast- food restaurants or drive-through restaurant facilities may be
separately located within any neighborhood center district;



   (C)   Offices for doctors, dentists, lawyers, realtors, insurance
agents and similar uses to serve the adjoining residential area.  Individual
professional offices within the neighborhood center project shall not exceed
3,000 square feet in gross building area. The aggregate total of all
professional office space within the project shall not exceed 25% of the
gross building floor area within the project;



   (D)   Day-care centers; and



   (E)   Retail operations selling personal services or goods over the
counter as limited to the following uses unless otherwise specifically
approved by the City Council:  antiques, art and school supplies, bakeries,
barbershop, beauty parlor, bicycles, books and stationery, candy, cameras and
photographic supplies, catering establishments, china and glassware, clothes
pressing, custom dressmaking, drugs, dry goods, florists, garden supplies,
gifts, hardware, hats, hobby shops, household appliance repair, interior
decorating studio (no retail furniture sales), jewelry and watch repair,
laundry and dry cleaning, locksmith shops, musical instruments, paint and
wallpaper, phonograph records and equipment, photography studio, shoes,
sporting goods, tailoring, tanning salon, tobacco, toys, variety stores,
video tape and equipment sales or rental, and wearing apparel.



(‘81 Code, § A1-35)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 462, passed 10-12-89; Am. Ord. 471, passed 1-11-90)



§ 155.107  CONDITIONAL USES.



   Within any NCC district, no structure or land shall be used for the
following use or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except by
conditional use permit:



   (A)   Motor fuel sales as an accessory use to a dairy/grocery store
operation; no motor vehicle repair facilities allowed;



   (B)   Buildings constructed with exposed vertical exterior finish
materials other than those provided under § 155.346 when:



      (1)   The proposed materials represent the same or similar
materials used on at least 66.7% of the existing buildings adjacent to the
site;



      (2)   The proposed materials are demonstrated to be of
comparable grade and quality as those otherwise required; and



      (3)   Under no circumstances shall sheet or corrugated
aluminum, iron, steel, asbestos, sheet plywood, plain or painted plain
concrete block or similar materials be used.  Any decorative concrete block
shall be colored only by means of a pigment impregnated throughout the entire
block.



   (C)   Hours of operation in excess of those listed in § 155.114; and



   (D)   Offices in excess of 3,000 square feet in gross building floor
area or which exceed more than 25% of the gross building floor area within
the project.



(‘81 Code, § A1-35)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 462, passed 10-12-89; Am. Ord. 471, passed 1-11-90)



§ 155.108  ACCESSORY USES.



   Within any NCC district, accessory uses permitted in the LB district or
uses deemed similar by the City Council shall be permitted.



(‘81 Code, § A1-35)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 462, passed 10-12-89; Am. Ord. 471, passed 1-11-90)



§ 155.109  LOCATION OF NEW CENTERS.



   After the effective date of this chapter, new neighborhood business
center zones shall have the following general characteristics:



   (A)   The center shall be contiguous to an existing arterial street
or a neighborhood collector street with primary access from the neighborhood
collector;



   (B)   The center shall be within six blocks of an existing transit
route or park-and-ride route;



   (C)   The center shall be located at least ¾-mile from other
existing convenience stores or zoned neighborhood centers;



   (D)   The center shall have at least two different uses or
retailers; and



   (E)   The center shall have at least three gross acres of land.



(‘81 Code, § A1-35)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 462, passed 10-12-89; Am. Ord. 471, passed 1-11-90)



§ 155.110  SITE DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   The goal of design standards is to create a quality building
and site design compatible with surrounding residential developments.  To do
this the city will regulate landscaping, building materials, signage,
lighting, noise, storage, ratios of impervious materials coverage and access
points for pedestrians and vehicles.



   (B)   Traffic circulation patterns and ingress and egress to the
site shall be designed so as to minimize the impact on the adjacent
neighborhood.



   (C)   The site shall be organized so that there can be a smooth flow
of vehicles in and out of the site as well as easy access to the various
activity areas. Acceleration and deceleration lanes and/or traffic medians
shall be required where existing or anticipated heavy flows indicate need.



   (D)   Entrances and exits shall be placed in accordance with city
requirements so as to minimize interference with off-site circulation
patterns.



   (E)   Circulation at gas pumps shall not conflict with access to
parking, interior vehicular circulation or access to and from public streets.



   (F)   Provision shall be made for emergency vehicle access and fire
lanes adjacent to the building.



   (G)   Parking shall be provided in the quantities recommended by the
city parking guidelines.  Parking for convenience shopping centers shall be
provided at a minimum of one space per 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
All parking areas shall be designed to city standards.



   (H)   Parking lots have having 15 or more spaces shall provide
parking for the physically disabled.  In addition, bicycle racks and
motorcycle parking shall be provided.



   (I)   Bicycle parking should be provided near building entries, but
shall not encroach into pedestrian walkways.



   (J)   Parking areas shall be screened from views of adjacent streets
and residential areas through a combination of planting and berming.  Walls
of masonry material similar to and compatible with the primary building
materials may also be used for screening parking and circulation areas.



   (K)   Loading/service areas shall be designed to include space for
vehicle ingress and maneuvering. Service to underground tanks shall not
conflict with the site access and shall be placed at least 100 feet from any
residential property line.  Loading and service shall only be done during
normal business hours.



   (L)   Service and loading to the fronts of buildings may be
permitted provided the rear of the building abuts a residential zoning
district.



   (M)   Loading/service areas, refuse containers, and storage
containers, located on the side or rear of buildings, shall be screened from
view from adjacent streets and residential areas through the use of intensive
six-foot high planting and/or opaque masonry screening walls.  Masonry shall
be the same material used on the exterior of the main structure.



   (N)   Outdoor storage and display shall be a prohibited use.  All
utility meters and services to the building shall be screened from view or
contained within the building.



   (O)   Screening walls or fences shall be at least six feet in
height, but not more than eight feet in height.  Lower walls may be used to
help screen parking and circulation areas.



   (P)   Fences or walls shall be constructed of a masonry material
similar to and complimentary to the primary building material and
architecture.  (Chain link type fences with or without wood slats or other
inserts shall not be an acceptable screening device.) Fencing shall not
impair traffic safety by obscuring views of entering or exiting motorists.



   (Q)   Decorative or protective wrought iron type fences may be
allowed when incorporated properly within a site plan.



(‘81 Code, § A1-35)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 462, passed 10-12-89; Am. Ord. 471, passed 1-11-90)



§ 155.111  LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   The goal of these standards is to assure that neighborhood
convenience centers present a landscaped appearance that is compatible with
adjacent residential areas, and complementary to the image of the community
as a whole. 



   (B)   The minimum cost of landscaping materials for the project
shall be 5% of the estimated building construction cost based on the current
means construction data.  For projects with a construction cost in excess of
$500,000, the landscape plans, as required in § 155.349, shall be prepared
by a landscape architect registered and licensed in the state.



   (C)   Plant materials, fences and walls shall be utilized to:



      (1)   Provide screening of undesirable views;



      (2)   Compliment the architectural form of the building;



      (3)   Define walkways, traffic circulation, special use areas,
and building entries;



      (4)   Provide a pleasant street appearance;



      (5)   Soften the visual impact of large paved areas;



      (6)   Soften the edge between a parking lot or street and the
building; and



      (7)   Mitigate the impacts of lighting or other negative
influence.



   (D)   Landscaped islands within parking lots shall be provided for
all parking lots in the neighborhood center. The total area of the islands
shall be at least 5% of the parking lot area, except that no island shall be
less than the size of a standard parking stall.  In addition to the required
tree planting in landscape islands, see § 155.349(D), ground cover within
the island shall also be installed.



   (E)   The landscape treatment of the space abutting the public
right-of-way shall include deciduous canopy trees in concert with berming or
other screening devices to conceal parking and circulation areas.



   (F)   Planting beds, conifers and ornamental trees shall be used to
accent entries and freestanding signage.



   (G)   Signage and identity structures shall be incorporated into the
landscape design and shown on landscape or site plans.



   (H)   At least 75% of the “landscape area” shall be live plant
material as opposed to walks, patios, and the like. Plant materials used in
planting beds shall be sized to achieve a minimum of 50% bed coverage within
two years of installation.



   (I)   Installation of trees and evergreens at larger than minimum
city standards may be required by the city to achieve buffering or
streetscape effect in some circumstances.



   (J)   The architectural design shall include plazas, patios, outdoor
seating adjacent to building entries.



   (K)   Special paving materials (brick pavers, stamped concrete,
paving stones, and the like) may be used to define pedestrian circulation
through parking and vehicular circulation areas.



   (L)   Paths and sidewalks, a minimum five feet in width, shall be
provided to assure that pedestrians can move safely and conveniently on the
site and between the site and the neighborhood.



   (M)   In all turf and landscape areas, an in-ground landscape
irrigation system shall be installed.  The systems shall be considered a
portion of the cost of the building (not the landscaping) and shall be
inspected as part of the building construction.



(‘81 Code, § A1-35)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 462, passed 10-12-89; Am. Ord. 471, passed 1-11-90)



§ 155.112  OUTDOOR LIGHTING.



   (A)   The goal of these guidelines is to allow outside lighting for
the functional and security needs of the neighborhood convenience center,
without adversely impacting adjacent properties.



   (B)   Lighting shall enhance the overall aesthetics of the site.



   (C)   Security lighting shall be provided, particularly at
pedestrian walkways and all entries.



   (D)   Lighting standards and canopies shall be integrated with the
architectural design of the buildings and shall be no more than 20 feet above
finished grade.  Detached canopies for gasoline sales shall be no more than
20 feet from finished grade to top of canopy.  All exterior canopy materials
shall match the color of the main building.  Canopy support posts shall be
enclosed in the same masonry materials utilized on the main entry face of the
building.  Light sources (other than signs) attached to canopies shall be
concealed on the underside of the canopy, either built into the canopy
ceiling or contained within concave lens illumination boxes which cast light
vertically to the surface of the pavement.



   (E)   Exterior speakers may be used for required fire and safety
purposes only.  No advertising or entertainment broadcasting shall be
permitted through exterior speakers mounted on the exterior of neighborhood
convenience center building or auxiliary structures.



   (F)   Light sources (light bulbs) shall not be visible from adjacent
properties and shall not project a glare on to adjacent properties.  They
shall be shielded to reflect light down onto the ground and not out onto the
streets or neighboring property.



(‘81 Code, § A1-35)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 462, passed 10-12-89; Am. Ord. 471, passed 1-11-90)



§ 155.113  ARCHITECTURAL FORM, SCALE AND MATERIALS.



   (A)   The goal of these guidelines is to assure that neighborhood
convenience centers present an architectural appearance that is visually
compatible with adjacent residential areas, and complementary to the image of
the community as a whole.



   (B)   The scale of buildings or canopies shall be at an appropriate
scale in relationship to the residential neighborhood to prevent domination
that may overpower the surrounding area in height or building mass. 
Buildings shall not be greater than 25 feet in height.  A building massing
model shall be required as per § 155.402.



   (C)   Forms and finish masonry or wood materials or buildings,
signage, gasoline pump canopies and other accessory structures shall be made
compatible with and relate to the architectural character of the adjacent
area.  The design shall adhere to the commercial building requirements of §
155.346, except that natural wood products may be used on a maximum of 50% of
the building’s vertical walls.



   (D)   Sloped roofs shall be utilized on the main structure.



   (E)   Mechanical equipment on building exteriors, roofs or parking
areas shall be screened from view from all public streets and adjoining
properties.



   (F)   Trash shall be screened and enclosed in masonry faced
enclosures or shall be stored completely within the main structure.



   (G)   Vending machines shall be architecturally designed into the
exterior face of the building. Vending machine and other exterior equipment
shall not be stored or installed on the sides or rear of the building,
parking or landscaped area abutting residentially zoned or developed
property.  No equipment or vending devices shall be placed or installed on
any landscaped area, nor forward of the front building face.



   (H)   A vestibule with exterior moveable walls attached to the
principal portion of a building in which product display or sales are
intended is permitted under the following conditions:



      (1)   The vestibule containing the exterior moveable walls
must be a permanent structure and attached to the principal building in
accordance with the requirements of the building code;



      (2)   The vestibule containing the exterior moveable walls
shall have a roof in accordance with the requirements of the building code;



      (3)   The exterior moveable walls shall be closed and secured
when the building is closed for business;



      (4)   The vestibule supporting the exterior moveable walls
shall be architecturally compatible with the principal portion of the
building;



      (5)   Exterior moveable walls shall not be adjacent to a
residential lot boundary;



      (6)   A minimum six-foot wide sidewalk is required adjacent to
the building for pedestrian circulation; and



      (7)   Only merchandise for sale may be displayed or kept
within the vestibule area.  No merchandise may be displayed on or upon
pallets, within shipping containers or other similar freight-handling
equipment.



(‘81 Code, § A1-35)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 462, passed
10-12-89; Am. Ord. 471, passed 1-11-90; Am. Ord. 684, passed 10-12-00)



§ 155.114  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   For projects which are within 1,000 feet of a residentially zoned area,
the hours of operation shall be prohibited between 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
All deliveries and loading shall be done during normal hours of operation.



(‘81 Code, § A1-35)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 462, passed 10-12-89; Am. Ord. 471, passed 1-11-90)



§ 155.115  PHASING OF IMPROVEMENTS.



   If a center is to be built in phases, each phase shall include an
appropriate share of the proposed streets, landscaping, circulation system,
parking, screening and other site and architectural amenities of the entire
project.  The extent of these improvements shall be determined for each
phase of a specific project at the time of preliminary approval, and may not
be based solely upon a proportional or equal share of the entire site. 
Requirements for a phased project may include off-site improvements.



(‘81 Code, § A1-35)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 462, passed 10-12-89; Am. Ord. 471, passed 1-11-90)



GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT



§ 155.125  PURPOSE.



   General business districts are designed for heavy uses and those
businesses which tend to serve other businesses and industry as well as
residents.  These uses can be incompatible with residential development;
therefore, businesses in this zoning classification are concentrated and
insulated as much as possible from residential areas.



(‘81 Code, § A1-36)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89)



§ 155.126  PERMITTED USES.



   Within any GB district, no structure or land shall be used, except for
one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council:



   (A)   Offices as accessory use to the principal use.  Medical,
professional, real estate offices and office buildings are not permitted;



   (B)   Lumber, heating and plumbing shops and similar construction
material sales and service facilities, outdoor storage subject to conditional
use;



   (C)   Wholesale office, sales or showroom for furniture, carpets and
rugs and similar household goods which shall not include retail food sales;



   (D)   Bowling alley, tennis club, skating, theater, archery,
coin-operated amusement devices and similar commercial recreation facilities
when contained within a building;



   (E)   Car wash, motor fuel sales subject to conditional use;



   (F)   Auto accessories sales, service facilities subject to
conditional use;



   (G)   Storage facilities contained within a building, outdoor
storage subject to conditional use;



   (H)   Rental shop, outdoor display or storage subject to conditional
use;



   (I)   Animal hospital or clinic when contained within a building;



   (J)   Television and radio studios, towers subject to conditional
use;



   (K)   Stone and monument sales, outdoor display or storage subject
to conditional use;



   (L)   Motor vehicle repair and auto body shop, outdoor storage
subject to conditional use;



   (M)   Armories or convention hall;



   (N)   Motor vehicle sales when conducted entirely within a building,
outdoor sales or storage subject to conditional use;



   (O)   Small engine or appliance repair conducted entirely within a
building;



   (P)   Warehousing or wholesale businesses when conducted within a
building.  Office/warehouse combination permitted when office space does not
exceed 30% of floor area;



   (Q)   Research or testing laboratories conducted within a building;



   (R)   Garden store when conducted within a building, outdoor sales
subject to conditional use;



   (S)   Bicycle, boat and snowmobile sales and service, outdoor
display or storage subject to conditional use; and



   (T)   Warehouse/outlet store.



(‘81 Code, § A1-36)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89)



§ 155.127  CONDITIONAL USES.



   Within any GB general business district, no structure or land shall be
used for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council,
except by conditional use permit:



   (A)   Motor fuel sales either as principal use or accessory use;



   (B)   Outdoor sales or storage of motorized vehicles;



   (C)   Outdoor storage of damaged vehicles;



   (D)   Outdoor research or testing facilities;



   (E)   Outdoor sales as principal use or as accessory to principal
use of the property;



   (F)   Outdoor display for rental shop;



   (G)   Retail sales of liquor as part of any facility;



   (H)   Restaurant facilities only when incidental to another use and
not principal use of site;



   (I)   Light fabrication/manufacturing where at least 25% of goods
produced are retailed on site; and



   (J)   Buildings constructed with exposed vertical exterior finish
materials other than those provided under § 155.346 when:



      (1)   The proposed materials represent the same or similar
materials used on at least 66.7% of the existing buildings adjacent to the
site;



      (2)   The proposed materials are demonstrated to be of
comparable grade and quality as those otherwise required; and



      (3)   Under no circumstance shall sheet or corrugated
aluminum, iron, steel, asbestos, sheet plywood, plain or painted plain
concrete block or similar materials be used.  Any decorative concrete block
shall be colored only by means of a pigment impregnated throughout the entire
block.



   (K)   Towers as regulated in § 155.385.



(‘81 Code, § A1-36)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 760, passed 10-14-04)



§ 155.128  ACCESSORY USES.



   Within any GB district, accessory uses permitted in the LB district or
uses deemed similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses.



(‘81 Code, § A1-36)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89)



§ 155.129  MINIMUM STANDARDS.



   (A)   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be
met.  No improvements shall be placed on lands unless the lands to be so
used or improved shall meet the following minimum area and dimensional
requirements.  The city may vary these minimum requirements when
construction is done in accordance with an overall development plan.



      (1)   Minimum area requirements and standards are as set out
in Appendix C.



      (2)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



      (3)   Screening, see § 155.348.



      (4)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.



      (5)   Parking, see §§ 155.370 through 155.379.



      (6)   Building materials, see § 155.346.



      (7)   Off-street loading areas, see § 155.354.



   (B)   Additional area standards and requirements. The following
requirements are in addition to those in division (A) above.  Where there
may be a conflict, those requirements under this section shall prevail:



      (1)   Front setbacks prevailing.  Where adjoining structures
existing at the time of adopting of this chapter have a greater setback than
that required by this chapter, the front setback of a new structure shall
conform to the prevailing setback in the immediate vicinity.  The building
inspector shall determine the necessary front yard setback in such cases. 
In no case shall a building be required to be set back more than 50 feet.



      (2)   Side and rear setbacks, party walls. Buildings may be
excluded from side and rear setback requirements if party walls are used and
if the adjacent buildings are constructed as an integral structure.  This
shall not permit structures closer to residential districts, however, than
required under division (A) above.



(‘81 Code, § A1-40)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 447, passed 6-22-89; Am. Ord. 471, passed 1-11-90)



RESTRICTED GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT



§ 155.140  PURPOSE.



   Restricted general business districts are designed for moderately
intensive uses and those businesses which tend to serve other businesses and
industry as well as residents.



(‘81 Code, § A1-36.1)  (Ord. 447, passed 6-22-89)



§ 155.141  PERMITTED USES.



   Within any GB-1 district, no structure or land shall be used, except
for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City
Council:



   (A)   Offices as accessory use to the principal use. Medical,
professional, real estate offices and office buildings are not permitted;



   (B)   Lumber, heating and plumbing shops and similar construction
material sales and service facilities, but no outdoor storage or sales;



   (C)   Wholesale office, sales or showroom for furniture, carpets and
rugs and similar household goods which shall not include retail food sales;



   (D)   Contractor’s office, but no outdoor storage permitted;



   (E)   Trade school, not to exceed 15% of a multi- tenant
building’s floor area unless proof of parking is demonstrated;



   (F)   Bicycle, boat and snowmobile sales and service, no outdoor
display or storage;



   (G)   Warehouse/outlet store;



   (H)   Rental shop, no outdoor display or storage;



   (I)   Animal hospital or clinic when contained within a building;



   (J)   Television and radio studios, but no towers permitted;



   (K)   Small engine or appliance repair conducted entirely within a
building;



   (L)   Warehousing or wholesale businesses when conducted within a
building.  Office/warehouse combination permitted when office space does not
exceed 30% of floor area;



   (M)   Research or testing laboratories conducted within a building;
and



   (N)   Light fabrication/manufacturing where at least 25% of goods
produced are retailed on site.



(‘81 Code, § A1-36.1)  (Ord. 447, passed 6-22-89)



§ 155.142  CONDITIONAL USES.



   Within any GB-1, general business district, there are no conditional
uses provided.



(‘81 Code, § A1-36.1)  (Ord. 447, passed 6-22-89)



§ 155.143  ACCESSORY USES.



   Within any GB-1 district, accessory uses permitted in the LB district
or uses deemed similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses.



(‘81 Code, § A1-36.1)  (Ord. 447, passed 6-22-89)



§ 155.144  ADDITIONAL LOT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Whenever a GB-1 district abuts an R district or an M district,
a fence or compact evergreen hedge, not less than 50% opaque nor less than
six feet in height, except adjacent to a street, shall be erected and
maintained along the side and rear property lines that abut the R or M
district.



   (B)   Loading docks shall not be permitted along the particular side
of a building which faces a public street.



(‘81 Code, § A1-36.1)  (Ord. 447, passed 6-22-89)



RETAIL BUSINESS DISTRICT



§ 155.155  PURPOSE.



   Retail business districts are areas which are centrally located to
serve the need for general retail sales.



(‘81 Code, § A1-37)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 469, passed 12-21-89; Am. Ord. 494, passed 9-20-90)



§ 155.156  PERMITTED USES.



   Within any RB district, no structure or land shall be used, except for
one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council:



   (A)   Retail shopping center developed under the following
conditions:



      (1)   An overall concept plan shall be submitted and approved
by the city including architecture style of all structures, parking,
driveways, landscaping and screening and adequate spaces for future community
facilities, when the facilities are to be a part of the center.



      (2)   Initial construction in new shopping centers shall
include a minimum of 20,000 square feet of floor area to ensure that the
center will function as described in § 155.155.  This requirement shall not
pertain to shopping centers or the peripheral or allied commercial
developments or vacant lots in areas where shopping centers are in existence
upon the effective date of this chapter.



   (B)   Freestanding retail buildings;



   (C)   Retail business uses in shopping centers or freestanding
buildings shall be limited to the following unless similar uses are
specifically approved by the City Council: stores and shops selling the
personal service or goods over a counter.  These include antiques, art and
school supplies, bakeries, barbershop, beauty parlor, bicycles, books and
stationery, candy, cameras and photographic supplies, carpets and rugs,
catering establishments, china and glassware, Christmas tree sales, clothes
pressing, clothing and costume rental, custom dressmaking, department stores
and junior department stores, drugs, dry goods, electrical and household
appliances, florists, food, furniture, furrier shops, garden supplies, gifts,
hardware, hats, hobby shops, interior decorating, jewelry, watch repair,
laundry and dry cleaning pick up, laundromat, leather goods and luggage,
locksmith shops, musical instruments, office supply, paint and wallpaper,
phonograph records, photograph studios, restaurants (Class I, and Class III
Neighborhood Restaurant without a drive-through window, only), shoes,
sporting goods, tailoring, theater (except open air drive-in), tobacco, toys,
variety stores, wearing apparel, grocery store and off-sale liquor store;



   (D)   Banks, savings and loan offices, offices for doctors,
dentists, lawyers, real estate and similar uses to serve the adjoining
residential area;



   (E)   Community facilities such as library, swimming pool, health
center, day-care center, religious facilities or community center;



   (F)   On-sale wine and/or 3.2% liquor in conjunction with a
restaurant facility;



   (G)   Health clubs or athletic clubs and facilities;



   (H)   Animal hospital or clinic when contained within a building;



   (I)   Small engine and appliance repair conducted entirely within a
building and accessory to a principal use;



   (J)   Commercial recreation including theater, coin-operated
amusement devices, athletic club, billiard room and similar facilities when
contained within a building; and



   (K)   Retail sales of auto accessories, except that of installation
facilities.



(‘81 Code, § A1-37)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 469, passed 12-21-89; Am. Ord. 494, passed 9-20-90; Am.
Ord. 823, passed 10-25-07)



§ 155.157  CONDITIONAL USES.



   Within any RB retail business district, no structure or land shall be
used for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council,
except by conditional use permit:



   (A)   Outdoor display or sales conducted by an occupant of the
shopping center;



   (B)   On-sale liquor;



   (C)   Multiple dwellings when integrated into multi-use structure;



   (D)   Service bays as accessory uses for the installation of auto
accessories in conjunction with an appliance store or auto accessory store
provided there are no more than two bays which shall be screened and oriented
as required by the City Council;



   (E)   Private clubs and lodges not operated for a profit;



   (F)   Motor fuel stations and minor auto repair facilities;



   (G)   Major auto or truck repair in conjunction with a motor fuel
station;



   (H)   Restaurants (Class II) when located no closer than 1,000 feet
from any residential or institutional use;



   (I)   Buildings constructed with exposed vertical exterior finish
materials other than those provided under § 155.346 when:



      (1)   The proposed materials represent the same or similar
materials used on at least 66.7% of the existing buildings adjacent to the
site.



      (2)   The proposed materials are demonstrated to be of
comparable grade and quality as those otherwise required.



      (3)   Under no circumstance shall sheet or corrugated
aluminum, iron, steel, asbestos, sheet plywood, plain or painted plain
concrete block or similar materials be used.  Any decorative concrete block
shall be colored only by means of a pigment impregnated throughout the entire
block.



   (J)   Carwash operations under either of the following conditions:



      (1)   In conjunction with and accessory to a motor fuel sales
operation.  The car wash to be restricted to one bay and must be
incorporated into the primary structure and subject to the same design
standards as a motor fuel station as stipulated in § 155.356.



      (2)   As a freestanding operation on its own lot.  The
facility must be located on a lot having no street frontage on a roadway
identified as either a major or minor arterial, or as a community or
neighborhood collector, in the thoroughfare plan of the city’s
comprehensive plan.  Where the wash lane entry or staging area is visible
from the street or adjacent to a less intensive use, appropriate screening
shall be installed and shall consist of berms, landscaping, opaque fence or
some combination thereof.  The facility must also be located no closer than
250 feet to a residential use, as measured from lot line to lot line.



   (K)   Major anchor/center sign subject to the requirements of
Chapter 154.



   (L)   Towers as regulated in § 155.385.



   (M)   Drive-through window in conjunction with a Class III
Neighborhood Restaurant, when the following requirements are met:



      (1)   The City Council shall find that any noise, headlights,
traffic volume and emissions from idling vehicles resulting from the
operation of the window does not negatively impact surrounding residential
and institutional uses.



      (2)   The drive-through lane shall not impede or conflict with
vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian traffic circulation on the site, as
determined by the City Traffic Engineer.



      (3).   When a neighborhood restaurant is located less than
1,000 feet from residential or institutional use, the City Council may
restrict the hours of operation of a drive-through window to mitigate any
adverse impacts caused by noise, headlights, traffic volume and emissions
from idling vehicles.



(‘81 Code, § A1-37)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 469, passed 12-21-89; Am. Ord. 494, passed 9-20-90; Am.
Ord. 760, passed 10-14-04; Am. Ord. 823, passed 10-25-07)



§ 155.158  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES (“RB”).



   Within any RB district, the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



   (A)   Accessory uses permitted in the LB district.



   (B)   Delivery bays provided the bays are screened and oriented as
required by the City Council.



   (C)   Outdoor dining area, subject to the regulations set forth in
this chapter.



(‘81 Code, § A1-37)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 469, passed 12-21-89; Am. Ord. 494, passed 9-20-90; Am.
Ord. 794,passed 8-24-06)



REGIONAL SHOPPING CENTER DISTRICT



§ 155.170  PURPOSE.



   Regional shopping center district is an area designed to serve the
monthly shopping needs of a population from a geographical area which extends
beyond the corporate limits of the city.



(‘81 Code, § A1-38)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 494, passed 9-20-90)



§ 155.171  PERMITTED USES.



   Within any SC district, no structure or land shall be used, except for
one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council:



   (A)   Retail shopping center district development under the
following conditions:



      (1)   An overall plan shall be submitted and approved
including architecture of all structures, parking, driveways, landscaping and
screening.  This shall include a preliminary plat of all lots, including
those for peripheral developments.



      (2)   Initial construction of the shopping center shall
include a minimum of 100,000 square feet of floor area to ensure that the
center will function as described in § 155.170.



   (B)   Retail shopping center uses shall be limited to the following
unless similar uses are specifically approved by the City Council: stores and
shops selling the personal services or goods over a counter.  These include:
antiques, art and school supplies, auto accessories, bakeries, banks,
barbershop, beauty parlor, bicycles, books and stationery, candy, cameras and
photographic supplies, carpets and rugs, catering establishments, china and
glassware, garden store, Christmas tree sales, clothes pressing, clothing and
costume rental, custom dressmaking, department stores and junior department
stores, drugs, dry goods, electrical and household appliance sales and
repair, florists, food, furniture, furrier shops, garden supplies, gifts,
hardware, hats, hobby shops, interior decorating, jewelry, watch repair,
laundry and dry cleaning pick up, instruments, office supply, paint and
wallpaper, phonograph records, photography studios, restaurants, shoes,
sporting goods, tailoring, theater, except open air drive-in, tobacco, toys,
variety stores, wearing apparel, grocery store, off-sale liquor store and
professional offices, finance and savings and loans.



   (C)   Peripheral commercial uses, not a part of the shopping center
building shall be permitted as follows:



      (1)   Banks and savings and loan offices;



      (2)   Furniture stores;



      (3)   Clubs, lodges or convention center;



      (4)   Office buildings;



      (5)   Restaurants, Class I only;



      (6)   Sports and health clubs; and



      (7)   Theater, except open air drive-in.



   (D)   On-sale wine and/or 3.2% liquor in conjunction with a
restaurant facility.



(‘81 Code, § A1-38)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 494, passed 9-20-90)



§ 155.172  CONDITIONAL USES.



   Within any SC district, no structure or land shall be used for the
following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except by
conditional use permit:



   (A)   Outdoor display or sales conducted by an occupant of the
shopping center;



   (B)   Garden store when developed separate from major shopping
center building;



   (C)   Motor fuel sales, service station, car wash and automobile
accessories sales or service; minor auto repair facilities in conjunction
therewith;



   (D)   Fast food or restaurant with carry-out facilities or drive-in
restaurant when developed separate from major shopping center building;



   (E)   Bowling alley or similar commercial recreational facility;



   (F)   Motel;



   (G)   Airport or heliport;



   (H)   On-sale liquor when developed separate from major shopping
center building;



   (I)   Mass transit terminal or pick-up stations;



   (J)   Multiple dwelling when integrated into a multi-use structure;



   (K)   Buildings constructed with exposed vertical exterior finish
materials other than those provided under § 155.346 when:



      (1)   The proposed materials represent the same or similar
materials used on at least 66.7% of the existing buildings adjacent to the
site;



      (2)   The proposed materials are demonstrated to be of
comparable grade and quality as those otherwise required; and



      (3)   Under no circumstance shall sheet or corrugated
aluminum, iron, steel, asbestos, sheet plywood, plain or painted plain
concrete block or similar materials be used.  Any decorative concrete block
shall be colored only by means of a pigment impregnated throughout the entire
block.



   (L)   Major anchor/center sign subject to the requirements of
Chapter 154.



(‘81 Code, § A1-38)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 494, passed 9-20-90)



§ 155.173  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   Within any SC district, accessory uses as permitted under § 155.093
shall also be permitted.



(‘81 Code, § A1-38)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 494, passed 9-20-90)



VISITOR BUSINESS DISTRICT



§ 155.185  PURPOSE.



   Visitor business districts are areas located and developed primarily to
serve the transient population attracted by Interstate Highway 35E, the
Minnesota Zoological Garden or similar facilities.



(‘81 Code, § A1-39)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89)



§ 155.186  PERMITTED USES.



   Within any VB district, no structure or land shall be used, except for
one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council:



   (A)   Motel or hotel;



   (B)   Restaurant, Class I only and a minimum of 5,000 square feet;



   (C)   On or off-sale liquor, wine or 3.2% liquor with a motel, hotel
or restaurant; and



   (D)   Mass transit terminal or pick-up station.



(‘81 Code, § A1-39)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89)



§ 155.187  CONDITIONAL USES.



   Within any VB district, no structure or land shall be used for the
following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except by
conditional use permit and after a motel or restaurant has been constructed
in the same general area:



   (A)   Car wash of compatible architectural design;



   (B)   Restaurant, Class II of compatible architectural design;



   (C)   Campground;



   (D)   Motor fuel station; minor auto repair facilities in
conjunction therewith; and



   (E)   Buildings constructed with exposed vertical exterior finish
materials other than those provided under § 155.346 when:



      (1)   The proposed materials represent the same or similar
materials used on at least 66.7% of the existing buildings adjacent to the
site.



      (2)   The proposed materials are demonstrated to be of
comparable grade and quality as those otherwise required.



      (3)   Under no circumstance shall sheet or corrugated
aluminum, iron, steel, asbestos, sheet plywood, plain or painted plain
concrete block or similar materials be used.  Any decorative concrete block
shall be colored only by means of a pigment impregnated throughout the entire
block.



(‘81 Code, § A1-39)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89)



§ 155.188  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   Within any VB district, accessory uses as permitted under § 155.093
shall also be permitted.



(‘81 Code, § A1-39)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89)



LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT



§ 155.200  PURPOSE.



   Limited industrial districts are areas which because of availability to
thoroughfares, suitable topography and isolation from housing areas, are
appropriate for manufacturing, warehousing and similar industrial uses having
a minimum of nuisance characteristics.



(‘81 Code, § A1-41)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.201  PERMITTED USES.



   Within any I-1 district, no structure or land shall be used, except for
one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council:



   (A)   Conducting a process, fabrication, storage, manufacturing or
wholesaling operation;



   (B)   Auto, marine, truck storage completely within a building;



   (C)   Contractor’s office, outdoor storage subject to conditional
use;



   (D)   Ice, cold storage plants, bottling works, outdoor storage
subject to conditional use;



   (E)   Restaurants, Class I only;



   (F)   Research laboratories;



   (G)   Trade school;



   (H)   Warehouse;



   (I)   Offices;



   (J)   Animal clinics, outdoor pens subject to conditional use; and



   (K)   Major automobile repair and auto body shop, outdoor storage
subject to conditional use.



   (L)   Small brewery and microdistillery.



(‘81 Code, § A1-41)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 998, passed
10-22-15)



§ 155.202  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, treatment,
assembly or storage of any products or materials is permitted in the I-1
district provided the use is not listed as a specific use permitted by right
or conditional use in the I-2 district.  Applicants for building permits in
the I-1 district shall submit evidences as may be required by the building
inspector to ensure compliance with the performance standards.  Should the
building inspector have any doubt as to the ability of any proposed use to
meet the required standards, the matter shall be referred to the Planning
Commission which shall make a recommendation to the City Council to grant or
deny the application.



(‘81 Code, § A1-41)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.203  CONDITIONAL USES.



   Within any I-1 district, no structure or land shall be used for the
following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except by
conditional use permit:



   (A)   Motor fuel sales, including minor auto repair facilities or
car wash;



   (B)   Truck and freight terminals and maintenance garages;



   (C)   Outdoor storage of vehicles or materials on open sales lot;



   (D)   Explosives, including all activities involving the storage,
utilization or manufacture of materials or products such as TNT or dynamite
which could decompose by detonation;



   (E)   Animal kennels with outside pens;



   (F)   Truck stops;



   (G)   Rental lots;



   (H)   Sales yards for building materials;



   (I)   Outdoor research or testing facilities; and



   (J)   Churches, unless a compelling governmental interest to
restrict same is found relating to the following or similar criteria:



      (1)   When located within a multi-tenant building, a finding
that occupancy of more than 50% of the total floor area by combined church
uses has an adverse effect upon the remaining occupants;



      (2)   When located within a multi-tenant building, a finding
that the number of parking stalls and the time at which they are needed by
the church use(s) has an adverse effect by conflicting with the parking needs
of the other building occupants;



      (3)   When located as a free-standing facility, a finding that
the church use has an adverse effect upon the adjacent and surrounding
occupied properties;



      (4)   Churches located under this section shall not be
entitled to “sensitive land use” status for the purposes of determining a
separation distance from regulated land uses which otherwise require such a
separation.



   (K)   Towers as regulated in § 155.385.



   (L)   Child care centers, subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   All child care centers shall be licensed by the State of
Minnesota, and shall provide proof of licensure prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.



      (2)   A child care center shall not be conducted in a
stand-alone building.



      (3)   A child care center shall not exceed more than 50% of
the total building footprint.



      (4)   Applicants requesting a conditional use permit for a
child care center shall provide the following for review and approval by the
city:



         (a)   A site plan, indicating the location of the
center, outdoor play areas, garbage receptacles, and similar site
characteristics.



         (b)   A list of tenants within the building and
neighboring buildings, to ensure the uses are compatible with the proposed
child care center.



         (c)   A dimensioned floor plan for both the center and
the multi-tenant building, indicating the child care center is 50% or less
than the total building footprint.



         (d)   A traffic plan indicating peak hours of traffic
generation, and a plan to minimize traffic conflicts between the building
tenants.



         (e)   Hours of operation.



   (M)   On-sale liquor, 3.2 beer or wine in conjunction with a Class I
restaurant; on-sale malt liquor in conjunction with a brewer taproom; on-sale
distilled spirits in conjunction with a microdistillery cocktail room; or
off-sale malt liquor from the premises of and in conjunction with a small
brewery; or off-sale distilled spirits in conjunction with a
microdistillery.  The parking requirements as set forth in this Code for
restaurant uses shall apply and be met on the subject site for brewer
taprooms and microdistillery cocktail rooms.  A brewer taproom and a
microdistillery cocktail room shall not exceed 30% of the total floor area of
the brewery or microdistillery with which each is respectively operated.



(‘81 Code, § A1-41)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 617, passed
6-27-96; Am. Ord. 760, passed 10-14-04; Am. Ord. 806, passed 3-22-07; Am.
Ord. 998, passed 10-22-15)



§ 155.204  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   Within any I-1 district, the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council shall be permitted:



   (A)   Off-street parking, storage garage and buildings and loading
as regulated in this chapter;



   (B)   Buildings, trailers, unscreened trash dumpsters, or portable
storage units temporarily located on the subject lot only for the purposes of
construction on the premises for a period of time not to exceed time
necessary for such construction.  Trash dumpsters shall be removed from the
subject lot when full;



   (C)   Essential public service facilities; and



   (D)   Essential security and safety facilities as approved by the
City Council.



   (E)   Outdoor dining area, subject to the regulations set forth in
this chapter or an outdoor patio in conjunction with a brewer taproom or
microdistillery cocktail room which shall be subject to the regulations
applicable to outdoor dining area and included in the 30% floor area
restriction for a brewer taproom or microdistillery cocktail room under a
conditional use permit issued hereunder.



   (F)   Retail sales of any service or any product, goods or material
produced at or related to the principle use on site, subject to the following:



      (1)   The retail sales are subordinate to the principle use.



      (2)   The gross floor area used for the retail sales is not
more than 15% of the total gross floor area or 5,000 square feet, whichever
is less, of the principle building if a single user/occupant or of the
principle user’s occupied space if within a multiple-user structure.



      (3)   The retail sales are owned and operated solely by the
principle user/occupant of the subject site.



      (4)   The parking requirements for both the principle use and
the retail use as set forth in this Code are met on the subject site.



(‘81 Code, § A1-41)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 760, passed
10-14-04; Am. Ord. 794, passed 8-24-06; Am. Ord. 996, passed 8-27-15; Am.
Ord. 998, passed 10-22-15)



§ 155.205  ADDITIONAL LOT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Whenever an I-1 district abuts an R district or an M district,
a fence or compact evergreen hedge, not less than 50% opaque nor less than
six feet in height, except adjacent to a street, shall be erected and
maintained along the side and rear property lines that abut the R or M
district.



   (B)   Loading docks shall not be permitted along the particular side
of a building which faces a public street.



(‘81 Code, § A1-41)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT



§ 155.215  PURPOSE.



   General industry districts are designed to serve the smaller
“quasi-industrial” uses, such as machine shops, sign shops, millworking
establishments, and the like.



(‘81 Code, § A1-42)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.216  PERMITTED USES.



   Within any I-2 district, no structure or land shall be used except for
one or more of the following uses, or uses deemed similar by the City Council:



   (A)   Any use permitted in the I-1 district, as regulated therein,
unless otherwise permitted by this section;



   (B)   The manufacturing, compounding, assembly, packaging, treatment
or storage of the following products or materials: brewing, cement, concrete,
stonecutting, brick, glass, batteries (wet cell), ceramic products,
millworking, metal polishing and plating, paint (pigment manufacturing),
vinegar works, rubber products, plastics, meat-packing (no on-site
slaughtering of animal(s) permitted), flour, feed, grain milling, sawmill,
lime, gypsum, plaster of Paris, glue, size, cloth and similar uses;



   (C)   Storage tanks consisting of or for the storage of bulk crude
oil, liquid petroleum products such as gasoline, diesel fuel, and heating
oil, or other flammable or combustible liquids that were present and in
operation on an I-2 property as of January 1, 2015, provided any storage tank
replaced or added on the site or on contiguous parcels under the same
operation shall be subject to the condition use permit or permitted accessory
use regulations herein as applicable; and



   (D)   Storage of construction materials of all types completely
within a building.



(‘81 Code, § A1-42)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 998, passed
10-22-15; Am. Ord. 1002, passed 12-22-15)



§ 155.217  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   All uses in the I-2 district shall not generate noise, odors, glare,
heat, dust, vibration or other influences so as to constitute a detrimental
effect upon the public health or safety.  When an I-2 (General Industrial)
district is located within 1,000 feet of property zoned for residential or
institutional uses, the City Council may require screening, berming,
landscaping, orientation of activities, or a combination thereof on the
property to minimize impacts on adjacent properties.



(‘81 Code, § A1-42)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 1002, passed
12-22-15)



§ 155.218  CONDITIONAL USES.



   Within any I-2 district, no structure or land shall be used for the
following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except by
conditional use permit:



   (A)   Acid manufacture;



   (B)   Storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products
which could decompose by detonation;



   (C)   Poison, fertilizer, fuel briquettes;



   (D)   Kilns or other heat processes fired by means other than
electricity;



   (E)   Explosives including all utilization, storage or manufacture
of materials or products such as TNT or dynamite which could decompose by
detonation;



   (F)   Open storage, primary or secondary use, of any type; and



   (G)   Concrete ready-mix plants and asphalt plants.



   (H)   Towers as regulated in § 155.385.



   (I)   On-sale malt liquor in conjunction with a brewer taproom;
on-sale distilled spirits in conjunction with a microdistillery cocktail
room; or off-sale malt liquor from the premises of and in conjunction with a
small brewery; or off-sale distilled spirits in conjunction with a
microdistillery.  The parking requirements as set forth in this Code for
restaurant uses shall apply and be met on the subject site for brewer
taprooms and microdistillery cocktail rooms.  A brewer taproom and a
microdistillery cocktail room shall not exceed 30% of the total floor area of
the brewery or microdistillery with which each is respectively operated.



   (J)   Storage tank(s) with a holding capacity of 10,000 gallons or
more or an aggregate of tanks with a holding capacity of 10,000 gallons or
more that consist of or are for the storage of bulk crude oil, liquid
petroleum products such as gasoline, diesel fuel, and heating oil, or other
flammable or combustible liquid that is constructed/installed or a
replacement of any existing tank on the property or on contiguous lots or
parcels of land under the same operation on or after January 1, 2015, subject
to the following conditions:



      (1)   Above ground tanks shall comply with the following
conditions:



         (a)   All tanks on the property, including any tank
existing on the property as of the date of the conditional use permit
application, shall have secondary containment installed as provided herein. 
For new or replacement tanks, the secondary containment shall be installed at
the time of the construction/installment of the new or replacement tank. For
any tank existing on the property as of the date of the conditional use
permit application, the secondary containment areas shall be installed
pursuant to a schedule approved by the city.  If a secondary containment
area contains tanks storing more than one type of substance, then the
substances must be compatible with each other as determined by the city’s
Fire Chief.



         (b)   Secondary containment areas shall consist of
materials that are impermeable to and compatible with the stored substances
for which the secondary containment serves and that will prevent a release
into the environment, including horizontal release over the ground surface
and vertical release into the underlying groundwater.



         (c)   Secondary containment areas shall be designed
consistent with secondary containment standards set forth in Minnesota Rules
7151.5400 (and as may be amended hereafter). Secondary containment areas
shall be of a size that will provide containment of one and one-half times
the total volume of the largest tank protected by the containment berm, as
verified through post-installation volumetric survey.  Secondary containment
areas shall be constructed of material of sufficient tightness and thickness
that will allow a vertical travel time by the stored substance through the
containment material of no less than seven days, as verified through
manufacturer’s data for synthetic materials and through post-installation
permeability testing for clay materials.  The owner/operator of the storage
tanks shall have all secondary containment construction required herein be
inspected, tested and certified in writing to conform with the requirements
of this Clause (J) by licensed professional engineer certified in petroleum
storage tank construction immediately after construction has been completed
and prior to filling new or replacement storage tanks for the first time.



         (d)   Access roads that are capable of supporting the
city’s fire apparatus shall be constructed to provide full access around
and within 150 feet of each tank. The access road shall meet the fire
apparatus road design specifications as provided in the Minnesota State Fire
Code, Chapter 5, and as may be amended hereafter.



         (e)   Upon petition of the operator, the city’s Public
Works Director and Fire Chief, in their sole discretion, may jointly
recommend approval of the use of an alternative secondary containment design
in lieu of the requirements herein, provided the proposed alternative
containment area is designed by a Minnesota licensed professional engineer
and said engineer certifies that the alternative design alternative design
equivalently meets the requirements provided in sub-clause (c) herein.



         (f)   When a facility containing storage tanks is
expanded, the City may require the applicant to conduct and submit to the
city ground water susceptibility studies and fire safety and emergency
response analysis within 90 days of the City’s request which will not be
requested more than every five  years unless a fire or a leak/spill of
product on the site has occurred earlier.



         (g)   Direct fire suppression/protection system(s) shall
be installed on site for all storage tanks. For new or replacement tanks, the
fire suppression/protection system(s) shall be installed at the time of the
construction/installment of the new or replacement tank. For the tank(s)
existing on the property as of the date of the conditional use permit
application, the fire suppression/protection system(s) shall be installed
pursuant to a schedule approved by the city.  Where required by the Fire
Chief, atmospheric tanks shall have foam fire protection systems with all
foam concentrate material stored on the property with the minimum amount of
foam concentrate stored on the property required to extinguish the largest
storage tank on site and pre-plumbed to the fire suppression/protection
system(s).



         (h)   Upon petition of the operator, the city’s Public
Works Director and Fire Chief, in their sole discretion, may jointly
recommend approval of the use of an alternative fire suppression system(s) in
lieu of the requirements herein, provided the proposed alternative system is
designed by a Minnesota licensed fire protection engineer and said engineer
certifies that the alternative design equivalently meets the requirements
provided in division (J)(1)(g) herein.



      (2)   Below ground tanks (buried) shall comply with all rules
and regulations thereof as established by the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency.



      (3)   Prior to the issuance of a conditional use permit
hereunder, the owner and operator of the storage tank(s) shall submit to the
city a comprehensive emergency response plan addressing any leak/spill or
fire at the property. The plan shall be updated and submitted to the city
every five years from the date of issuance of the conditional use permit.



(‘81 Code, § A1-42)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 760, passed
10-14-04; Am. Ord. 998, passed 10-22-15; Am. Ord. 1002, passed 12-22-15)



§ 155.219  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   Within any I-2 district, the following accessory uses, or uses deemed
similar by the City Council, are permitted:



   (A)   Above ground storage tank(s) consisting of or for the storage
of bulk crude oil, liquid petroleum products such as gasoline, diesel fuel,
and heating oil, or other flammable or combustible liquid with a holding
capacity of less than 10,000 gallons or an aggregate of storage tanks with a
holding capacity of less than 10,000 gallons on the property, provided:



      (1)   The storage and use of the liquid stored in the tanks
are incidental to and an integral part of the operation of the principle use
on the property; and



      (2)   All storage tanks shall provide secondary containment
and have fire suppression system(s) as required by the Minnesota State Fire
Code and as required by the city’s Fire Chief as may be necessary due to
the liquid stored, the topographical conditions of the site and surrounding
area, the size and height of the tank(s), or the proximity of the tanks to
surrounding property uses.



   (B)   Retail sales of any service or any product, goods or material
produced at or related to the principle use on site, subject to the following:



      (1)   The retail sales are subordinate to the principle use.



      (2)   The gross floor area used for the retail sales is not
more than 15% of the total gross floor area or 5,000 square feet, whichever
is less, of the principle building if a single user/occupant or of the
principle user’s occupied space if within a multiple-user structure.



      (3)   The retail sales are owned and operated solely by the
principle user/occupant of the subject site.



      (4)   The parking requirements for both the principle use and
the retail use as set forth in this Code are met on the subject site.



      (C)   An outdoor patio in conjunction with a small brewery
taproom or microdistillery cocktail room which shall be subject to the
regulations applicable to outdoor dining area set forth in this Code and
included in the 30% floor area restriction for a brewer taproom or
microdistillery cocktail room under a conditional use permit issued hereunder.



(‘81 Code, § A1-42)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 996, passed
8-27-15; Am. Ord. 998, passed 10-22-15; Am. Ord. 1002, passed 12-22-15)



§ 155.220  ADDITIONAL LOT REQUIREMENTS.



   Additional lot requirements as required for the I-1 districts under §
155.205 shall also be required for the I-2 districts.



(‘81 Code, § A1-42)  (Ord. No. 291, § 2, 4-21-83)



BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT



§ 155.230  PURPOSE.



   Business park districts are designed for uses and businesses which
provide and may combine office, corporate headquarters, research, light
assembly, commercial recreation and storage within a building shell.  The
district requires a specific architectural concept plan, consistent with
commercial buildings, as per § 155.346(D)(1), and a minimum of 40 acres.
Without mitigation of impacts through requirements in this subchapter, these
uses may be incompatible with residential development.  Therefore,
businesses in this zoning classification are concentrated, isolated and
buffered as much as possible from any adjoining residential areas.



(‘81 Code, § A1-42.5)  (Ord. 535, passed 2-27-92; Am. Ord. 637, passed
11-25-97)



§ 155.231  PERMITTED USES.



   Within any BP district, no structure or land shall be used, except for
one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council:



   (A)   Corporate offices or headquarters with associated marketing
and research buildings in a campus setting;



   (B)   Laboratories, research facilities and support offices as the
principal use.  Medical, professional and real estate offices and office
uses which are less than 20,000 square feet in area shall only be permitted
as a tenant in a building of at least 20,000 square feet or more in floor
area;



   (C)   Offices with attached manufacturing or warehouse combinations
wherein manufacturing or warehouse space shall not exceed 90% of the floor
area per occupant.  Office space shall be placed in a location nearest to
the customer entrance;



   (D)   Warehouse sales or showrooms for furniture, carpets, rugs and
similar goods that do not include retail food sales;



   (E)   Storage facilities contained within a building and associated
with the primary use or outdoor storage as a conditional use;



   (F)   Animal hospitals or clinics with no exterior storage or animal
runs;



   (G)   Television, recording and radio studios and sound stages;
microwave towers are subject to conditional use and tall broadcast towers are
not permitted;



   (H)   Trade schools and community colleges with no exterior storage
or outside classrooms; and



   (I)   Contractor’s office, with indoor storage space not to exceed
90% of the floor area.



   (K)   Pet spa or daycare, subject to the following:



      (1)   Outdoor animal-relief areas, subject to a conditional
use permit.



      (2)   If located in a multi-tenant building, soundproofing
shall be installed on all common walls between the daycare suite and adjacent
suites within the building.



      (3)   The overnight keeping of animals shall be allowed on a
limited basis, and shall not exceed 35% of the number of animals kept during
the day.



      (4)   No outdoor facilities, including runs, kennels or
outdoor storage, shall exist.



      (5)   A cattery or kennel shall not be allowed as part of a
pet spa or daycare facility.



(‘81 Code, § A1-42.5)  (Ord. 535, passed 2-27-92; Am. Ord. 637, passed
11-25-97; Am. Ord. 821, passed 10-11-07)



§ 155.232  CONDITIONAL USES.



   Within any BP business park district, no structure or land shall be
used for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council,
except by conditional use permit:



   (A)   Outdoor climate, weathering, environmental exposure research
or testing facilities, which shall be screened from view, and not exceed
noise and air quality standards of PCA.  This is intended to be a passive
research or testing area with tested items to be anchored for exposure to
climatic conditions;



   (B)   Restaurant or cafeteria facilities associated with an internal
to office facilities intended to serve only the employees of the facility;



   (C)   Light fabrication/manufacturing when contained entirely within
the building;



   (D)   Swim and fitness clubs, tennis clubs, skating, exercise and
similar commercial recreation facilities when contained within a building. 
An inflatable structure as an accessory building, may be used when setback a
minimum of 250 feet from adjoining residential structures;



   (E)   All building exterior finishes constructed other than to the
standards set forth in § 155.346(D)(1), downtown commercial buildings,
regarding exposed vertical exterior finish materials.  Under no circumstance
shall sheet or corrugated aluminum, iron, steel, asbestos, sheet plywood,
plain or painted plain concrete block or similar materials be used;



   (F)   BP zoning districts established with less than 40 acres;



   (G)   Outdoor storage of materials, provided they are screened from
view in a manner satisfactory to the City Council with a masonry fence
matching the building materials of the primary building and that they storage
area is located along an interior lot line, not abutting any public street;



   (H)   Microwave towers only when associated with a studio broadcast
facility, with a maximum height equal to the distance the tower is setback
from the closest property line; and



   (I)   Church or daycare uses, only when located in a multi-tenant
building and when said uses occupy less than 50% in aggregate of the total
floor space of the building.



   (J)   Towers as regulated in § 155.385.



   (K)   Outdoor overnight parking of vehicles; provided they are
properly screened from view in a manner satisfactory to the City Council, and
that no outdoor overnight parking of vehicles shall be allowed in parking
areas located adjacent to residential areas.



   (L)   Outdoor relief areas in conjunction with a pet spa or daycare
operation, subject to the following requirements:



      (1)   The outdoor relief area shall be properly screened in a
manner approved by the city.



      (2)   The exterior of the premises outside of the screened
area shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary manner.



      (3)   The outdoor relief area shall be for the use of dogs
only.



      (4)   No dogs shall remain unattended in the outdoor relief
area.



      (5)   The outdoor relief area shall not be used as an outdoor
kennel, animal run, animal outdoor play area, materials storage, or any other
use not specifically identified in the conditional use permit.



      (6)   The outdoor relief area shall be maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition at all times.



      (7)   Solid waste material shall be removed a minimum of once
per day, and disposed of in a sanitary manner.



      (8)   A filtration bed shall be constructed to ensure that
liquid waste will not enter into the ground or the city's storm water system.



      (9)   Final plans for any outdoor relief area shall be
reviewed and approved by city staff prior to any construction.



      (10)   Pea gravel and lime shall be removed on an annual
basis, and the city shall inspect the removal and replacement of the
materials.



      (11)   The outdoor relief area shall be maintained in clean
and sanitary condition at all times.  All solid waste must be removed a
minimum of once per day, and disposed of in a sanitary sewer; and liquid
waste shall be flushed with water and sanitized with an environmentally
sensitive cleaning and sanitation product once per day.



(‘81 Code, § A1-42.5)  (Ord. 535, passed 2-27-92; Am. Ord. 637, passed
11-25-97; Am. Ord. 673, passed 5-25-00; Am. Ord. 760, passed 10-14-04; Am.
Ord. 808, passed 4-26-07; Am. Ord. 821, passed 10-11-07)



§ 155.233  ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Within any BP district, the uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council as listed in §155.093 shall be permitted accessory uses.



   (B)   Retail sales of any service or any product, goods or material
produced at or related to the principle use on site, subject to the following:



      (1)   The retail sales are subordinate to the principle use.



      (2)   The gross floor area used for the retail sales is not
more than 15% of the total gross floor area or 5,000 square feet, whichever
is less, of the principle building if a single user/occupant or of the
principle user’s occupied space if within a multiple-user structure.



      (3)   The retail sales are owned and operated solely by the
principle user/occupant of the subject site.



      (4)   The parking requirements for both the principle use and
the retail use as set forth in this Code are met on the subject site.



(‘81 Code, § A1-42.5)  (Ord. 535, passed 2-27-92; Am. Ord. 996, passed
8-27-15)



§ 155.234  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Whenever a BP district abuts or is across the street from an R
district or an M district, a fence or masonry wall, berm or compact evergreen
hedge, or a combination thereof, not less than 50% opaque nor less than six
feet in height shall be erected and maintained along all property lines or
streets.



   (B)   Loading docks shall not be permitted along the particular side
of a building which faces a public street or an abutting R or M district.



   (C)   The minimum size of a parcel or contiguous parcels to be
rezoned as a BP district shall be 40 acres, unless the City Council approves
a conditional use permit to allow for a lesser size.



   (D)   When a parcel is designated for a BP district, the
owner/applicant shall submit a master plan illustrating the proposed lots and
building locations.  In addition, the owner/applicant shall submit a master
architectural concept plan which illustrates a consistent use of exterior
materials, as specified in § 155.346(D)(1), downtown commercial buildings,
heights and entry and loading door designs which shall be used as a guide in
the development of each building in the district.



   (E)   The minimum floor area of any building shall be 20,000 square
feet.



(‘81 Code, § A1-42.5)  (Ord. 535, passed 2-27-92; Am. Ord. 637, passed
11-25-97)



§ 155.235  MINIMUM STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The minimum area standards and requirements set out in
Appendix C shall be met. 



   (B)   No improvements shall be placed on the lands unless the lands
to be so used or improved shall meet the minimum area and dimensional
requirements.



      (1)   See this chapter’s Appendix C.



      (2)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



      (3)   Screening, see § 155.348.



      (4)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.  The minimum cost of
landscaping materials shall be 2.5% of building value.



      (5)   Parking, see §§ 155.370 through 155.379.



      (6)   Building materials, see § 155.346.



(‘81 Code, § A1-43)  (Ord. 291, 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed 2-23-89;
Am. Ord. 446, passed 6-22-89; Am. Ord. 535, passed 2-27-92)



INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT



§ 155.245  PURPOSE.



   Institutional districts are areas designed to serve the public and
quasi-public uses.



(‘81 Code, § A1-44)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 514, passed
5-23-91)



§ 155.246  PERMITTED USES.



   Within any P district, no structure or land shall be used, except for
one or more of the following principal uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



   (A)   Elementary, middle, junior high, and senior high schools
having a regular course of study accredited by the Minnesota State Department
of Education;



   (B)   Public libraries and public art galleries;



   (C)   Parks and playgrounds, including other structures and
buildings necessary for the operation of or directly serving the park or park
facilities;



   (D)   Public recreational facilities or athletic fields operated by
a political subdivision or school accredited by the Minnesota State
Department of Education;



   (E)   Recreational buildings, community centers and swimming pools;



   (F)   Churches, chapels, temples and synagogues;



   (G)   Golf courses, but not inlcuding commercially operated driving
ranges, “pitch-and-putt” miniature golf courses;



   (H)   Cemeteries including mortuaries;



   (I)   Municipal government administrative buildings and maintenance
buildings and facilities including outdoor storage of municipal vehicles,
equipment and materials, municipal utility facilities, fire stations and
police stations;



   (J)   Governmental service centers, administrative offices and
maintenance facility buildings (outdoor storage in connection therewith shall
be a conditional use), utility or waste water facilities, and courthouses;



   (K)   Academies, colleges, junior colleges and universities,
including dormitories and other structures and facilities necessary in the
operation of an academy, college or university;



   (L)   Clubs and lodges, non-profit and not engaged primarily in
providing a service customarily carried on in a business such as the serving
of food and drink;



   (M)   Public hospitals, nursing homes and convalescent centers; and



   (N)   Day-care centers and nurseries.



(‘81 Code, § A1-44)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 514, passed
5-23-91; Am. Ord. 900, passed 9-23-10; Am. Ord. 957, passed 12-26-13)



§ 155.247  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   Within any P district, no accessory structure or use shall be
permitted, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council:



   (A)   Clubhouses, maintenance buildings, or other related structures
on the grounds of golf courses.



   (B)   Convents, seminaries, monasteries and nunneries, rectories,
parsonages and parish houses and religious retreats when accessory to a
church, chapel, temple or synagogue.



   (C)   Accessory uses as permitted in § 155.093.



   (D)   Concession, restroom, ticket booth, press box, and warming
house buildings and dugouts and score boards when directly serving park
facilities, recreational facilities or athletic field(s) on the same site.



   (E)   One storage building not larger than 750 square feet in area
that is necessary in the operation of any permitted use within the
institutional district.



   (F)   Fuel dispensing facility in connection with a municipal
maintenance or governmental maintenance facility.



(‘81 Code, § A1-44)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 514, passed
5-23-91; Am. Ord. 957, passed 12-26-13)



§ 155.248  CONDITIONAL USES.



   Within any P district, no structure or land shall be used for the
following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except by
conditional use permit:



   (A)   Any structure otherwise permitted but exceeding 40 feet in
height.



   (B)   Public utility building, structure, or service facility,
including electric substations occupying in excess of 500 square feet of land
area, under the following conditions:



      (1)   When located adjacent to a designated utility corridor
as identified in the utility chapter of the city’s comprehensive plan or
utility location plan as adopted by the City Council, if in existence;



      (2)   When adequate security is provided through the use of
appropriate fencing and/or windowless building walls. Preferred fencing shall
be a solid masonry wall, unless it can be demonstrated that the fenced
facility requires the movement of air for cooling purposes which would be
inhibited by a solid wall. Unless otherwise required by federal or state
regulations, barbed wire shall not be used unless specifically approved by
the City Council;



      (3)   When adequate screening and buffering is provided
through the use of appropriate landscape materials and in accordance with §
155.348;



      (4)   When the facility or outside edge of any fencing is
located at least 100 feet from any residential dwelling in existence at the
time of the facility’s establishment;



      (5)   When the facility is not adjacent to the city’s
“Ring Route” central business district road system, as identified in the
city’s comprehensive plan;



      (6)   When the City Council determines that the proposed
location will not adversely affect adjacent residential or commercial uses
because the traffic generation, noise, glare, appearance or other nuisance
characteristics; and



      (7)   When the City Council determines that the proposed
facility will not generate nuisances which will have an adverse effect upon
existing adjacent uses or the future development of adjacent vacant
properties.



   (C)   Towers as regulated in § 155.385.



   (D)   An accessory storage building larger than 750 square feet in
area or any accessory storage building regardless of size if an accessory
storage building currently exists on the property, provided the building is
necessary in the use and operation of the permitted primary use on the
property subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   All minimum area standards as set forth herein shall be
met;



      (2)   Any building or structure to be used for storage of
moveable property, which is not in connection with a maintenance facility
located on the site as the primary use, shall not exceed 1,400 square feet;



      (3)   The exterior finish and materials of any accessory
building shall be architecturally compatible with the principal building, if
any, otherwise all buildings shall comply with exterior finish and materials
regulations set forth elsewhere in this code;



      (4)   No more than two accessory storage buildings shall be
permitted on a lot or parcel unless otherwise permitted in § 155.246.



   (E)   (1)   Outdoor storage of motor vehicles, equipment or
materials in connection with the use and operation of a governmental
maintenance facility on the property, subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   All motor vehicles shall be licensed and have
current registration for road operation;



         (b)   All motor vehicles and motorized equipment shall
be operational and in working condition;



         (c)   All motorized vehicles or equipment shall be
stored on an impervious surface; and



         (d)   The outdoor storage area shall be fenced in
accordance with the fence regulations herein and property screened as set
forth in the screening regulations set forth herein.



      (2)   This division (E) shall not apply to the vehicles
impounded and in the possession of the city and located on city-owned
property in the course of its public safety and law enforcement duties.



(‘81 Code, § A1-44)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 514, passed
5-23-91; Am. Ord. 760, passed 10-14-04; Am. Ord. 957, passed 12-26-13)



§ 155.249  MINIMUM AREA STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be met. 



   (A)   Area requirements.  No improvements shall be placed on lands
unless the lands to be so used or improved shall meet the following minimum
area and dimensional requirements:



   Minimum Lot Dimensions



   Lot area (sq. ft.)   10,000



   Lot width (ft.)        80



   Minimum Building Setbacks



   Along principal or minor



     arterial streets (ft.)        50



   Along community or



     neighborhood collector



     streets (ft.)           40



   Along other streets      35



   Along side lot line (ft.)        10



   Along rear lot line (ft.)        20



   Abutting R or M districts   20



   Minimum Parking Setbacks



   Along public street (ft.)        20



   Abutting R or M districts



     (ft.)              20



   Side or rear lot line (ft.)        5



   Maximum Building Coverage



   Coverage of lot (%)        20



   Maximum Building Height



   Maximum height, except



     by conditional use



     permit (ft.)           40



   (B)   Maximum impervious surface.  See § 155.350.



   (C)   Screening.  See § 155.348.



   (D)   Landscaping.  See § 155.349.



   (E)   Parking.  See §§ 155.370 through 155.379.



(‘81 Code, § A1-45)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT



§ 155.260  PURPOSE.



   The purposes of this subchapter are:



   (A)   To encourage a more creative and efficient approach to the use
of land;



   (B)   To allow a variety in the types of environment available to
the people of the city;



   (C)   To encourage more efficient allocation and maintenance of
privately controlled open space in residential developments through the
distribution of overall density of population and intensity of the land use
where an arrangement is desired and feasible;



   (D)   To provide the means for greater creativity and flexibility in
environmental design than is provided under the strict application of the
zoning and subdivision chapters while at the same time preserving the health,
safety, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare of the city and
its inhabitants;



   (E)   To encourage an overall design within the natural boundaries
for an area; and



   (F)   To provide an overall guide for developments that are staged
because of the size of an area.



(‘81 Code, § A1-46)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.261  DESIGNATION.



   All planned development districts shall be designated on the official
zoning map of the city.



(‘81 Code, § A1-46)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.262  PERMITTED USES.



   The permitted, accessory and conditional uses shall be as specifically
stated and/or illustrated.



(‘81 Code, § A1-46)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.263  SITE COVERAGE.



   Permitted maximum site coverage in the planned development zone may be
calculated on the total land involved in the planned development.



(‘81 Code, § A1-46)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.264  DENSITY.



   Permitted densities shall be as specifically stated in the appropriate
planned development designation and shall be in general conformance with the
comprehensive guide plan.



(‘81 Code, § A1-46)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.265  INDIVIDUAL LOTS.



   Requirements for lot area, lot dimensions, yards, setbacks, location of
parking areas and public street frontage shall be as stipulated in the
appropriate planned development designation.



(‘81 Code, § A1-46)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



Cross-reference:



   Planned Development Designations, see Appendix F



§ 155.266  CRITERIA.



   The criteria necessary for approval of the preliminary development plan
as well as the rezoning shall be as follows:



   (A)   The proposed development is in conformance with the
comprehensive guide plan of the city and encompasses an area of not less than
five acres.  An area of less than five acres may be approved only if the
applicant can demonstrate that (1) the proposed project better meets the
City’s comprehensive plan goals and policies than standard zoning
regulations; and (2) a planned development on the subject site is in the
public interest.



   (B)   The proposed development plan is designed in a manner so as to
form a desirable and unified environment within its own boundaries.



   (C)   The planned development will not create an excessive burden on
parks, schools, streets and other public facilities and utilities which serve
or are proposed to serve the planned development.



   (D)   A single-family residential lot shall not be rezoned to a
planned development  district if: (1) the subdivision regulations in this
Code prohibit a subdivision of the lot due to required lot size for the
existing zoning designation; or (2) a planned development designation solely
provides a means to avoid the zoning regulations for the property as zoned.



(‘81 Code, § A1-46)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 997, passed
9-24-15)



§ 155.267  REVISIONS AND CHANGES.



   (A)   Minor changes in the location, placement and height of
buildings or structures may be authorized by the City Administrator if
required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the
final plat was approved and filed with the city.



   (B)   Changes in use, substantial rearrangement of lots, blocks and
building tracts, and changes in the provisions of common open spaces may be
made only after public hearing by the Planning Commission.  No amendments
may be made in the approved final development plan unless they are shown to
be required by changes in the development policy of the city.



(‘81 Code, § A1-46)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.268  ADMINISTRATION; PURPOSE.



   Planned development districts may be established or the boundaries
thereof may be changed under the requirements of § 155.400 for zoning,
except as otherwise provided by this section.



(‘81 Code, § A1-47)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89)



§ 155.269  PETITION.



   All petitions for planned developments shall be the same as required by
§ 155.400 for zoning and include, in addition, the following:



   (A)   Information.  All of the information required under §§
155.260 through 155.268.



   (B)   Sketch plan.



      (1)   Streets.  This shall include the proposed locations of
all major and minor arterials and collector streets.  The details of local
access streets are not required with the preliminary development plan.



      (2)   Utilities.  This shall include proposed general plans
for sanitary sewer and water trunks and storm sewer trunk and holding
ponds.  Detailed plans are not required at this time.



      (3)   Lots and blocks.  The property may be divided into
blocks only at this time.  Detailed lot design is not required with the
preliminary development plan.



      (4)   Future platting.  None of the above is meant to
circumvent platting required prior to building construction or the
requirements of the city subdivision chapter.  The above states the minimum
requirements for the preliminary development plan stage.  The developer, at
his or her option, may provide greater detail at this stage.  Without
detailed lot plans, another preliminary plat hearing will be needed as
development ensues.



   (C)   Staging plan.  This shall include the proposed sequence of
development in terms of years or range of years of all areas of the planned
development.  It shall include staged development of structures, utilities,
streets, walkways and dedication of parks, ponds and open space.  When
dissimilar uses or uses of different intensity are adjacent to one another,
the planned development appendix may require that the most intensive use be
constructed prior to the less intensive use.



   (D)   Parks and pedestrian circulation.  This shall include the
exact location and dimensions of public parks, ponds and trails proposed to
be dedicated to the city.  It shall also include a proposed pedestrian
circulation plan related to the city’s plan for pedestrian circulation.



   (E)   Land use plan.  This shall include an area- to-area
designation of the type of use(s) proposed with corresponding acreage and
densities.  The land use plan shall show the ultimate development, in blob
form, proposed for the entire property, that is, major, minor or collector
streets, parks, trails, ponds or open space, residential, commercial,
industrial or institutional development.



   (F)   Boundary survey; legal description.  A boundary survey and
legal description of each tract within the planned development designation
which will contain a distinctive use.



   (G)   Preliminary plan.  All of the above shall constitute the
“preliminary development plan.”



   (H)   Public interest showing. A separate written statement
submitted by the applicant concisely stating how the planned development
proposal would benefit the public interest.



(‘81 Code, § A1-47)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 997, passed 9-24-15)



§ 155.270  FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLANS.



   Prior to the construction or the issuance of building permits, the
following information shall be approved.  This may be approved in stages as
development ensues.



   (A)   Final plat.  This shall be in accordance with the city’s
subdivision chapter and revisions thereto.



   (B)   Final building drawings and specifications. These shall be
presented to the building inspector for review and recommendation to the
Planning Commission and City Council.



   (C)   Final site plans and landscape schedule. These shall be
presented to the city staff for review and recommendation to the Planning
Commission and City Council.  These shall be scaled drawings and include all
site detail.



(‘81 Code, § A1-47)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89)



§ 155.271  EXCAVATION PERMIT.



   Prior to approval of all details related to the final development
plans, the City Council may grant an excavation permit.



(‘81 Code, § A1-47)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89)



SAND AND GRAVEL DISTRICT



§ 155.285  PURPOSE.



   The purposes of this section are:



   (A)   To provide for the economical availability and removal of
sand, gravel, rock and soil vital to the growth of the city and the region;



   (B)   To establish regulations, safeguards and controls in the city
regarding noise, dust, traffic, drainage, groundwater quality and other
factors which will minimize the environmental and aesthetic impacts on mined
or adjacent property;



   (C)   To reduce the potential for pollution caused by wind and soil
erosion and sedimentation;



   (D)   To establish the locations, orderly approval process, and the
operating conditions under which sand and gravel extraction and processing
will be allowed in the city; and to establish conditions which insure the
restoration of mined areas consistent with existing and planned land use
patterns; and



   (E)   To establish this sand and gravel zoning district as the only
zoning district where new sand and gravel operations will be allowed,
pursuant to City Council approval of a conditional use permit and annual
Council approval of excavation permits.



(‘81 Code, § A1-48)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 472, passed
1-25-90)



§ 155.286  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONMENT.  The actual vacancy, for 24 consecutive months, of 20 or
more excavated areas without completed grading and installed erosion controls
consistent with the approved end use plan. Vacancy shall be conclusively
presumed as intent to abandon or vacate the site by the operator.



   COMPLETION OF OPERATIONS, NOTICE THEREOF.  A written notice filed with
the City



Clerk 18 months prior to the completion of excavation operations.  After the
18-month period, active and substantial excavation shall not occur on
property so noticed and described.  Completion of operations may occur on
any definable portion of the property.



   DUST.  Airborne, inorganic, particulate matter other than smoke or
steam.



   EXCAVATION PERMIT.  The annual permit required of all excavation
sites/owners by § 150.15(A).



   FISCAL IMPACT ANALYSIS.  A comparative analysis provided by the
petitioner (or prepared by the city or its consultant and paid for by the
petitioner) which itemizes the fiscal impact of property taxes, land uses and
public improvement costs of the proposed mining operation and the proposed
“end uses” on the city, county and school district in comparison to the
fiscal impact property taxes and land uses and public improvement costs of
development on the site if no mining would occur.  All projections should be
at present dollar value, excluding inflation.



   MINERALS.  Nonmetallic material found in the earth including but not
limited to sand, gravel, rocks, and soil, which may be covered by overburden.



   OPERATOR.  Any person or persons, partnerships or corporation, or
assignees or any associations, or persons either natural or artificial,
including every public or governmental agency engaged in sand and gravel
operations.



   OVERBURDEN.  Those materials which lie between the surface of the
earth and the mineral deposit to be mined.



   PROCESSING.  Any activity which may include the crushing, washing,
stockpiling, compounding, mixing, or treatment of sand, gravel, rocks or
similar mineral products into consumable products such as construction grade
sand, gravel, concrete, asphalt and other similar products.



   RECLAMATION, RESTORATION, REHABILITATION.  To renew land to a self-
sustaining, long term use which is compatible with contiguous land uses and
which process shall include the re-establishment of vegetation, soil
stability and establishment of safe conditions appropriate to the intended
use of the land in accordance with the city’s comprehensive guide plan and
the conditional use permit conditions allowing for excavation and/or
processing on the site.



   SAND AND GRAVEL OPERATIONS.  The removal, extraction, truck hauling,
crushing, processing, excavation and/or production of sand, gravel, rocks and
similar mineral products.



   STOCKPILING. 



      (1)   Storage of processed or raw materials on the site of the
sand and gravel operation.  The operations may continue or be sold from the
site for up to 18 months after official written notice of completion of
operations has been accepted by the City Council.



      (2)   From the date of acceptance of the notice of completion,
up to 18 months of final excavation, and an additional 18 months of
processing or storage may occur on the site.  In no case shall the period of
final excavation and storage/processing exceed 36 months after acceptance of
notice of completion.



   TOPSOIL.  That portion of the overburden which lies within the A and B
horizon of soil closest to the surface and which supports the growth of
vegetation.



(‘81 Code, § A1-48)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 472, passed
1-25-90)



§ 155.287  CRITERIA FOR ZONING APPROVAL.



   In establishing a sand and gravel zoning district, the City Council
shall find that:



   (A)   Consistency with city plans and policies.  The proposed
district is consistent with the text and maps of the comprehensive guide plan
and the location is suitable in that the excavation, mining, processing,
stockpiling or hauling of sand and gravel deposits will not tend to create a
nuisance or exceed local, state or federal safety and environmental standards
on the adjacent properties.  The petitioner for a SG district, at his or her
sole cost, shall provide information to help determine the suitability,
including, but not limited to a completed zoning amendment application;
exhibits illustrating adjacent and on-site buildings and land uses; existing
elevations and percent of slope within and 300 feet beyond the perimeter of
the site; environment assessment worksheet or impact statements; and fiscal
impact analysis.



   (B)   Fiscal impact analysis.  The fiscal impact analysis shall
include two types of projections:



      (1)   A land use development scenario based on existing
comprehensive guide plan and zoning designations.



      (2)   An alternative scenario based upon the assumption that a
new SG district with a planned unit development end use is approved.  Each
fiscal projection shall include estimates of all known public improvement
costs, timing of development, new development valuations, total annual
property taxes per type of use, short term construction jobs, mining jobs and
estimates of permanent jobs to be created based upon the end uses proposed,
and the number of households, occupants and school aged children that could
occupy the site after completion of each phase of end use development.



   (C)   Size.  The proposed SG district shall cover an area of at
least 20 acres.  This limitation shall not apply when the tract of land is
contiguous to an active sand and gravel operation, provided that both tracts
are being operated by the same producer.



   (D)   Access.  The sand and gravel district shall have direct
access to nonresidential, collector streets or county roads of sufficient
load carrying capacity to serve traffic generated by the sand and gravel
operation.



   (E)   Environmental impacts.  An environmental impact statement (as
defined by Minnesota Environmental Quality Board Rules) shall be completed
for each gravel mining project proposed. The proposed project shall meet the
recommended standards provided by the environmental impact statement.  The
responses and recommendations of the environmental impact statement shall be
considered by the City Council prior to any final action on a rezoning
request.  The application for rezoning shall not be considered complete
until the time as final comment has been received on the adequacy of the
environmental impact statement.



(‘81 Code, § A1-48)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 472, passed
1-25-90)



§ 155.288  PERMITTED USES.



   Within any SG district, no structure or land shall be used, except for
one or more of the following uses:



   (A)   Limited agricultural pursuits, including the raising of crops
and other plant materials;



   (B)   Commercial greenhouses and nurseries; and



   (C)   Accessory uses as permitted under § 155.093.



(‘81 Code, § A1-48)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 472, passed
1-25-90)



§ 155.289  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Within any SG district the excavation, hauling, mining,
stockpiling or processing of sand and gravel deposits and buildings and
equipment as are customarily incidental thereto, including concrete and
asphalt plants, may be approved by the City Council through the issuance of a
sand and gravel conditional use permit.  Conditions regarding operations and
reclamation/rehabilitation may be attached to the conditional use permit for
the sand and gravel operation in order to assure compatibility with present
and future land uses.  For purposes of enforcement, conditions attached to
the permit shall be considered a portion of the city code.



   (B)   Within a sand and gravel district, any centralized processing
washing or crushing plant for materials such as sand and gravel, concrete,
asphalt or others shall be allowed only as a portion of a conditional use
permit.  The plant shall be located in a permanent centralized location
within the excavation site.  Except where the applicant can demonstrate that
the plant can meet state and federal air and noise standards at the project
property lines, the City Council may require the processing plant to be
enclosed within a building with walls from floor to roof, except for
materials entries/exits and doorways, and a sealed roof, except for steam and
heat exchangers, in order to meet air particulate and noise pollution
standards.



   (C)   Portable, pit face crushing equipment may be approved as a
portion a conditional use permit provided:



      (1)   The location of the portable crushing equipment meets
all mining and/or excavation setbacks for the area in which it is to be
located;



      (2)   The top of the portable crushing equipment and all
conveyor systems are placed a minimum of 15 feet below the existing grade of
the non-excavated pit edge or constructed berm projected within the permanent
setback from the property lines; and



      (3)   Expansion of previously non-permitted, existing uses if
compatible with sand and gravel operations.



(‘81 Code, § A1-48)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 472, passed
1-25-90)



§ 155.290  NOTIFICATION PROCESS.



   (A)   In addition to the zoning and conditional use permit
notification process required elsewhere in this code, notifications of the
proposed sand and gravel district rezoning and/or conditional use permit
hearing shall be published once, in the official newspaper of the city, and
mailed by the City Clerk, at least ten days prior to the hearing, to all city
property owners within 3,600 feet of the proposed central plant processing
site or within 350 feet from the property lines of the proposed district and
sand and gravel conditional use permit, whichever is greater.  In addition,
the City Clerk shall notify the City Clerk of each city located within 350
feet of the property lines.



   (B)   The applicant shall supply to the City Clerk a certified list
of all city property owners within 3,600 feet of the proposed central
processing site or within 350 feet of the property lines of the proposed
district and conditional use permit area, whichever is greater, and the
adjacent City Clerk’s business address, at least 30 days prior to the
hearing date.  At least ten days prior to the hearing, the City Planner
shall post public hearing notice sign boards on all sides of the property
which are adjacent to a public right-of-way.



(‘81 Code, § A1-48)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 472, passed
1-25-90)



§ 155.291  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. 



   In any SG district, the following performance standards shall be
observed:



   (A)   Permit required.  No sand and gravel operations shall occur
except under the terms of an approved sand and gravel conditional use permit
with a planned unit development agreement for phased reclamation and proposed
end uses of the land.  After issuance of the permits, the applicant shall be
subject to an annual excavation permit issued by the City Council.



   (B)   Fencing.  A minimum six-foot high chain link type fence
meeting Minnesota Department of Transportation standards for right-of-way
fencing shall be constructed at the property lines at required fence setback
lines along all property lines by the operator to control access to any
excavation from adjacent developed residential property.



   (C)   Hours of operation.  Hours of operation for excavation,
processing and truck hauling, which may be amended by the City Council in the
conditions attached to the conditional use permit, shall be as follows:



      (1)   Areas less than 3,600 feet to residential areas.  The
maximum hours of operations for excavation, processing, except concrete and
asphalt processing, and truck hauling equipment in a sand and gravel district
where these activities are located closer than 3,600 feet to the city’s, or
an adjacent city’s, developed or zoned residential property which existed
prior to the effective date of this chapter and zoning map amendment, shall
be 6:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, unless otherwise stipulated
in the approved conditional use permit based upon noise and air pollution
control mitigation measures.



      (2)   Areas more than 3,600 feet from residential areas.  The
maximum hours of operation for excavation, processing, except concrete and
asphalt processing, and truck hauling equipment in a sand and gravel district
where these activities are located farther than 3,600 feet to the city’s,
or an adjacent city’s developed or zoned residential property which existed
prior to the date of this chapter or map amendment, shall be 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, unless otherwise stipulated in the
approved conditional use permit based upon noise and air pollution control
mitigation measures.



      (3)   Processing and mixing extended hours. The maximum hours
of operation for concrete and asphalt processing and associated truck hauling
equipment, not excavation or crushing, in a sand and gravel district wherein
the processing equipment is located in a centralized location and within an
enclosed processing building shall be 5:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday, unless otherwise stipulated in the approved conditional use permit
based upon noise and air pollution control mitigation measures.



   (D)   Soil and water conservation and watershed review and
recommendations.  As a part of the original application for a conditional
use permit, and annually with the application for an excavation permit, the
applicant shall submit grading plans and phased rehabilitation plans to the
Dakota County Soil and Water Conservation Service and to the Vermillion River
Watershed Management Organization for review and recommendations.  The
recommendations on the phased rehabilitation grading, soil and water
retention plans shall be reviewed annually by the City Council and may be
included as a condition of the conditional use permit or the annual
excavation permit.



   (E)   Setback and slopes to adjacent uses or zones. 



      (1)   Berm heights and setbacks from property or zoning
district boundaries are as set in Appendix D.



      (2)   Adjacent to residential developed or zoned areas,
excavation, mining and stockpiling shall not be conducted closer than 300
feet to any city or adjacent city’s residential or multiple-dwelling
structure, residential or multiple-dwelling structure, residential zoning
boundary, or proposed residential structure “pad,” existing on the
approval date of the sand and gravel conditional use permit.



      (3)   Adjacent to non-residentially developed or zoned areas,
excavation, temporary crushing, interior concrete and asphalt production,
sedimentation ponds and stockpiling without berming and vegetative buffering
shall not be conducted closer than 300 feet to the boundary of an adjoining
property line except to reduce the elevation thereof in conforming to the
adjoining property, as stipulated in the conditional use permit.  Exceptions:



         (a)   In the last 18 months of operation, after filing
and acceptance by the City Council of a written notice of intent to complete
operations, the operator may complete excavation and reclamation operations
to within 100 feet from any nonresidential property line.  For a maximum of
36 months after the acceptance of the notice of intent, the operator may
stockpile and process on the site, if not prohibited by other sections of
this code.



         (b)   In the annual excavation permit, the operator may
request approval to complete temporary excavation and temporary crushing to
within 100 feet from any property line.  This activity may occur for up to
one year.  The maximum height of any excavation, temporary crushing
equipment or temporary stock piles located less than 1,000 feet from the
property line shall be a minimum of eight feet below the average height of
the adjacent berms within the 100-foot mandatory setback.



      (4)   (a)   During excavation operations, the slope to the
bottom of the pit from the required setback line shall be no greater than two
feet horizontal to one foot vertical.  All unprotected or untreated soil
banks, or pit bottoms of excavation areas not excavated to a ground water
depth, shall be left with a slope no steeper than 10%, except as specifically
stipulated in the conditional use permit or annual permit. 



         (b)   Greater slope may be permitted if it is in
conformity to the immediately surrounding area.  When excavation is
completed on a section of the pit, all excavated areas shall be completely
graded and seeded in conformity to the surrounding natural topography and in
accordance with the city’s comprehensive guide plan and the end use plan
for the site.  The grades shall provide for sufficient drainage so that both
natural and storm water leaves the property at the original or natural
drainage points shown on the plan, except where otherwise designated by the
City Engineer.



   (F)   Slopes to water bodies.  All groundwater or stormwater
storage areas resulting from excavation shall be rehabilitated as follows:



      (1)   Any stormwater pond constructed for interim or final end
uses shall have a minimum 100- foot natural plant material shore land buffer
zone setback constructed by the applicant as part of the reclamation of the
site.



      (2)   Stormwater ponds shall have shallow water slopes of 10:1
to 20:1 in areas with less than three feet of water depth.



      (3)   In manmade groundwater lakes, the bottom contour shall
be gradually sloping from the shoreline to the deepest portion of the water
body at a maximum slope of six feet horizontal to one foot vertical (6:1) for
at least 100 feet from the proposed shoreline toward the center of the water
body.  Beyond 100 feet in horizontal distance, the slope of the bottom
contours may be steeper than 3:1 or as stipulated in the sand and gravel
mining conditional use permit.



      (4)   Shoreline slopes ascending from any water body shall not
exceed one foot vertical to six feet horizontal, except as stipulated in the
conditional use permit or excavation permit.



   (G)   Setback and slopes along streets.  Sand and gravel
excavation, shall not be conducted closer than 100 feet to the right-of-way
line of any existing or platted street, road or highway except:



      (1)   Excavation may be conducted within the limits in order
to reduce the elevation thereof in conforming to a street grade established
by the City Engineer, as stipulated in the conditional use permit for the
operation.



      (2)   In the last 18 months of operation, after City Council
acceptance of a written notice of intent to complete operations, the operator
may complete reclamation grading operations within the 100-foot required
setback to any right-of-way property line.  The final graded slope to the
bottom of the pit from the road right-of-way line shall be no greater than
three feet horizontal to one foot vertical.



   (H)   Setbacks of access roads.  The mining setback area required
may, in part, be used for a central, paved access road as stipulated in the
conditional use permit.



   (I)   Visual screening.



      (1)   The minimum required setback area, as set out in
Appendix D, along all exterior property lines shall be bermed, landscaped and
planted in accordance with the terms and conditions of the sand and gravel
conditional use permit.  Within the required setback area, the 100 feet
adjacent to the property line shall be bermed, the “primary berm,” to a
height of 16 feet, with a maximum 2:1 slope and landscaped with a seeded
fiber mulched turf and coniferous tree seedlings to a density of 800
seedlings per acre.  All areas within the required setback shall be
landscaped with a seeded turf within 15 days of excavation.



      (2)   Processing plants and towers from crushing, concrete and
asphalt plants shall be located at the lowest or base elevation on the
site.  The height of the plant and towers, and the base elevation shall be
stipulated in the conditional use permit.  Plant and towers shall be
screened with secondary stockpile berms not to exceed 40 feet in height.



   (J)   Weed control.  Weeds and other unsightly or noxious
vegetation shall be controlled as necessary to preserve the appearance of the
landscaped area. Existing trees and topsoil along existing public rights-
of-way shall be preserved, maintained and supplemented for the depth of the
setback or as stipulated in the conditional use permit or excavation permit.



   (K)   Location of driveway access.  All means of driveway access to
a sand and gravel operation from any street shall be so located and designed
as to avoid the routing of vehicles from the property over streets that
primarily serve abutting residential development.



   (L)   Paving access roads.



      (1)   All access roads from a sand and gravel operation to any
public roadway shall be paved with asphalt or concrete for a distance of at
least 300 feet to the intersection with a public roadway to minimize dust
conditions.  During the annual excavation permit review, the City Council
may require additional paving length, up to 600 feet on any access road, if
dust and truck tracking are identified as a problem by the city.  All
unpaved access roads shall be treated with a dust retardant on a regular
basis as stipulated in the annual excavation permit.



      (2)   Soil tracking from truck hauling onto public roads from
the access road may also be reduced through improvements required as part of
the annual excavation permit.  These improvements may include, but are not
limited to:



         (a)   Extension of the pavement length or width on the
access road.



         (b)   Installation of a wash facility and wash rack.



   (M)   Dust control standards.  All internal roads and access roads
within the sand and gravel operations shall be treated to minimize dust
conditions as stipulated in the conditional use permit or excavation
permit.  All processing equipment shall be contained within a fully enclosed
building unless otherwise stipulated in the conditional use permit and
meeting Minnesota Pollution Control Agency requirements.  All processing
equipment not enclosed in buildings shall be surrounded by berms at least 30
feet in height.  All stockpiles higher in elevation than the permanent berms
along property lines shall have permanent sprinkling/wetting equipment to
reduce wind erosion from the stock pile.



   (N)   Noise.



      (1)   The maximum noise level at the perimeter of the site
shall be within the limit set by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.  In no case shall the noise level
exceed 50 decibels measured at 3,600 feet from the noise making equipment
shall be located in enclosed buildings unless otherwise stipulated in the
conditional use permit and meeting Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
requirements.  All processing equipment not enclosed in buildings shall be
surrounded by berms at least 30 feet in height.  All screens, hoppers and
conveyors belts shall be nonmetallic.



      (2)   Noise levels at specific setbacks shall not exceed the
following:



         (a)   Centralized crushers:



            1.   Eighty-eight dBa at 100 feet; and



            2.   Fifty dBa at 2,000 feet.



         (b)   Pit face crushers:



            1.   Eighty-three dBa at 100 feet; and



            2.   Fifty dBa at 1,000 feet.



         (c)   Front end loaders:



            1.   Eighty-one dBa at 100 feet; and



            2.   Fifty dBa at 1,000 feet.



         (d)   All other machinery:



            1.   Eighty dBa at 100 feet; and



            2.   Fifty dBa at 1,000 feet.



   (O)   Water pollution.  Operators shall comply with all applicable
Minnesota DNR and Pollution Control Agency regulations and U.S. Corp of
Engineers and Environmental Protection Agency regulations for the protection
of water quality.  No waste products or process residue, including untreated
waste wash water, shall be deposited in any lake, stream or natural drainage
system, except that lakes and ponds wholly contained within the excavation
site may be utilized.  All human waste materials shall utilize city central
sewer disposal or sealed septic tanks with monthly septic tank pumpings.



   (P)   Wastewater.  Operators shall dispose of all wastewater used
on the site in a manner which will not adversely affect adjoining property
and shall use silting ponds or other means of disposing of the suspended
solids in the waste water as stipulated in the conditional use permit or
excavation permit and approved by the City Engineer.



   (Q)   Removal of buildings.  Within a period of 18 months after
filing a letter of intent to complete operations or within six months after
determination by the Council that the site has been abandoned by the sand and
gravel operation, all buildings, structures and plants incidental to the
operation shall be dismantled and removed by and at the expense of the sand
and gravel producer last operating the building, structure or plant, or the
owner of the property, unless the structure or use is compatible with the
anticipated ultimate use of the property.  All buildings, structures or
plants not removed as required by this section may be removed by the city
with the costs for the removal charged to the producer last operating on the
property or the owner of the property.



   (R)   Topsoil.



      (1)   Stripping of topsoil from either A or B soil horizons
shall be done only as used in the excavation and mining operations, that is
area-wide stripping without vegetative replanting shall not be allowed. 
Graded or backfilled areas (or banks in the case of excavations made to a
water producing depth) shall be covered with topsoil to a minimum depth of
four inches as part of the reclamation process.  The topsoil shall be
capable of supporting the growth of vegetation.  The operator shall
guarantee that either:



         (a)   All A horizon topsoil scraped from the site shall
be retained at the site and used as surface soil in permanent berms or used
for the restoration of the site; or



         (b)   A performance bond or other guarantee stipulating
that the operator will replace all topsoil, to a depth of four inches, needed
for reclamation of the site is filed with the original conditional use permit.



      (2)   Other soil retention methods may be stipulated in the
conditional use permit or excavation permit.



   (S)   Landscaping.



      (1)   Upon replacement of the topsoil, trees, shrubs, legumes,
grasses or other ground cover, similar to Minnesota Department of
Transportation Mix #800, shall be planted upon the areas in order to avoid
erosion.  The restoration shall be on a continuing basis as excavation is
completed.  Berm, stockpiles, drainage channels and setback areas shall be
seeded within 15 days after the completion of final grading.  All culvert
inverts and outlets shall be sodded within 15 days after completion of final
grading.



      (2)   The applicant shall be responsible for final grading and
reseeding of all reclaimed land, including public parks land.  Seeding dates
shall be between April 15 and August 15.  Additional seeding dates may be
approved in the annual excavation permit.  On slopes greater than 6%, seeded
soils shall be mulched with a fiber or straw hydro-mulch and tacking agent. 
On slopes less than 6%, a disk anchored straw mulch may be used.  Soil
erosion fences, bales, dikes or combinations thereof shall be used at the
base of slopes greater than 12%.  Staked fiber blanket or staked sod shall
be installed on all slopes greater than 2:1.



(‘81 Code, § A1-48)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 472, passed
1-25-90)



§ 155.292  RECLAMATION, RESTORATION AND REHABILITATION.



   The applicant shall comply with the following time limits and standards
during partial and complete reclamation of the sand and gravel site:



   (A)   At the time of initial application, and as an annual update is
necessary during the review of the excavation permit, the applicant shall
meet the requirements and procedures for a planned unit development, §§
155.260 through 155.271, illustrating all present and future staged uses
proposed for a sand and gravel site undergoing reclamation.  The city may
combine public hearings for the conditional use permit and planned unit
development end use plan.  Each annual excavation permit shall be attached
to the original conditional use permit as an amendment thereto.  The city
may require annual excavation permit applications, that differ from the
initially approved operations and end use plans or from the conditional use
permit, to be reviewed at a conditional use permit amendment public
hearing.  Each annual excavation permit shall contain an end use
reclamation, restoration and rehabilitation plan for the area in which mining
has been completed for that year.



   (B)   All designated community collector street right-of-ways,
county road right-of-ways and utility corridors approved as part of an end
use planned unit development shall be fixed in vertical and horizontal
location and recorded with the County Recorder as per the requirements of the
official mapping statutes,  M.S. § 462.359, prior to the issuance of the
first excavation permit for the site.  The approved and recorded official
map may be amended from time to time and re-recorded after approval by the
City Council.



   (C)   Water bodies and drainage plans.



      (1)   All proposed end use drainage, storage, surface run-off
and manmade groundwater lakes or wetland plans are subject to review by the
Vermillion River Water Management Organization.  All ground water lakes and
ground water wetlands created as part of the end use plan for a mined area
shall be subject to the city’s shoreland management ordinance.  Lakes,
wetlands and developable lands within 500 feet of the shoreline shall be
classified as “recreational development” shoreland areas.  These areas
shall adhere to all shoreland setback criteria listed in §§ 155.305 through
155.318 in effect on the date of the original conditional use permit approval
unless otherwise stipulated in the conditional use permit.



      (2)   All drainage ways from impervious surfaces of the sand
and gravel end use plan shall be graded and drained in a manner to direct
runoff to surface water sedimentation and filtration ponds or wetlands prior
to release into any groundwater lake or wetland.



      (3)   Ground water lakes and wetlands which are greater than
ten acres in water surface created as a part of the mining excavations shall
be graded to allow for end use public pedestrian access systems within
shorelines designated for public ownership.



   (D)   As a portion of the planned unit development, the applicant
shall submit grading plans, including two-foot contour intervals,
illustrating the proposed final grades within the portion of the site
rehabilitated each year with the application for an annual excavation
permit.  All rehabilitation areas which are planned for land and building
uses, other than permanent open space or agriculture, shall have a final
elevation at least 15 feet above the normal ordinary groundwater level; and,
the areas shall be planned for gravity connection to the city’s municipal
sanitary sewer or storm sewer system or as approved by the City Engineer. 
If a final elevation plan for the site has not been submitted to the City
Council for approval within six months after abandonment or completion of
operations, the city may contract to complete the grading plans and the
on-site earth movement and rehabilitation work and charge these engineering
and construction costs to the applicant or current operator’s performance
bond and assess the owner of the property for any costs not covered by the
performance bond.



(‘81 Code, § A1-48)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 472, passed
1-25-90)



§ 155.293  NONCONFORMING USES.



   (A)   Any sand and gravel operation existing and not in compliance
with previous city ordinances on the date of the adoption of this subchapter
shall be considered a nonconforming use until a time as the property is zoned
SG, sand and gravel district.



   (B)   Any sand and gravel operation existing and in compliance with
previous city ordinances on the date of the adoption of this chapter shall be
permitted to continue subject to the following:



      (1)   The use shall not be permitted to expand its operation
beyond the limits of the permit under which it is presently operating.



      (2)   The use shall be immediately subject to the final
grading, landscaping, slopes, utility and roadway performance standards of
this chapter and shall comply with all provisions within 18 months or upon
City Council acceptance of a notice of completion of operations, whichever
occurs first.  If the completion of excavation and operation is not
completed by the operator, the city may complete the restoration and utilize
performance bond proceeds and assessment of additional costs to pay for the
work.



(‘81 Code, § A1-48)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 472, passed
1-25-90)



SHORELAND DISTRICT



§ 155.305  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The shoreland overlay district is a “zone on zone”
district intended for those areas where additional or more stringent
regulations are necessary to provide adequate environmental protection of
protected waters.  The shoreland overlay district exists in addition to
another zoning district as designated on the city’s zoning map.  In the
case of overlapping or conflicting regulations, the more restrictive
regulation shall apply.



   (B)   In order to guide the wise development and utilization of
shorelands of protected waters for the preservation of water quality, natural
characteristics, economic values and the general health, safety and welfare,
all protected waters in the city have been given a shoreland management
classification by the Minnesota Commissioner of Natural Resources as
follows:  recreational development lakes and streams, such as Alimagnet
Lake, Moeller (Long) Lake and Farquhar Lake.



   (C)   The shorelands of the city are hereby designated as a SH,
shoreland overlay district.



(‘81 Code, § A1-49)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 419, passed
6-30-88)



§ 155.306  PERMITTED USES.



   All permitted uses allowed and regulated by the applicable zoning
district underlying the shoreland overlay district as indicated on the
city’s zoning map, except as restricted in § 155.309.



(‘81 Code, § A1-49)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 419, passed
6-30-88)



§ 155.307  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   All permitted accessory uses allowed and regulated by the applicable
zoning district underlying the shoreland overlay district indicated on the
city’s zoning map.



(‘81 Code, § A1-49)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 419, passed
6-30-88)



§ 155.308  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   All conditional uses and applicable attached conditions
allowed and regulated by the applicable zoning district underlying the
shoreland overlay district as indicated on the city’s zoning map, except as
restricted in § 155.309.



   (B)   Boathouse construction when a permit for work in the beds of
protected waters has been issued by the Commissioner of Natural Resources. 
The structure is not subject to setback requirements from the high water mark.



(‘81 Code, § A1-49)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 419, passed
6-30-88)



§ 155.309  SETBACK AND AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Recreational development waters setback and area requirements
are as set out in Appendix H.



   (B)   Impervious surface area bonus.  To qualify for an impervious
surface area bonus, as permitted in Appendix D, significant man-made
facilities shall be provided for the reduction of storm water flow or the
treatment of urban runoff for non-point source water pollutants.  The
Director of Public Works and the Department of Natural Resources shall
determine whether a proposed management practice(s) is adequate to warrant a
bonus.  A bonus may range from 1 to 20% for non-water frontage lots and from
1 to 10% for water frontage properties, dependent upon the practice(s)
proposed.



(‘81 Code, § A1-49)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 419, passed
6-30-88)



§ 155.310  ALTERATIONS.



   (A)   The removal of natural vegetation shall be restricted to
prevent erosion into public waters, to consumer nutrients in the soil and to
preserve shoreland aesthetics. 



   (B)   Removal of natural vegetation in the shoreland overlay
district shall be subject to the following provisions:



      (1)   Selective removal of natural vegetation shall be allowed
provided that sufficient vegetative cover remains to screen cars, dwellings
and other structures when viewed from the water;



      (2)   Clear cutting of natural vegetation shall be prohibited;



      (3)   Natural vegetation shall be restored insofar as feasible
after any construction project is completed in order to retard surface runoff
and soil erosion; and



      (4)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to
permitted uses which normally require the removal of natural vegetation.



(‘81 Code, § A1-49)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 419, passed
6-30-88)  Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.311  GRADING, FILLING OR ALTERATIONS OF NATURAL TOPOGRAPHY.



   Where the slope of the land is toward a public water or watercourse
leading to a protected water may be permitted, provided that:



   (A)   The smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for as short a
time as feasible;



   (B)   Temporary ground cover, such as mulch, is used and permanent
ground cover, such as sod, is planted;



   (C)   Methods to prevent erosion and trap sediment are employed; and



   (D)   Fill is stabilized to accepted engineering standards.



(‘81 Code, § A1-49)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 419, passed
6-30-88)



§ 155.312  EXCAVATIONS.



   Where the intended purpose is connection to protected water may be
permitted, provided that:



   (A)   An excavation permit is obtained from the city; and



   (B)   A permit for work in the beds of protected waters has been
issued by the Commissioner of Natural Resources.



(‘81 Code, § A1-49)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 419, passed
6-30-88)



§ 155.313  WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN.



   (A)   All development within a shoreland area shall be subject to a
water quality management plan, which is to be approved prior to construction
by the Director of Public Works, except single and double dwellings meeting
the following criteria:



      (1)   The parcel is not part of a plat created after the
effective date of this chapter; and



      (2)   The parcel does not have frontage on a protected water.



   (B)   A water quality management plan shall include, but not be
limited to, a statement of non-point source pollutant treatment methods to be
used to reduce potential water pollution associated with urban runoff, soil
erosion after construction is complete and soil erosion during
construction.  These methods shall be in addition to any significant manmade
facilities proposed for an impervious surface area bonus as permitted by §
155.309(B).



(‘81 Code, § A1-49)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 419, passed
6-30-88)



§ 155.314  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.



   Altered zoning standards may be allowed as exceptions to those
contained in § 155.309 for planned developments, provided that:



   (A)   Proposals must be approved by the Department of Natural
Resources prior to the approval by the city.  The Department of Natural
Resources shall have 30 days from the date of written notification from the
city to reply after which time the proposal shall be considered approved;



   (B)   Open space is preserved that would not have been preserved
without the planned development;



   (C)   Where a density bonus is considered, the following factors are
evaluated to ensure the proposed density will be consistent with the resource
limitations of the protected water:



      (1)   Physical and aesthetic impact of any increased density;



      (2)   Density of current development;



      (3)   Amount of public shoreland and shoreline;



      (4)   Levels and types of water surface use and public access;
and



      (5)   Possible effects on overall public use of the protected
water;



   (D)   Any shoreline recreation facilities, such as beaches, docks
and boat launching facilities, are centralized;



   (E)   The development is consistent with requirements for a planned
development in the city zoning chapter; and



   (F)   An approved planned development shall not be modified unless
approved in writing by the Department of Natural Resources and the City
Council.  The Department of Natural Resources shall have 30 days from the
date of written notification from the city to reply after which time the
request shall be considered approved.



(‘81 Code, § A1-49)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 419, passed
6-30-88)



§ 155.315  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   Due to the environmentally sensitive nature of shoreland areas,
additional restriction of on-site sewage systems is hereby established to
prohibit the systems under any of the following conditions:



   (A)   Low or swampy area or areas subject to recurrent flooding;



   (B)   Areas where the highest known ground water table is within
four feet of the bottom of the soil absorption system at any time;



   (C)   Areas of exposed bedrock or shallow bedrock within four feet
of the bottom of a soil absorption system of any other geologic formation
which prohibits percolation of the effluent;



   (D)   Areas of ground slope where there is danger of seepage of
effluent onto the surface of the ground in accordance with the following
critical slope values.



      Percolation Rate



     (minutes)     Critical Slope



     Less than 3     20% or more



       3 - 45     15% or more



       45 - 60     10% or more



   (E)   Soils where the percolation rate is slower than one inch in 60
minutes.



(‘81 Code, § A1-49)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 419, passed
6-30-88)  Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.316  NONCONFORMING SEWER SYSTEMS.



   All existing on-site sewage systems not complying with § 155.315 are
hereby declared to be nonconforming.  All nonconforming systems shall be
removed or reconstructed to conform with the provisions of § 155.315 no
later than five years from the date of enactment of this chapter.



(‘81 Code, § A1-49)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 419, passed
6-30-88)



§ 155.317  WATER SUPPLY.



   (A)   Public or private supplies of water for domestic purposes
shall conform to Minnesota Department of Health standards for water quality.



   (B)   Public or municipal water supplies shall be used where
available and where feasible.



   (C)   No person, firm, or corporation shall install, alter, repair
or extend any private well without first obtaining a permit therefor from the
city.



      (1)   Application for permits shall be made in writing upon
printed blanks or forms furnished by the city and shall be signed by the
applicant.



      (2)   Each application for a permit shall include:  a correct
legal description of the property on which the proposed installation,
alteration, repair or extension is to take place; a plan of the site of
reasonable scale and accuracy showing the location of any proposed or
existing buildings, sewage treatment facilities, property lines, a complete
plan of the water supply system showing the location, size and design of all
parts of the system to be installed, altered, repaired, or extended, the name
of the person, firm or corporation who is to install the system, any further
information as required by the city.



   (D)   Private wells shall be located in a manner to be free from
flooding and the top shall be so constructed and located as to be above all
possible sources of pollution.  Wells already existing in areas subject to
flooding shall be floodproofed.



   (E)   No private well shall be located closer than three feet to the
outside basement wall of a dwelling. The outside basement footing shall be
continuous across the opening of the well alcove.  No well shall be located
closer than 15 feet to a property line.



   (F)   Private wells shall be located in accordance with the
standards of the Minnesota Health Department standards MHD 217, “Location
of Wells,” (c)(1).



(‘81 Code, § A1-49)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 419, passed
6-30-88)



§ 155.318  NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   A copy of each plat located in a SH, shoreland district shall
be submitted to the Department of Natural Resources at least ten days prior
to final approval by the city.



   (B)   A copy of the notice of public hearing to consider a variance
to the provisions of the Shoreland Overlay District or a conditional use in
the Shoreland Overlay District shall be sent to the Commissioner of Natural
Resources so that the notice is received by the Commissioner at least ten
days prior to the hearings.



   (C)   A copy of all amendments to this section and final decisions
granting variances or conditional uses within the Shoreland Overlay District
shall be sent to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten days of the
amendment of final action.



(‘81 Code, § A1-49)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 419, passed
6-30-88)



GENERAL REGULATIONS



§ 155.330  NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Any structure or use lawfully existing upon the effective date
of this chapter or an amendment thereto, may be continued at the size and in
a manner of operation existing upon the effective date of the city zoning
regulation, except as hereinafter provided.



   (B)   Building permits legally issued not more than 120 days prior
to the effective date of this chapter to construct a building or structure,
the use of which will be nonconforming, shall be void unless the construction
is started and substantially under contract within 120 days after the
effective date of this chapter.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the placing of a
structure in safe condition when the structure is declared unsafe by the
Building Inspector.



   (D)   When any nonconforming use of any structure or land in any
district has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be
changed to any nonconforming use.



   (E)   (1)   Whenever a nonconforming building or structure shall
have been damaged by fire, flood, explosion, earthquake, war, riot or other
peril, it may be reconstructed  to the same size and intensity of use,
unless the damage to the building or structure is 50% or more of its market
value and no building permit has been applied for within 180 days of when the
property was damaged in which case the reconstruction shall be for a use in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 



      (2)   For the purpose of this division, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   DAMAGE.  The present cost to repair, reconstruct, or replace the
building or structure.



   MARKET VALUE.  The Dakota County Assessor’s Office’s estimated
market value of the building or structure for the year in which the building
was damaged.



   (F)   Whenever a nonconforming use of a building or structure is
discontinued for a period of more than twelve months, any future use of the
building or structure or land shall be in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter.



   (G)   Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing
or related to a nonconforming use is permitted including necessary
nonstructural repairs and incidental alterations which do not extend or
intensify the nonconforming use.



   (H)   A nonconforming use of a structure, building or parcel of land
may be changed to a similar use or to a more restrictive nonconforming use. 
Once a structure, building or parcel of land has been placed in a more
restrictive nonconforming use, it shall not return to a less restrictive
nonconforming use.



   (I)   Alterations may be made to a building containing nonconforming
residential units when the alteration will improve the livability thereof,
provided it will not increase the number of dwelling units nor the outside
perimeter of the building.



(‘81 Code, § A1-6)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 772, passed
4-14-05)



§ 155.331  LOT PROVISIONS.



   A duly created lot of record shall be deemed a buildable lot provided
all of the following are met:



   (A)   The lot shall have a minimum of 60 feet of frontage on a
public street right-of-way or the lot shall have been approved in platting a
condominium project or an attached dwelling project wherein a contiguous lot,
owned in common, provides the frontage;



   (B)   There shall be no more than one principal building on one lot,
except when specifically approved by the city;



   (C)   The lot shall be capable of supporting a building(s) and
private well and private sewage system when public utilities are not
available;



   (D)   The lot shall be of sufficient size to accommodate a
building(s) within the minimum required building setbacks for the particular
zoning district in which it is located; and



   (E)   Substandard lots within the SH, shoreland district may be
allowed as building sites provided:



      (1)   The lot existed prior to the enactment of this chapter;



      (2)   The lot is in separate ownership from abutting lands;



      (3)   The use is permitted in the zoning district; and



      (4)   All other sanitary and dimensional requirements of the
SH subchapter are met insofar as practical.



(‘81 Code, § A1-7)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 419, passed
6-30-88)



§ 155.332  ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to install, construct, erect, alter,
revise, reconstruct or move any outdoor accessory storage building which
exceeds 120 square feet of enclosed area on a residentially zoned lot without
first obtaining a building permit.  If the roof of an accessory building or
structure is projected beyond the walls or supports of the building or
structure more than 24 inches in any direction and the total roof area
exceeds 120 square feet, a building permit shall also be required.



   (B)   The application for a building permit for an accessory
building or structure shall be made upon a form provided by the city and
shall include:



      (1)   Drawings, plans and specifications in sufficient detail
so that the city’s Building Inspector may review the same for compliance
with all applicable building codes;



      (2)   Illustration of the method of anchoring the building to
the ground which must be approved by the Building Inspector; and



      (3)   Other information as the city may require to ensure
compliance with these regulations.



   (C)   No accessory building or structure other than a fence or a
temporary construction office shall be permitted on any lot in an R district
prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which it is
accessory, except a residential garage, which prior to construction of the
residence can be used only for storage purposes pertaining to and until
completion of the main structure.



   (D)   Setbacks.



      (1)   All accessory buildings or structures 120 square feet in
area or less, except those related to a farming operation shall be located in
the side or rear yard and no closer than five feet to any property line or 20
feet to a side lot line, if adjacent to any public street right-of-way.



      (2)   All accessory buildings or structures exceeding 120
square feet in area, except those related to a farming operation, shall meet
the minimum building setbacks of the appropriate zoning district, except that
in R districts the accessory building may be set back from rear lot lines a
minimum of ten feet.



      (3)   Accessory buildings and structures related to a farming
operation and on a farm, may be located anywhere on the lot except that a
building for housing more than two animal units shall not be less than 50
feet from a lot line and all buildings shall otherwise conform to yard
regulations for the district in which it is located.



   (E)   Any accessory building or structure not attached to a dwelling
unit shall be set back a minimum of six feet from the dwelling unit.  If the
dwelling unit has an attached garage, the accessory building or structure may
be placed directly adjacent to the garage provided it maintains the six-foot
setback from the dwelling unit and any other applicable setbacks.  A
detached accessory building or structure may be placed closer than six feet
to a dwelling unit if appropriate fire protection of the exterior wall(s) and
roof is provided.



   (F)   All accessory buildings or structures shall be maintained and
kept so as not be an eyesore or a nuisance.  Any building which is not so
maintained shall be removed by the property owner or upon due notice.  The
building may be removed by the city at the property owner’s expense.



   (G)   An accessory building or structure shall not exceed 16 feet in
height and 750 square feet in area.



   (H)   A portable or permanent accessory building or structure shall
not be located in a public utility easement, except when approved by the city
and/or any public utility holding the easement.  Where any question arises
as to the location or design of the accessory building, the Building
Inspector may refer the matter to the City Council for final determination.



   (I)   All accessory buildings and structures shall be suitably
anchored to the ground.



   (J)   Any accessory building or structure in excess of 120 square
feet shall be constructed to the standards of the Minnesota State Building
Code.



(‘81 Code, § A1-8)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 318, passed
5-10-84; Am. Ord. 630, passed 8-21-97)  Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.333  REQUIRED YARDS AND OPEN SPACES.



   (A)   Whenever a park or play area is so located that it abuts on a
public right-of-way or railroad right-of-way, either a landscaped yard area
of at least 30 feet shall be maintained from the right-of-way and the nearest
developed play space, or a fence or similar barrier shall be constructed and
maintained.  This section shall apply to all public and private parks,
schools, churches and areas where parks and quasi- public play areas are
provided.



   (B)   No yard or open space existing upon the effective date of this
chapter shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make the yard or other
open space less than the minimum required by this chapter.



   (C)   The following shall not be considered as encroachments on yard
area or setback requirements:



      (1)   Projections and window wells.



         (a)   Chimneys, flues, sills, pilasters, lintels,
ornamental features, cornices, eaves, bays, gutters and other similar
projections, provided they do not extend more than 30 inches into the
required setback area and in no instance in the R districts nearer than three
feet from a lot line.



         (b)   A window well may encroach up to 48 inches,
measuring from the outside edge of the well wall/support, into the required
side or rear setback, provided it is not closer than five feet to a lot line
or encroach into an easement.



      (2)   In front yards.



         (a)   Uncovered balconies that extend into the required
setback area a distance of four feet or less, provided that they are seven
feet or more above grade at the foundation line.



         (b)   Patios, decks, uncovered porches, steps and stoops
that extend into the required setback area a distance of eight feet or
less.  No portion of a front deck, porch or stoop may have a height greater
than 30 inches measured from the top of the platform to the finished grade.



         (c)   Ramps constructed for the purpose of providing
handicap access which extend into the required setback area a distance of
eight feet or less, provided that they are 18 inches or less above grade at
the building line with a railing no higher than 36 inches.



      (3)   In side yards.  Ramps constructed for the purpose of
providing handicap access, terraces, steps, stoops and uncovered patios,
porches or decks, none of which extend nearer than five feet to the side lot
line.



      (4)   In rear yards.



         (a)   Patios or decks no more than 18 inches above grade
at the building line, exclusive of any railing, ramps constructed for the
purpose of providing handicap access, breezeways, detached picnic shelters,
recreational equipment, constructed landscape features or retaining walls,
driveways, steps, stoops and mechanical equipment, provided that none of
these extend nearer than five feet to the rear lot line.



         (b)   Attached uncovered balconies or decks higher than
18 inches above building grade may extend up to 12 feet into the required
setback area.



      (5)   Allowances.  All of the preceding permitted setback
encroachments shall not be construed to allow encroachment into an easement
of record.



   (D)   The minimum required building setback for any building in any
yard in all zoning districts along any interstate or state highway, principal
or minor arterial and community collector, either existing or proposed as
designated in the city’s comprehensive guide plan.



   (E)   The City Council may waive the required side yard setback
requirement in all districts if two legal lots of record are held in one
ownership and are combined by the Dakota County Assessor as one tax parcel.



   (F)   A building that met setback requirements at the time the
building permit was issued may be replaced by a new building that is no
larger than the existing building’s foundation footprint notwithstanding
the setback requirements in effect at the time the new building is to be
erected unless the setback distance for the lot as provided in this chapter
has been amended since the issuance of the building permit for the existing
building.



(‘81 Code, § A1-9)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-82; Am. Ord. 492, passed
8-9-90; Am. Ord. 874, passed 12-22-09; Am. Ord. 965, passed 5-8-14) 
Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.334  HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   Height limitations as set forth in this section may be
increased by 50% when applied to the following:



      (1)   Antenna, radio or TV;



      (2)   Belfries;



      (3)   Church spires and steeples;



      (4)   Cooling towers; and



      (5)   Elevator penthouse.



   (B)   Height limitation for flagpoles in any district shall be 100
feet.



   (C)   Heights in excess thereof for the purposes may be permitted
only by a variance granted by resolution of the City Council determining that
the structures would not be dangerous and would not adversely affect the
adjoining or adjacent property.



(‘81 Code, § A1-10)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.335  TRAFFIC VISIBILITY.



   On all corner lots in all districts, no structure or planting in excess
of 36 inches above the abutting curb line shall be permitted within a
triangular area defined as follows:  beginning at the intersection of the
projected curb lines of two intersecting streets, thence 30 feet along one
curb, thence diagonally to a point 30 feet from the point of beginning on the
other curb line, thence to the point of beginning.



(‘81 Code, § A1-11)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.336  PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to install, construct, erect, alter,
revise, reconstruct or move any pipeline, underground telephone line,
underground electric transmission line or overhead electric transmission line
without first obtaining a permit from the Apple Valley Public Works
Director.  In issuing a permit, the Public Works Director shall find that:



      (1)   The proposed location of the essential service shall not
reasonably interfere with present or future development;



      (2)   The depth of any buried essential services shall be at a
depth that will not cause future problems with roads, streets, utilities or
buildings;



      (3)   The width of any linear easements or rights-of-way shall
not be such that it will unreasonably interfere with future development;



      (4)   The location of any essential service is in accordance
with the overall utility location plan(s) as adopted by the City Council,
when the plan is in existence, or the designated utility corridors as
identified in the utility chapter of the city’s comprehensive plan; and



      (5)   The location of any essential service is in accordance
with § 155.340 concerning utility line burial.



   (B)   The Director of Public Works shall refer any application for a
utility permit to the Planning Commission for its review and recommendation
where there is a question about compliance with the above criteria in
division (A).  The Planning Commission findings and recommendations shall
then be forwarded to the City Council for final action.



(‘81 Code, § A1-12)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 514, passed
5-23-91)  Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.337  LAND RECLAMATION AND MINING.



   Land reclamation and mining shall only be permitted as provided and
regulated by provisions of §§ 155.285 through 155.293 hereof, by
definitions contained herein, and by §§ 150.15 through 150.20 and
amendments thereto.



(‘81 Code, § A1-14)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.338  STRUCTURES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   No buildings, structures or uses may be located in or on any public
lands or rights-of-way without approval by the City Council.



(‘81 Code, § A1-13)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.339  PLATTING REQUIRED.



   (A)   All land shall be platted prior to placing any structure
thereon unless otherwise approved by the City Council.



   (B)   Land zoned for condominiums or townhouses for sale may be
platted after footings are poured with the approval of the City Council.



(‘81 Code, § A1-16)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.340  BURYING UTILITIES.



   (A)   All utilities installed after the effective date of these
regulations, including but not limited to electrical, telephone and cable
television lines, shall be buried unless otherwise approved by the City
Council.



   (B)   Existing overhead utilities within road right- of-ways which
are not in conformance with overhead utility corridors as stipulated in §
155.336(A)(4) and of a capacity less than 15 kilovolts are declared to be
nonconforming and must be buried at the time they are replaced due to aging
or capacity limitations, or relocated due to road construction or
reconstruction within the rights-of-way in which they share space, unless
otherwise approved by the City Council.  This provision shall not apply to
existing overhead utilities located on rear or side lot line easements which
directly serve adjacent properties.



   (C)   Existing overhead utilities which are to be buried in
conformance with division (B) preceding shall be done so under the terms and
scheduling requirements as listed within the applicable franchise agreement
for the affected utility, if so stipulated.  In the absence of franchise
agreement stipulations for the affected utility, the burial shall occur under
the terms and scheduling requirements stipulated by the city at the time the
overhead utility is replaced or relocated; the substitute stipulations to be
arrived at through negotiation between the affected utility and the city,
which shall not otherwise be prohibited from contributing toward the cost of
burial.



(‘81 Code, § A1-17)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 514, passed
5-23-91)



§ 155.341  PLACEMENTS OF HOUSES ON RESIDENTIAL LOTS.



   (A)   On all residential lots not served by public utilities which
are at least 24,000 square feet in area and 170 feet in width, all structures
shall be placed so that the lot may be further subdivided in the future
unless otherwise approved by the City Council.



   (B)   On all residential lots where a two-car garage is not
constructed with initial development, sufficient space in accordance with the
minimum setback requirements shall be reserved for the potential future
construction of a two-car garage.



(‘81 Code, § A1-18)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.342  USES NOT PROVIDED FOR.



   Whenever in any district a use is neither specifically permitted or
denied, a property owner may request a study by the city to determine whether
the particular use is compatible with the zoning district in which it is
proposed to be located.



(‘81 Code, § A1-19)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.343  PUBLIC SAFETY.



   All site and building plans, except for single- family dwellings or
duplexes shall be reviewed by the city Fire and Police Departments.  Plans
shall be reviewed for fire warning and protection systems, public safety,
vehicular access and concerns related to public safety.



(‘81 Code, § A1-21)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.344  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   The guiding of urban development so as to develop a compatible
relationship of uses depends upon certain standards being maintained.  Uses
permitted in the various districts, conditional and accessory uses, shall
conform to the following standards:



   (A)   Noise.  Any use producing noise shall be in conformance with
the minimum standards as adopted and enforced by the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency.



   (B)   Smoke and particulate matter.  Any use established, enlarged
or remodeled after the effective date of this chapter shall be so operated as
to meet the minimum requirements of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
regarding emission of smoke and particulate matter.



   (C)   Toxic or noxious matter.  The discharge of toxic or noxious
matter shall conform with the minimum standards as adopted by the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency.



   (D)   Odors.  The discharge of odors shall conform with the air
quality standards as adopted by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



   (E)   Vibrations.  Any use creating periodic earth shaking
vibrations shall be in conformance with the minimum standards concerning
vibration as adopted and enforced by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



   (F)   Glare and heat.  Any use producing heat or light transmission
shall be in conformance with the minimum standards as adopted and enforced by
the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



   (G)   Waste material.  Waste material resulting from or used in
industrial or commercial manufacturing, fabricating, servicing, processing or
trimming shall not be washed into the public storm sewer system nor into the
sanitary sewer system, but shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the
City Engineer which is consistent with the policies and standards of the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



   (H)   Bulk storage (liquid).  All uses associated with the bulk
storage of oil, gasoline, liquid fertilizer, chemicals and similar liquids
shall comply with the requirements of the Minnesota State Fire Marshal and
the Minnesota Department of Agriculture offices and have documents from those
offices stating the use is in compliance.



   (I)   Radiation emission.  All activities that emit radioactivity
shall comply with the minimum requirements of the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency.



   (J)   Electrical emission.  All activities which create electrical
emissions shall comply with the minimum requirements of the Federal
Communications Commission.



   (K)   Explosives.  Any use requiring storage, utilization or
manufacturing of products which could detonate by decomposition shall be
located not less than 400 feet from any residential district line.



(‘81 Code, § A1-50)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.345  SPECIAL PROVISIONS.



   The special provisions established in this chapter are designed to
encourage a high standard of residential and business development by
providing assurance that neighboring land uses will be compatible.  The
special provisions are also designed to prevent and eliminate those
conditions that cause blight.  All future development in the city shall be
required to meet these provisions.  The special provisions shall also apply
to existing development where so stated or otherwise practical or reasonable
as determined by the Zoning Administrator.



(‘81 Code, § A1-151)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.346  BUILDING AND SITE DESIGN.



   (A)   The design of all building site and landscape plans shall be
prepared by a professional skilled and trained to perform these services. 
Buildings shall be designed to fit the particular site and shall be
harmonious with adjacent buildings, topography and natural surroundings and
shall otherwise meet the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   In order to assure that new construction is compatible with
existing structures and neighborhood environments, it is necessary to
establish minimum design and building material standards. These standards
will serve to prevent new development from de-stabilizing adjacent
neighborhoods by mitigating the intrinsic negative impacts associated with
structures of greater bulk and density.  The following standards are
established to accomplish these ends:



      (1)   Exterior vertical surface design.  All exterior
vertical surfaces of residential, multiple residential, commercial,
industrial and institutional structures of any type shall be treated as a
front and have an equally attractive or same fascia.



      (2)   Design of garages.  Garages and other accessory
buildings shall have a design and appearance that will not detract from the
main building(s) or adjacent buildings.



      (3)   Mechanical protrusions. All necessary mechanical
protrusions visible to the exterior shall be screened or handled in a manner
such that they are not visually obvious and are compatible with the
surrounding development.



         (a)   For rooftop mechanical equipment, all mechanical
equipment and related appurtenances, except solar collector panels, must be
fully screened by either a parapet wall along the edge of the building or by
a screen immediately surrounding such equipment.  The height of the parapet
wall or screen shall be at least the height of the equipment.  Parapet walls
must be an extension of the primary building materials comprising the outside
walls of the building; screens must be constructed of durable,
low-maintenance materials and be either a light, neutral color or the same
color as the primary building materials of the outside walls.  Rooftop
equipment shall be set back from the edge of the roof along the front
building face a minimum of one times the equipment height.



         (b)   For ground mounted equipment, all mechanical
equipment and related appurtenances must be fully screened by either a
masonry wall or an opaque landscape screen. The height of the wall or
landscape screen shall be at least the height of the equipment.  Masonry
walls must be constructed of the same materials and color as the primary
materials comprising the outside walls of the building; landscape screening
must be of plant materials that are fully opaque year-round. Equipment shall
be painted a neutral earth-tone color. All mechanical protrusions shall be
pointed out on the site plan and elevations. 



      (4)   Materials.  Materials shall be those normally utilized
in this part of the country for permanent type construction, which are found
in what is generally accepted as good architectural design and which are
found to be compatible with nearby existing buildings.  Required building
materials shall depend upon the use of the building as follows:



         (a)   Commercial buildings shall have a vertical exposed
exterior finish of 100% non- combustible, non-degradable and maintenance-free
construction materials (such as face brick or natural stone but excluding
such construction materials as sheet or corrugated aluminum, iron, or
concrete block of any kind or similar).  Exterior roof-top finishes shall
preclude the use of exposed or plated metal; any metal surface shall be
coated or anodized with a non- reflective, glare-free finish.



         (b)   Industrial buildings shall have a vertical exposed
exterior finish of 100% non- combustible, non-degradable and maintenance-free
construction materials (such as face brick, natural stone or decorative
concrete block but excluding construction materials as sheet or corrugated
aluminum, iron, plain or painted plain concrete block or similar).  Any
decorative concrete block shall be colored only by means of a pigment
impregnated throughout the entire block.  Exterior roof-top finishes shall
preclude the use of exposed or plated metal; any metal surface shall be
coated or anodized with a non- reflective, glare-free finish.



         (c)   Multiple residential buildings adjacent to R zones
or occupied M zones shall have a vertical exposed exterior finish consisting
of at least 50% non-combustible, non-degradable and maintenance-free
construction materials (such as face brick or natural stone but excluding
such construction materials as sheet aluminum, iron or concrete block of any
kind or similar), with the balance being a non- manufactured natural
construction material such as plank cedar or redwood.



   (C)   In addition to the performance standards contained within this
section, those areas and uses located in Downtown Apple Valley shall also
conform to the design guidelines contained in the Downtown Design Guidelines,
as formally adopted to the satisfaction of the City Council.  If any
provision or requirement of this section is in conflict with any term, 
condition or standard contained in the Downtown Development Design
Guidelines, or with any provision or requirement of any other Chapter in this
code, the provisions and requirements set forth in this section shall
govern.  Downtown Apple Valley is that area located within the Ring Route,
and bounded by 147th Street to the north, 153rd Street to the south, Pennock
Avenue to the west and Galaxie Avenue to the east.



(‘81 Code, § A1-53)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 772, passed 4-14-05; Am. Ord. 965, passed 5-8-14)



§ 155.347  NATURAL FEATURES.



   Site planning and development shall show due regard for all natural
terrain features, such as trees or vegetation, watercourses, historic areas,
slopes, soil conditions, ponding areas and wetlands and similar existing
physical features in order that development of any type will not have an
adverse or detrimental effect upon the ecology or natural character of an
area.



(‘81 Code, § A1-54)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.348  SCREENING.



   (A)   Screening in residential districts:



      (1)   Screening shall be required in residential districts
where:



         (a)   Any off-street parking area contains more than
four parking spaces and is within 30 feet of an adjoining residential
district; and



         (b)   Where the driveway to a parking area of more than
four parking spaces is within 15 feet of an adjoining residential district.



      (2)   In residential districts, all materials and equipment
shall be stored within a building or fully screened (so as to not be visible)
from adjoining properties except for the following: laundry drying and
recreational equipment, construction and landscaping materials and equipment
currently being used on the premises, agricultural equipment and materials if
these are used or intended for use on the premises, off-street parking of
passenger automobiles and pickup trucks.  The use of any residential lot
whether inside or outside a building, and the use of any open portion of the
half of any lot that joins any street for the storage, keeping or abandonment
of junk or scrap materials, and the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of
automobiles or other vehicles is prohibited unless otherwise permitted by
this chapter.  Minor automobile repair may occur out of doors; major
automobile repair must occur within a garage.



   (B)   Screening in business, industrial and institutional districts:



      (1)   Where any business, institutional or industrial use
(that is, structure, parking or storage) is adjacent to and within 100 feet
of property zoned for residential use, that business or industry shall
provide screening along the boundary of the residential property.  Screening
shall also be provided where a business or industry is across the street from
a residential zone, but not on that side of a business or industry considered
to be the front (as determined by the building inspector).



      (2)   In business, industrial and institutional districts, all
exterior storage shall be screened.  The exceptions are:



         (a)   Retail merchandise being displayed as permitted by
this chapter; and



         (b)   Materials and equipment being used for
construction on the premises.



   (C)   In all zoning districts, all waste material, debris, refuse or
garbage shall be kept in an enclosed building or enclosed within a
container.  The container shall be completely screened by a wall or an
equivalent visual screen.  The screen or enclosed building shall be
architecturally compatible with the principal building it serves.



   (D)   Type of screening.



      (1)   The screening required in this section shall consist of
an attractive solid fence or wall or landscaping or earth berm but shall not
extend within 30 feet of any public street where the screening in excess of
three feet in height is needed.



      (2)   Where landscaping, such as a hedge, is used, the
landscape feature shall provide a year-round solid screen before the
requirements of this section are met.



      (3)   Natural features, such as differences in elevation, tree
masses or similar natural features, may negate the need for man-made
screening in certain areas.  This determination shall be made by the Zoning
Administrator.



   (E)   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to
maintain all screening so as not to be unsightly, a nuisance or create a
hazard or safety problem.



(‘81 Code, § A1-55)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.349  LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   A landscaped yard shall be installed and maintained along all
public streets except on lots in agricultural districts, on through lots (not
corner lots) in R-1 districts, or on lots abutting a public transportation
facility.  This yard shall be kept clear of all structures, storage and
off-street parking, except for driveways.  This yard shall be at least five
feet in depth from the public right-of-way for all properties abutting Cedar
Avenue south of 140th Street and for all properties abutting 150th Street
west of Pilot Knob Road, but east of 147th Street. This yard shall be at
least 15 feet in depth along all other streets, measured from the public
right-of-way.  The measurement shall be determined as of the time that the
permit for construction or improvement is issued.  Except for driveways, the
yard shall extend along both streets in the case of a corner lot.



   (B)   An approved landscape plan shall be required for all new
commercial, industrial, multiple residential and institutional
developments.  For developments having a construction value in excess of
$1,000,000, the plan shall be prepared by a landscape architect registered
and licensed in the state.  To the maximum extent feasible, this site plan
shall incorporate any existing vegetative features on the site; to the extent
that the value of preserved vegetation can be demonstrated, a credit to the
minimum expenditures following below may be allowed.  The landscape plan
shall include size, location, quantity and species of all plant materials and
the method of maintenance.  The minimum cost of landscaping materials for
the plan shall be a percentage of the estimated building construction cost
based on current means construction data as follows:



      (1)   Multiple residential, 2½%;



      (2)   Commercial, 2½%;



      (3)   Institutional, 2½%; and



      (4)   Industrial, 1½%.



   (C)   The City Council may require a landscape bond to ensure that
all plant materials are planted and maintained for at least one year.



   (D)   Landscaped islands shall be provided in parking lots
containing more than 25 parking stalls. Total area of islands shall be at
least 2% of the parking lot area, except that no island shall be less than
the size of a standard parking stall.  Islands shall be surrounded by a
concrete curb and provided with a weed retardant mesh or plastic sheeting. 
Islands shall be planted with a minimum 2½-inch diameter tree at the rate of
one tree per 150 square feet of island area.



(‘81 Code, § A1-56)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 875, passed 12-22-09)



§ 155.350  DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No land shall be developed and no use shall be permitted that
results in water run-off causing flooding or erosion on adjacent property. 
Run-off shall be properly channeled into a storm drain, watercourse, ponding
area or other suitable facility.



   (B)   An approved drainage plan shall be submitted and approved for
any new, redeveloped, or expanded commercial, industrial, multiple
residential and institutional development, subject to the following
requirements.



      (1)   A maximum storm water run-off coefficient of 0.6 for a
five-year rainfall event (2.4 cubic feet per second per acre).  When the
development drains immediately into a stormwater trunk having a design
capacity that can accommodate a run-off coefficient greater than 0.6, as
determined by the City Engineer and in accordance with the adopted Apple
Valley Master Stormwater Management Plan, the run-off coefficient of the
drainage plan may be increased to no more than 0.9.



      (2)   On-site infiltration of the first one-half inch of storm
water resulting from any rainfall event.  The volume of infiltration
necessary to achieve this standard is to be calculated with the formula: 
Volume of infiltration area (acres feet) = (0.042') x (number of acres). 
This requirement may be waived if the soil conditions are found to be
unsuitable for infiltration or if the infiltration is already being
accomplished within the drainage district (as identified within the adopted
Apple Valley Master Stormwater Management Plan) in which the subject
development property lies.



(‘81 Code, § A1-57)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 760, passed
10-14-04)  Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.351  FENCES; PERMITS AND LOCATION.



   (A)   Permit required.  No person, firm or corporation, except on a
farm and related to farming, shall hereafter construct or cause to be
constructed or erected any fence, wall or similar barrier in excess of six
feet in height,  as measured from the ground to the top of the fence with an
exception of a two-inch ground clearance, without first obtaining a permit
from the city.  Any fence, wall or similar barrier requiring a building
permit shall be constructed or erected in accordance with the provisions of
the Minnesota State Building Code.



   (B)   Locations.  All boundary fences shall be located entirely
upon the private property of the persons, firm or corporation constructing or
causing the construction of the fence unless the owner of the property
adjoining agrees, in writing, that the fence may be erected on the division
line of the respective properties.  The building inspector may require the
property owner desiring to erect a fence for which a permit is required to
establish the boundary lines of his or her property by a survey thereof to be
made by any registered land surveyor.



   (C)   Fence regulations. A fence is a public nuisance and prohibited
accordingly if it does not comply with the following requirements:



      (1)   The fence shall be firmly fastened and anchored in order
that it is not leaning or otherwise in the stage of collapse.



      (2)   The fence shall be maintained in sound and good repair
and free from deterioration, loose or rotting pieces, or holes, breaks, or
gaps not otherwise intended in the original design of the fence. The fence
shall be free from any defects or condition which makes the fence hazardous.



      (3)   All exterior wood surfaces of any fence, other than
decay resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements by paint or other
protective surface coating or treatment, which shall be maintained in good
repair to provide the intended protection from the elements.



      (4)   No fence section shall have peeling, cracked, chipped or
otherwise deteriorated surface finish, including but not limited to: paint or
other protective coating or treatment, on more than 20% of any one linear
ten-foot section of the fence.



      (5)   Any link fence, where permitted, shall be constructed
and maintained in such a manner that no barbed ends be located at the top of
the fence.



      (6)   No fence made of any material which is intended for the
purpose of temporary fencing, such as snow fencing or erosion control or
sedimentation fencing, shall be permitted on any property for a period in
excess of 30 days within any twelve-month period, except in connection with a
development, construction or land-disturbing activity project requiring such
temporary fencing or as otherwise approved by the city for good cause.



   (D)   Residential district fences.  In all areas of the city zoned
residential and not a farm, no boundary line fence shall be erected or
maintained more than 3½ feet in height except that:



      (1)   Fences on all corner lots erected within 30 feet of the
intersecting curb line shall be subject to § 155.335.



      (2)   Fences may be constructed to a height of eight feet on
the side property line from the rear lot line to the front setback line of
the principal building.



      (3)   Fences along any rear property line which is also the
rear property line of an abutting lot or which abuts a street right-of-way
shall not exceed eight feet in height.



      (4)   Fences along a rear property line which constitutes the
side lot line of an abutting lot shall not exceed eight feet in height and
shall not exceed 3½ feet in height within a triangular area described as
follows: beginning at the intersection of the common rear/side lot line and
the abutting lot's front lot line; thence 17 feet along the common rear/side
lot line; thence diagonally to a point 17 feet from the point of beginning
along the side street lot line; thence to the point of beginning.



      (5)   Fences on side street lot lines shall not be more than
eight feet in height and shall not extend toward the front lot line past a
point on the lot line where the front building line of the principal building
projected would intersect and, if the adjacent lot fronts on the same street
as the aforementioned side street lot line, the fence shall not exceed 3½
feet in height within the triangular area described in subsection (4) above.



   (E)   Business, industrial and institutional district fences. 
Property line fences within all business, industrial or institutional
districts shall not exceed eight feet in height unless otherwise permitted by
the City Council.



   (F)   Barbed wire and electric fences. Barbed wire fences shall not
be permitted in any district except agricultural unless specifically
permitted under conditions set forth by the City Council. Electric fences
shall not be permitted in any district except in agricultural and only when
related to farming or in other districts in which a farm is located and only
when related to farming and not used as a boundary fence. An underground
electronic or electric boundary marker systems used for containment of
domestic animals, such as "invisible fence," shall not constitute an electric
fence for purposes of this paragraph.



   (G)   Special purpose fences.  Fences for special purposes, such as
the Zoological Garden perimeter fence, may be permitted in any use district
by the City Council.  Findings shall be made that the fence is necessary to
protect, buffer or improve the premises for which the fence is intended.
(‘81 Code, § A1-58)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 704, passed
12-13-01)



§ 155.352  SWIMMING POOLS.



   (A)   Barrier requirements.



      (1)   A minimum 48-inch high barrier, which completely
surrounds and restricts access to the swimming pool, shall be installed and
maintained in a sound and safe condition around a swimming pool or around the
tract of land where the pool is located.  The barrier may consist of a
security fence, freestanding wall, a building's wall, or combination
thereof.  When the swimming pool is an aboveground swimming pool of which
the wall(s) of the swimming pool are greater than 48 inches from the ground
to the top of the pool wall(s) at every point around the pool, then no
barrier is required, but the means of access into the swimming pool (e.g.
ladder or steps), shall be secured, locked or removed to prevent access
during any period of time that the pool is unattended or not in use.  Spas
or hot tubs with a locking safety cover which complies with ASTM Standard F
1346-91 shall exempt from these barrier requirements, provided they are
equipped with a safety locking cover which is locked at all time during which
the spa or hot tub is not in use.  Storable swimming or wading pools shall
be exempt from this section provided all means of access into the pool are
removed and the pool is covered when it is not attended.



      (2)   The top of the barrier shall be at least 48 inches above
grade measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming
pool.  The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the
barrier shall not allow passage of a four-inch-diameter-sphere.  Where the
top of the pool structure is above grade, such as an aboveground pool, the
barrier may be at ground level, such as the pool structure, or mounted on top
of the pool structure.  Where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool
structure, the maximum vertical clearance between the top of the pool
structure and the bottom of the barrier shall not allow passage of a
four-inch-diameter sphere.



      (3)   Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a
four-inch-diameter sphere.



      (4)   To prevent a person from scaling a solid barrier, which
does not have openings, such as a masonry or stone wall, such barrier wall
shall not contain indentations or protrusions in excess of 1.25 square inches
except for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints.



      (5)   Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical
members and the distance between the tops of each of the horizontal members
is less than 45 inches, the horizontal members shall be located on the
swimming pool side of the fence.  Spacing between vertical members shall not
exceed 1.75 inches in width.  Where there are decorative cutouts within
vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 1.75 inches in
width.



      (6)   Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical
members and the distance between the tops of each of the horizontal members
is 45 inches or more, spacing between vertical members shall not exceed four
inches.  Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing
within the cutouts shall not exceed 1.75 inches in width.



      (7)   Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be a
2.25-inch square unless the fence is provided with slats fastened at the top
or the bottom of which reduce the openings to not more than 1.75 inches.



      (8)   Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, such
as a lattice fence, the maximum opening formed by the diagonal members shall
not be more than 1.75 inches.



      (9)   The Building Inspector shall approve the plans and
specifications for the barrier prior to its installation.  The barrier shall
be equipped with doors or gates which are self-closing and self-latching with
the latch to be located a minimum of 42 inches above ground level and
equipped with a lock which shall be kept locked when the swimming pool is
unattended.



   (B)   Setbacks.



      (1)   Swimming pools shall be set back a minimum of five feet
from any side or rear lot line as measured from the nearest edge of the slope
around the pool or perimeter walk.



      (2)   Swimming pools shall not be located in an easement of
record as measured from the nearest edge of the slope around the pool or
perimeter walk.



      (3)   Swimming pools shall not be permitted in the front yard
or side yard in the area between the street right-of-way line and the minimum
required building setback line.



   (C)   Drainage.  Swimming pools which raise the existing elevation
more than eight inches shall be reviewed by the City Engineer who shall have
the right to refuse the permit for construction of same if, in his opinion,
adjoining properties will be adversely affected because of alteration of
drainage patterns.



   (D)   Permit required.  No person shall construct, install or
locate a swimming pool, as defined herein, without first obtaining a swimming
pool permit from the city.  Storable swimming or wading pools are not
required to obtain a pool permit.  The applicant for a swimming pool permit
shall submit any information as the Building Inspector shall deem
necessary.  An application for a Natural Resources Management Permit shall
also be submitted if required under the Natural Resources Management
regulations in this Code.



   (E)   Storable swimming and wading pools must be disassembled and
stored between the dates November 1 and April 1 of each year.



(‘81 Code, § A1-59)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 755, passed
6-24-04; Am. Ord. 756, passed 7-8-04; Am. Ord. 768, passed 2-24-05)



§ 155.353  LIGHTING ARRANGEMENTS.



   (A)   In all districts, any lighting used to illuminate an
off-street parking area or sign shall be arranged so as to deflect light away
from any adjoining residential zone or from the public streets. Direct glare
from floodlights or similar sources, shall not be directed into any adjoining
property or public streets, and all the source of all lights shall be hooded
or controlled in some manner so as not to light adjacent property. Mitigative
measures shall be employed to limit glare and spill light to protect
neighboring parcels and to maintain traffic safety on public roads.  These
measures shall include lenses, shields, louvers, prismatic control devices
and limitations on the height and type of fixtures.  The city may also limit
the hours of operation of outdoor lighting if it is deemed necessary to
reduce impacts on the surrounding neighborhood.



   (B)   In residential areas, any light or combination of lights that
cast light on any adjacent residential property shall not exceed 1/2 foot
candle (meter reading) as measured at the property line.  Lighting fixtures
for new and renovated outdoor sports and recreational facilities that adjoin
residential uses shall be designed to eliminate reflected glare and spill
light from the bottom one-third of the reflector, and to shield the view of
the arc tube from the residential property.



   (C)   In commercial and industrial areas, any light or combination
of lights that cast light on any adjacent commercial or industrial property
shall not exceed one foot candle as measured at the property line.  All
canopy lighting shall only be permitted under the canopy structure, and
consist of canister spot lights or shoebox lights recessed into the canopy. 
No portion of the light source or fixture may extend below the bottom face of
the canopy.  Total canopy illumination below the canopy may not exceed 115
foot candles at ground level.



   (D)   The city may require submission of a light distribution plan
if deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the intent of this section.



(‘81 Code, § A1-60)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 772, passed
4-14-05)



§ 155.354  OFF-STREET LOADING AREAS.



   (A)   Location.



      (1)   All loading areas, including maneuvering area, shall be
off-street and shall be located on the same lot as the building or use to be
served.



      (2)   Loading areas shall not be permitted adjacent to a
residential district, along the front side of a building or along a side
facing a public street unless the loading area, including maneuvering area,
is more than 100 feet from the public street.



      (3)   Where a loading area faces a public street or
residential district, a minimum 40-foot wide landscaped yard, including berms
and vegetation, shall be provided and maintained along the public street or
that particular side.



   (B)   Surfacing.  All loading berths and access driveways shall be
surfaced with concrete or asphalt.



   (C)   Use of loading berths.  Loading berths or access drives shall
not be used for the storage of goods or inoperable vehicles.



   (D)   Required berths. There shall be provided adequate off-street
loading space in connection with any structure which requires receipt or
distribution of materials by vehicles on a regular basis.



(‘81 Code, § A1-64)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.355  OPEN SALES LOTS.



   Open sales lots shall be subject to the following standards:



   (A)   A minimum 20-foot wide yard abutting the public right-of-way
shall be landscaped and the landscaping shall be separated from the usable
portion of the lot by a curb.  The 20-foot landscaped yard shall also be
provided where the lot abuts a residential lot.



   (B)   All of the lot other than the portion occupied by a building
or landscape treatment shall be surfaced to control dust and drainage.



   (C)   Lot shall be constructed according to a grading plan approved
by the City Engineer.



   (D)   When a lot is adjacent to a lot located in a residential
district, a fence of acceptable design shall be erected along that particular
side.



   (E)   The outdoor lighting system for a sales lot shall be so
designed that no direct source of light is visible from the public
right-of-way or adjacent land.



   (F)   A site plan for the lot, showing ingress and egress, storage,
parking, fencing and other necessary features required to understand the
operation, shall be filed for approval by the City Council.



(‘81 Code, § A1-65)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.356  MOTOR FUEL STATION DESIGN.



   Motor fuel stations shall be subject to the following standards:



   (A)   The minimum required building setback shall relate to any
canopy, weather protection, pump island or building.



   (B)   The sale or rental of motor vehicles, trailers, campers, boats
and other items which are not kept entirely within the building shall require
an approved open sales lot.  In any instance, these vehicles shall only be
permitted at the side or rear of the motor fuel station lot.



   (C)   A minimum 20-foot landscaped yard shall be provided along all
abutting public right-of-way lines, except where approved driveways occur.



   (D)   All goods offered for sale on the motor fuel station site,
other than those generally required for the operation and maintenance of
motor vehicles, shall be stored, sold and displayed within a building.



   (E)   All trash, waste material and unwanted motor vehicle parts
shall be stored within a separate enclosure behind the building or within the
building.



   (F)   The outdoor lighting system shall be approved by the city and
shall be so designed to prevent any undue light being directly visible from
the public right-of-way or abutting lots.



   (G)   Wherever a motor fuel station abuts a residential district, a
solid screen, not less than six feet high, shall be erected and maintained
along the side and rear property line that abuts the residential district.



   (H)   The entrance doors for any service stalls shall not face
toward a principal or minor arterial.



   (I)   A minimum of two off-street parking spaces for each service
bay shall be provided at the side or rear of the principal building.



(‘81 Code, § A1-66)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.357  PREPARED FOOD OUTLETS.



   (A)   Prepared food outlets, such as drive-ins, franchise food
operations and quick-stop prepared food facilities, shall be subject to the
following standards:



      (1)   The minimum 20-foot wide yard abutting the public
right-of-way shall be landscaped and the landscaping shall be separated from
the surfaced part of the lot by a concrete curb;



      (2)   Hours of operation shall be confined to the period
between 10:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. except for those sites located 200 feet or
more from any residential district;



      (3)   The entire site, other than the area occupied by a
building or landscaping, shall be surfaced with concrete or asphalt;



      (4)   The outdoor lighting system shall be so designed that no
direct source of light is visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent
land;



      (5)   When prepared food is served to the customer in a
carry-out container, a proposed system of trash containers and trash removal
from the site shall be submitted to the city for approval.  The system to
include the pick-up of papers and other material upon and adjacent to the
site;



      (6)   A proposed system of ingress, egress and parking shall
be submitted for approval by the city.  Curb cuts shall not be permitted
within 50 feet from the curb line intersection on local or collector streets
and 80 feet on principal or minor arterials; and



      (7)   The minimum required building setback shall relate to
any canopy, weather protection or similar feature.



(‘81 Code, § A1-67)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



   (B)   All neighborhood restaurants shall be subject to the following
standards:



      (1)   Traffic circulation patterns and ingress/egress to the
site are designed so as to minimize impact to adjacent residential and
institutional properties; and



      (2)   The applicant shall demonstrate the use’s generated
traffic will not adversely affect any surrounding residential or
institutional uses and shall submit, upon the city’s request, a traffic
study.  The city may require additional landscaping and/or screening to
protect neighboring residential and institutional uses.



(Ord. 654, passed 12-10-98)



§ 155.358  SPECIAL PROMOTIONS.



   Special outdoor promotions in commercial zoning districts such as, but
not limited to, tires at service stations, carnivals at shopping centers,
sidewalk sales or similar outdoor displays and sales at service stations or
shopping centers, shall only be permitted as accessory uses when approved by
the Zoning Administrator under the following conditions:



   (A)   The promotional sales approval shall only be given to the
owner of a business or his or her duly appointed representative;



   (B)   The approval shall be valid for a period not to exceed ten
days.  Each business shall not be allowed more than one special promotion
during any calendar year, except a permit for sidewalk sales which shall not
be allowed more than two times during a calendar year;



   (C)   The promotional sales shall be conducted entirely upon the
owner’s property in a manner that will not interfere with traffic
circulation or otherwise create a nuisance or safety hazard as determined by
the Zoning Administrator;



   (D)   Individual stores within a shopping center or a free-standing
store may be given approval for sidewalk sales;



   (E)   Sidewalk sales shall be restricted to the area immediately
adjacent to the front of the store on the sidewalk or parking lot.  The
sales or display shall permit a minimum four-foot wide open sidewalk area in
front of each store at all times for pedestrians; and



   (F)   Failure to comply with these regulations shall be sufficient
reason to immediately revoke the approval.



(‘81 Code, § A1-68)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.359  ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS.



   (A)   Findings.  Minnesota State Attorney General’s Office and
the Cities of St. Paul, Minnesota; Indianapolis, Indiana; Phoenix, Arizona;
Seattle, Washington; Houston, Texas; and Los Angeles, California, have
conducted studies of the impact of adult establishments on their respective
communities.  Based on these studies and the study done by the City of Apple
Valley Urban Affairs Committee, the Apple Valley City Council finds:



      (1)   Adult establishments can have an adverse impact on
adjacent commercial uses;



      (2)   Residential neighborhoods located within close proximity
to adult theaters, bookstores and other adult establishments experience
increased crime rates (sex-related crimes in particular), lowered property
values, increased transiency, neighborhood blight and potential health risks;



      (3)   The adverse impacts which adult establishments have on
surrounding areas diminish as the distance from the adult establishments
increases;



      (4)   Many members of the public perceive areas within which
adult establishments are located as less safe than other areas which do not
have the uses;



      (5)   Adult establishments can exert a dehumanizing influence
on persons attending nearby places of worship; children attending family day
care homes, state-licensed group family day-care homes and child care
centers; students attending schools; and people using parks;



      (6)   The concentration of adult establishments in one area
can have a substantially detrimental effect on the area in which the
businesses are concentrated and on the overall quality of urban life.  A
cycle of decay can result from the concentration of adult establishments. 
The presence of the businesses is perceived by others as an indication that
the area is deteriorating which can cause other businesses and residents to
move out of the vicinity.  Declining real estate values, which can result
from the concentration of the businesses, erode the city’s tax base and
contribute to a feeling that section of the city is depressed; and



      (7)   Adult establishments can increase the risk of exposure
to communicable diseases. Experiences of other cities indicate that
businesses can facilitate the spread of communicable diseases by virtue of
the design and use of the premises, thereby endangering not only the patrons
of the establishments but also the general public.



   (B)   Purpose.  In order to minimize the detrimental effect adult
establishments have on adjacent land uses, and to promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare of the city, the City Council adopts the
following zoning regulations, recognizing that it has a great interest in the
present and future character of the city’s residential and commercial
neighborhoods.  Adoption of these regulations is not intended to
unreasonably restrict the opportunity of adult establishments to locate in
the city.



   (C)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, terms shall
have the meaning given them in Chapter 110.



   (D)   Adult establishments and adult accessory use - high impact. 
These shall be prohibited in all of the city’s use districts detailed in
this code, except the following use districts, where businesses shall be a
permitted use, provided the conditions in Chapter 110:



      (1)   General Business, GB and GB-1;



      (2)   Limited Business, LB and LB-1;



      (3)   Neighborhood Convenience Center, NCC;



      (4)   Retail Business, RB;



      (5)   Regional Shopping Center, SC;



      (6)   Visitor’s Business, VB;



      (7)   Planned Development, PD;



      (8)   Industrial - Limited Industrial, I-1;



      (9)   Industrial - General Industrial, I-2; and



      (10)   Business Park, BP.



   (E)   Conditions.  In use districts in which adult establishments
are permitted uses, the following conditions shall be met prior to an adult
establishment being allowed:



      (1)   No adult establishment shall be located closer than
1,000 feet from any other adult establishment or on-sale liquor
establishment, including sale of beer and wine;



      (2)   No adult establishment shall be located closer than
1,000 feet from any place of worship, schools, parks, libraries,
state-licensed family day care home or nursing home, state-licensed group
family day-care home or state-licensed child care center;



      (3)   No adult establishment shall be located closer than
1,000 feet from residential use district or single-family dwelling;



      (4)   Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest lot line of the
parcel used by the adult establishment or, if located within a multiple
tenant commercial or industrial center, from the nearest point of the actual
business premises of the adult establishment business, to the nearest point
of the actual business/residential premises of any use listed in divisions
(1), (2) and (3) above; and



      (5)   The establishment shall comply with Chapter 110 of the
code.



(‘81 Code, § A1-78)  (Ord. 620, passed 9-26-96)



§ 155.360  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS



   (A)   Findings and purpose statement.  The City Council finds that
it is in the best interest of the city to use its police powers to protect
the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizens by adoption of
these property maintenance regulations.  The intent of these regulations is
to further the following objectives:



      (1)   To preserve the value of all properties within the city;



      (2)   To protect the character and stability of all properties
within the city;



      (3)   To provide minimum standards of maintenance for property
within the city and to prevent conditions that adversely affect or are likely
to adversely affect the safety, health and welfare of not only persons
occupying the property, but all persons who may enter or be exposed to the
conditions on the property; and



      (4)   To correct or abate conditions on property that do not
comply with the standards of maintenance established herein and subject
persons to unsafe or unhealthy conditions on the property.



   (B)   Application and scope.



      (1)   All owners and occupants of property shall comply with
the provisions set forth in this section and elsewhere in this code. This
section applies to all property located within any commercial, industrial, or
residential zoning district, as those terms are defined in this chapter.



      (2)   This section does not apply to the following:



         (a)   Unimproved land, which may be allowed to remain in
a natural condition, but shall comply with all other provisions of this code;



         (b)   Vacant buildings, structures, and accessory
structures scheduled for demolition or removal, provided they are secured in
such a way that they present no public danger; and



   (C)   Definitions.  For purposes of this section the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.  Shall have the meaning stated in the zoning
regulations of this code. Accessory buildings or structures include, but are
not limited to: decks, porches, fences, retaining walls, and sheds.



   BUILDING.  Shall have the meaning stated in the zoning regulations of
this code. Buildings include, but are not limited to: dwellings, offices, and
stores.



   EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of the infestation of
insects, rats, mice, vermin, rodents, bats or other pests by eliminating
their harborage places, by removing or making inaccessible materials that
serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other
approved pest elimination method.



   GARBAGE OR REFUSE.  Animal or vegetable waste or other matter
resulting from the handling, storage, preparation, cooking, and consumption
of food, including the cans, containers, wrappers or other packaging
therefrom and any combustible or non-combustible waste materials other than
garbage, including but not limited to: packaging waste of household products;
liquid or aerosol hazardous waste, including used or discarded auto oil and
fluids, paint, stain and finish products, finish removal products, cleaning
chemicals and the like; and unused appliances, furniture, paper, cartons,
boxes, wood and wood by products, rubber, leather, tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, glass, crockery, tires and other similar materials.



   HAZARDOUS BUILDING OR HAZARDOUS PROPERTY OR HAZARDOUS CONDITION.  Any
building or property, or conditions located therein or thereon, which because
of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, physical damage, unsanitary
condition, or abandonment, constitutes a fire risk or a danger or threat to
public safety and health.



   INFESTATION. The presence, within or contiguous to a structure on the
property, of insects, rats, mice, vermin or other pests or rodents in numbers
or quantities large enough to be harmful, unhealthy, or unsafe for human
habitation.



   PESTS.  Rodents or insects at any stage of development and other
destructive or offensive vermin, including, but not limited to, rats, mice,
fleas, roaches or bats.



   PROPERTY.  Developed land, parcel or platted lot, including any
buildings, structures, and accessory structures thereon.



   STRUCTURE.  Shall have the meaning stated in the zoning regulations of
this code.



   UNSANITARY CONDITION.  An unhealthy or unhealthful condition tending
to harbor or spread disease or cause illness or sickness such as an
infestation; accumulation of human or animal fecal matter or other waste not
properly disposed of; accumulation of garbage, refuse, debris, or other items
that hinder the proper ventilation for or the ability to freely access a
mechanical or other system or unit (e.g., utility meter, electrical box,
water heater, furnace or other appliance) within a structure or hinder the
ability to freely open doors and windows for egress or access stairways; and
significant accumulation of unclean food or eating dishware, utensils and
cookware, etc.



   (D)   Maintenance requirements. The owner and occupant of a property
shall keep and maintain the property in compliance with the following
requirements:



      (1)   Exterior property areas. Exterior property areas, which
means all areas of a property which are exterior and not related to any
portion of a building, structure, or accessory structure located on the
property, shall be maintained as follows:



         (a)   The exterior property areas shall be kept and
maintained in a clean, safe, and sanitary condition;



         (b)   The property shall be graded and maintained to
prevent the erosion of soil and accumulation of water thereon, or within any
building located thereon, except in approved water retention areas; and



         (c)   Private sidewalks, driveways, and similar areas
shall be kept in good repair and maintained free from hazardous conditions.



      (2)   Exterior of buildings, structures, and accessory
structures.



         (a)   General. The exterior of any building, structure,
or accessory structure shall be maintained in good repair so as not to pose a
threat to the public health, safety, or welfare.



      (b)   Exterior surfaces. Exterior wood surfaces shall be
protected from the elements and decay by maintained paint, stain or other
protective covering or treatment.  Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall
be removed and the surfaces repainted or otherwise covered by other
protective wood covering. Joints in siding materials and between siding and
other features shall be maintained weather-resistant.  Metal surfaces
subject to rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and treated to inhibit
future rust or corrosion.  For purposes of this section, if 20% or more of a
wall or other surface area, such as: fascia, soffits, rake, has the
protective coating peeling, flaking, chipping, or deteriorated, then the wall
or surface area shall be restored to a protected condition.



      (c)   Structural members. Structural members shall be
maintained free from deterioration and shall be of a condition that is
capable of safely supporting the imposed loads.



      (d)   Exterior walls.  Exterior walls shall be free from
holes, breaks, and loose, missing or rotting materials.



      (e)   Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be
maintained weather-resistant so as not to allow moisture to enter the
building.  Roof drainage systems shall be maintained in good working order
to perform the intended function.  Roof water shall not be discharged in a
manner that creates a public nuisance.



      (f)   Stairways, decks, porches, and balconies.  Stairways,
decks, porches, and balconies, and attachments thereto, shall be maintained
structurally sound, in good repair, capable of supporting the imposed loads,
able to perform the intended function and maintained weather-resistant.



      (g)   Chimneys, flues, and vents.  Chimneys, flues, vents,
and other similar features shall be maintained in good and safe repair and
structurally sound.  Exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be maintained
and protected from rust or decay according to the requirements of this
chapter.



      (h)   Windows, skylights, and doors. Windows, skylights, and
doors of the principal use buildings shall be kept in good repair and weather
tight.  Glazing materials with cracks, holes, or similar damage and missing
glazing shall be replaced with approved glazing materials.



      (i)   Safety features.  Safety features that are placed on
property shall be maintained in good condition and repair and structurally
sound to perform the intended function.



      (j)   Premises identification. Approved numbers or addresses
shall be displayed on all residential and commercial buildings in such a
position as to be plainly visible and legible from the street or road
fronting the property.  These numbers shall be a minimum of four inches in
height, have a minimum stroke width of one-half inch, and shall contrast with
the surface on which they are mounted.



      (3)   Interior areas. The owner and occupant of a building or
accessory structure shall maintain the interior area of the building in
compliance with the following requirements:



         (a)   General. The interior of any building or accessory
structure on the property shall be maintained in good repair, structurally
sound, and in a sanitary condition.  The occupant shall keep that part of
the building or accessory structure on the property which the occupant
occupies or controls in good repair, structurally sound, and in a sanitary
condition.



         (b)   Good repair and structurally sound. 



            1.   All buildings, accessory structures and any
portion of any building or accessory structure, including mechanical,
electrical, plumbing and other building systems, previously constructed or
installed in accordance with city and state fire and building codes shall be
maintained in conformance with the requirements of the code in effect at the
time of the construction or installation. All mechanical, electrical,
plumbing and other systems or fixtures within the building or accessory
structure shall be properly installed and maintained in working order and
functional condition in accordance with the state building code regulations
in effect at the time the building was originally constructed.  All systems
and fixtures shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks, or defects and be
capable of performing the function for which such fixture or system is
designed and shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and functional
condition.  All structural components and members of the building's interior
shall be maintained in good repair and structurally sound condition capable
of supporting the imposed loads.  A vacant or unoccupied building or unit
therein may have water, electric or natural gas services discontinued so long
as:



               a.   The Minnesota State Building Code or
the Minnesota State Fire Code does not require continued utility service(s)
for the building or unit; or



               b.   The safety and welfare of the other
units in the building are not adversely affected by the discontinued utility
service.



            2.   Any vacant or unoccupied building or unit
therein that has water services not discontinued during winter months as to
put the safety and welfare of the other units in the building at risk of
damage or injury (e.g., frozen water lines) may be deemed a public nuisance.



         (c)   Accumulation of garbage.  All interior areas of
the building or accessory structure on the property shall be free from any
excessive accumulation of garbage or refuse.  Accumulation of garbage or
refuse shall be deemed to be excessive if such accumulation hinders the
proper ventilation for or the ability to freely access a mechanical or other
system or unit (e.g., utility meter, electrical box, water heater, furnace or
other appliance) within the structure or hinders the ability to freely access
stairways or to open doors and windows for egress or is of such quantity to
cause or be cause for the attraction or infestation of pests and rodents on
the property.  All garbage and refuse shall be stored and disposed of in
accordance with the regulations governing storage and disposal of garbage
elsewhere in this code.



         (d)   Infestation. All buildings and accessory
structures shall be free from rodent or pest infestation.  The owner and
occupant shall not permit the accumulation of garbage, refuse or other
material as to provide shelter to or serve as a food source for rodents or
pests.



         (e)   Unsanitary conditions.  The owner and occupant
shall not allow the building or accessory structure to be maintained in an
unsanitary condition, including, but not limited to:  the accumulation of
human or animal fecal matter or other similar waste; the unlawful
accumulation and storage of garbage; the accumulation of unclean and
unsanitary food preparation and consumption cookware, dishes, eating
utensils, and other similar ware.



         (f)   Hazardous building or condition.  No property,
building or accessory structure shall be maintained as a hazardous building
or in a hazardous condition.



   (E)   Other code provisions.  The maintenance requirements set
forth herein are not exclusive and are in addition to all other provisions of
this code or state law that regulate the condition or use of property,
including, but not limited to: storage of garbage or refuse, junk vehicles or
appliances; weed and pest control; building, fire and plumbing code
requirements; individual sewage treatment systems; and prescribed public
nuisances.



   (F)   Public nuisance declared.  A violation of any provision in
this section shall constitute a public nuisance.  It shall be the primary
responsibility of the property owner and occupant to abate any public
nuisance as declared in this section which exist on the owner's or occupant's
property.  The abatement of any public nuisance and the cost thereof shall
be governed by the general public nuisance regulations elsewhere in this code.



   (G)   Enforcement.  Any Apple Valley peace officer or other
designated city official shall have the power to enforce any provision of
this section and to determine whether a public nuisance, as declared herein,
exists or is being maintained on the property.  The city further authorizes,
at the request of and in cooperation with any Apple Valley peace officer or
other designated city official, any designated employee of Dakota County
public health or human services agency(s) to undertake the responsibilities
of enforcing the provisions of this section.



         (1)   Notice of violation.  Whenever a peace officer,
other designated city official, or Dakota County public health or human
services agent (hereinafter "official") determines a public nuisance exists
or is being maintained on a property, the owner of record or occupant, or
both of the property shall be notified in writing that a public nuisance
exists and that it shall be abated within a reasonable time as determined by
the official.  The notice of violation shall specify each of the existing
public nuisances, the necessary repairs, if any, or other work necessary to
abate each nuisance, a reasonable time deadline to abate the public
nuisances, and the city's authority to abate the public nuisance if the owner
or occupant fails to do so and to collect the city's costs thereof as
permitted by state law. The notice shall be served upon the occupant of the
property at the property address and upon the owner of record, if different
than the occupant.  The notice may be served in person or by U.S. mail;
service upon the owner of record who is not the occupant of the property
shall be mailed to the last known address of the owner as provided by the
Dakota County property tax records.



      (2)   Entry upon property.  If the owner or occupant of the
property refuses consent to an official to enter the property for purposes of
enforcement of this section, the official is authorized to take any and all
necessary steps to obtain a warrant or other order from the court authorizing
entry.



      (3)   Abatement of nuisance. The official enforcing the
provisions of this section shall be authorized to contract services of a
third party to abate any public nuisance on a property when the property
owner or occupant has provided written consent.  If the owner or occupant
does not voluntarily abate the public nuisance or provide written consent to
the city to abate the public nuisance, then the city may proceed with any
other legal remedies available to cause the abatement of the declared public
nuisances and the collection of its costs for said abatement as provided by
the provisions in this code and Minnesota state law.



(Ord. 694, passed 6-14-01; Am. Ord. 854, passed 2-12-09; Am. Ord. 888, passed
5-13-10)



PARKING REQUIREMENTS



§ 155.370  PURPOSE.



   Regulation of off-street parking and loading spaces in this chapter is
to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public rights-of-way and so to
promote the safety and general welfare of the public by establishing minimum
requirements for off-street parking, loading and unloading from motor
vehicles in accordance with the utilization of various parcels of land and
structures.  All applications for a building permit, in all districts, shall
be accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale and dimensioned, indicating the
location of off-street parking and loading spaces in compliance with the
requirements set out in this subchapter.



(‘81 Code, § A1-61)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 443, passed
5-18-89; Am. Ord. 455, passed 7-27-89; Am. Ord. 479, passed 4-12-90)



§ 155.371  COMPLIANCE WITH EXISTING STRUCTURES.



   All uses existing upon the effective date of the adoption of this
chapter shall be required to reasonably comply, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator, with the minimum parking requirements set forth in this
chapter.  Whenever a building or part thereof is changed in usage, such that
the new use requires more parking than the old, the extent to which the use
is changed shall be required to comply fully with the provisions of this
chapter.



(‘81 Code, § A1-61)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 443, passed
5-18-89; Am. Ord. 455, passed 7-27-89; Am. Ord. 479, passed 4-12-90)



§ 155.372  CALCULATIONS.



   (A)   The term “floor area” for the purpose of calculating the
number of off-street parking spaces shall be the net usable floor area of the
various floors, devoted to retail sales, services, office spaces, processing
and fabrication exclusive of hallways, utility space, restrooms and storage
areas other than warehousing.



   (B)   Each parking space shall not be less than nine feet wide and
20 feet in length and each space shall be served adequately by access
drives.  If the stall is adjacent to a curb or a landscaped area, the
required length of the space may be reduced by 1½ feet.



   (C)   On-street parking spaces shall not be utilized in providing
the minimum required number of parking spaces for each use under this chapter.



   (D)   All spaces shall be served by access aisles of the following
widths, based on the angle of the parking stalls:



   Parking Angle     Aisle Width



     90-degree      24 feet; two-way



     60-degree      18 feet; one-way



     45-degree      15 feet; one-way



(‘81 Code, § A1-61)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 443, passed
5-18-89; Am. Ord. 455, passed 7-27-89; Am. Ord. 479, passed 4-12-90)



§ 155.373  PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   The purpose of this section is to reduce the visual clutter,
surface soil runoff, facilitate stormwater infiltration, promote the general
safety and welfare, and protect the property values of adjoining properties
by controlling the number of vehicles that may be parked on a residentially
zoned lot, and the impervious surface created by driveways. 



   (B)   Parking in all residential districts shall be subject to the
following requirements:



      (1)   Required off-street parking in the residential districts
shall be on the same lot as the principal building unless otherwise approved
by the City Council;



      (2)   Non-passenger vehicles shall not be parked or stored in
a residential district except when loading, unloading or rendering a
service.  Under no circumstances shall parking facilities accessory to
residential structures be used for open air storage of non-passenger vehicles;



      (3)   All motorized vehicles, regardless of type, method of
propulsion, or placement on a trailer, and all Class II vehicles and trailers
shall be parked or stored on a paved surface;



      (4)   No person shall cause, undertake, permit or allow the
outside parking and storage of vehicles on residentially zoned property
unless it complies with the following requirements:



         (a)   A property located in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5,
and R-CL zoning districts, or planned development districts where the primary
use is single-family residences may have a maximum of four passenger
vehicles, in addition to any permitted motorcycles, recreational vehicles or
trailers, parked or stored outside the residence for the occupants of that
property provided all passenger vehicles are parked or stored on the lot as
regulated by the city code.  A permitted accessory unit dwelling shall not
be entitled to park additional vehicles than are otherwise allowed for the
primary dwelling unit. 



         (b)   The city may approve an annual “on site parking
permit” for outdoor parking of more than four but not to exceed six
passenger vehicles, on an R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-CL zoned property, or
planned development districts where the primary use is single-family
residences, provided it meets the following standards:



            1.   The applicant’s property shall conform to
the parking standards set forth in § 155.378 hereof;



            2.   The owner shall pay a permit fee as stated in
the appendix to Chapter 35;



            3.   All vehicles must be parked or stored on the
established paved driveway and not on the street;



            4.   No vehicle shall encroach into or otherwise
block a sidewalk, trail, path or any roadway; or within the area between any
sidewalk and roadway; and



            5.   All vehicles must be operational and properly
licensed.



   (C)   Recreational vehicles and trailers.



      (1)   On a residential lot one acre or larger, not more than
four of any combination of recreational vehicles or trailers of any class may
be parked or stored outside, provided at least two are completely screened
from view from public roads or adjacent properties.



      (2)   On residential lots smaller than one acre, a resident
may park or store the following outside: either one Class I recreational
vehicle or trailer and either one Class II recreational vehicle or trailer;
or not more than two Class I recreational vehicles or trailers.  Under no
circumstances, shall there be more than one Class II recreational vehicle or
trailer parked or stored outside on residential lots smaller than one acre at
any one point in time.



      (3)   Motorized recreational vehicles or recreational
equipment on trailers and Class II trailers shall be parked or stored on a
paved surface entirely on the vehicle owner's property.  If parked in the
front of the primary residence, all recreational vehicles and trailers
regardless of classification shall be located on the established driveway. 
If stored in the rear yard, Class II recreational vehicles and Class II
trailers shall be 10 feet from the rear lot line, or 20 feet from any
street-side lot line.  When parked or stored outside, trailers shall be
emptied of all refuse, debris, junk, or other materials. 



      (4)   Recreational vehicles are not to be occupied or used for
living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes while parked or stored on any lot;
except nonpaying guests of the owner of the property may occupy one
recreational vehicle in addition to those permitted herein.  Such vehicle
shall be parked subject to the provisions of this section and used for
sleeping purposes for a period not to exceed seven consecutive days at one
time or more than 14 days total in one calendar year.



(‘81 Code, § A1-61)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 443, passed
5-18-89; Am. Ord. 455, passed 7-27-89; Am. Ord. 479, passed 4-12-90; Am. Ord.
729, passed 6-26-03; Am. Ord. 834, passed 2-28-08)  Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.374  JOINT PARKING FACILITIES.



   (A)   Required parking facilities serving two or more uses may
collectively provide off-street parking, except in residential districts,
provided that the total number of parking spaces is not less than the sum
total of the requirements for each use computed separately. 



   (B)   In the case where operating hours do not overlap, the city may
allow the parking spaces to be reduced below the total requirements of the
individual uses under the following conditions:



      (1)   The proposed joint parking space is within 400 feet of
the entrance of the use it will serve;



      (2)   The applicant(s) shall show that there is no substantial
conflict in the principal operating hours of the two or more buildings or
uses for which joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed; and



      (3)   A properly drawn legal instrument, approved by the city,
executed by the parties concerned, for joint use of the off-street parking
facilities shall be filed with the City Clerk.



(‘81 Code, § A1-61)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 443, passed
5-18-89; Am. Ord. 455, passed 7-27-89; Am. Ord. 479, passed 4-12-90)



§ 155.375  USE OF OFF-STREET SPACES.



   Required off-street parking space in commercial or industrial
districts, including those within a planned development district, shall not
be utilized for open storage of goods, overnight parking of vehicles, storage
of vehicles or for vehicles which are inoperable, or for lease, rent or sale,
except where otherwise permitted.



(‘81 Code, § A1-61)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 443, passed
5-18-89; Am. Ord. 455, passed 7-27-89; Am. Ord. 479, passed 4-12-90; Am. Ord.
738, passed 11-13-03)    Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.376  SALE OF PARKING AREAS.



   Property that constitutes required off-street parking area may not be
separated, through sale or other means, from the property containing the
principal use for which the parking area is required.



(‘81 Code, § A1-61)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 443, passed
5-18-89; Am. Ord. 455, passed 7-27-89; Am. Ord. 479, passed 4-12-90) 
Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.377  PROOF OF FUTURE PARKING.



   If it is clearly demonstrated by the owner that the required parking is
in excess of the actual demand, all of the required parking need not be
constructed initially.  A minimum of 75% of the spaces required must be
built initially.  The remainder of the required spaces, as shown on the site
plan, are to be constructed by the owner when the city determines they are
needed.  The area of future parking must be sodded with grass and kept free
of shrubs or trees.  To ensure the construction of the future spaces, a
financial guarantee may be required by the city.



(‘81 Code, § A1-61)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 443, passed
5-18-89; Am. Ord. 455, passed 7-27-89; Am. Ord. 479, passed 4-12-90)



§ 155.378  OFF-STREET PARKING; DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Access and location.  Parking areas shall be designed so as
to provide an adequate means of access to a public street.  Driveway access
shall not be less than 24 feet in width, except for single- and two-family
dwellings; shall not exceed 30 feet in width and shall be located to cause
the least interference with traffic movement.  All off-street parking spaces
shall have access off driveways and not directly off a public street. 
Except for single- and two-family dwellings, the minimum driveway radius
shall be 15 feet.



   (B)   Surfacing.



      (1)   In single-family residential districts, any area
intended to be used for parking spaces, driveways, storage of motor vehicles,
or vehicle maneuvering areas shall be surfaced with concrete, asphalt or
brick pavers.



      (2)   In multi-family residential, commercial, industrial, or
institutional districts, any area intended to be used for parking spaces,
driveways, loading areas, open sales or storage lots, vehicle maneuvering,
and the like, shall be surfaced with concrete or bituminous materials.



   (C)   Lighting.  Lighting shall be accomplished in a manner as to
have no direct source of light visible from the public right-of-way or
adjacent land. Lighting shall be provided, where necessary, to aid in the
maneuvering of vehicles.



   (D)   Curbing.  All open off-street parking areas for multi-family
residential buildings of over four units, and commercial, industrial and
institutional uses shall provide a concrete curb along the perimeter of all
parking areas and parking lots.



   (E)   Marking of spaces.  Parking spaces and pedestrian ways shall
be clearly painted or clearly marked.



   (F)   Driveway location.  Driveways shall be placed in the
boulevard area in the space defined by an extension of the side lot lines to
a perpendicular intersection with the street center line.  Side lot lines
which terminate on a cul-de-sac shall be extended to the center.



   (G)   Driveway setbacks.  Driveways serving single-family detached
or duplex lots shall be located not less than 30 feet from a curb line
intersection.  Other driveways shall be located no less than 50 feet from
the curb line intersection of local or neighborhood collector streets and 100
feet on community collector or minor and principal arterial streets.



   (H)   Driveway grade.  Driveways may exceed a grade of 10% where
approved by the city.  A level area shall be provided for an automobile in
front of the garage on residential lots.



   (I)   Walkways.  Surfaced walkways shall be provided from parking
areas and recreation areas to the entrances of buildings, except for single-
and two- family dwellings.



   (J)   Landscaping.  Parking lots must be landscaped.



   (K)   Drainage.  Any driveway or parking area construction or
expansion in any zoning district shall be subject to review and approval by
the City Engineer to ensure construction is in compliance with approved
drainage plans.



   (L)   Residential driveway width.  Residential driveways installed
or modified after the date of adoption of the ordinance codified herein shall
comply with the following standards:



      (1)   Driveways with a single driveway approach shall not
exceed 40% of the width of the lot up to a maximum of 36 feet whichever
dimension is the smaller provided the driveway between the curb and
right-of-way line does not exceed 30 feet in width.



      (2)   Circular driveways with driveway approach cuts serving
the same lot shall not exceed the maximum 36 feet when the width of both
driveways are combined. 



      (3)   Any driveway approach not directly leading to an
attached or detached garage or accessory structure shall be located beside
the attached garage abutting the primary structure.



   (M)   Number of driveway approaches in residential districts.  Only
one driveway approach will be allowed from a single-family residential lot to
the same street, except that two driveway approaches to the same street may
be allowed when the lot frontage on that street is at least 120 feet.  Lots
having frontage on more than one street will be allowed driveway approaches
consistent with the standards in this chapter.



(‘81 Code, § A1-62)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 455, passed
7-27-89; Am. Ord. 479, passed 4-12-90; Am. Ord. 834, passed 2-28-08; Am. Ord.
878, passed 2-11-10)  Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.379  MINIMUM REQUIRED SPACES.



   The following minimum parking spaces shall be provided and maintained
by ownership, easement or lease, for and during the life of the respective
uses hereinafter set forth.  Where a specific requirement is not stated, the
City Council shall determine the adequacy of parking when approving a site
plan. These requirements are subject to upward or downward revisions based on
the experiences of the city:



   (A)   Single-family or two-family dwelling.  Two parking spaces for
each dwelling unit in addition to any garage space which may be provided, as
in § 155.341(B).



   (B)   Multiple dwelling (including townhouses). One and one-half
parking spaces and one garage space per unit shall generally satisfy the
parking requirements; however, upward or downward revisions may be required
at the time of site plan review based on the accessibility of the open
parking spaces to all tenants and guests of the multiple dwelling complex. 
Garage (enclosed) parking spaces shall be required in addition to the surface
spaces and shall be provided at the rate of one space per apartment unit and
two spaces per townhouse unit. Garage spaces must be either underground or
attached to the multiple-residential structure.



   (C)   Motel.  One space for each dwelling unit or lodging room plus
one additional space for each eight units.  Additional spaces shall be
required for liquor or restaurant facilities on the premises.



   (D)   Church, auditorium or undertaking establishments.  One
parking space for each 3½ seats based on the design capacity of the main
assembly hall.



   (E)   Hospital.  One and one-half parking spaces for each three
patient beds, plus one space for each two employees, plus one space for each
staff doctor.



   (F)   Rest homes, nursing homes, sanitariums or homes for the aged
and children.  One space for each four beds plus one space for each two
employees and one space for each staff doctor.



   (G)   Day nurseries.  Ten spaces, plus one space for each 500
square feet in the principal structure.



   (H)   Medical or dental clinic.  Three parking spaces for each
staff doctor practicing on the premises at any one time or one space for each
150 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater.



   (I)   Office buildings or professional offices having less than
6,000 square feet of floor area.  One parking space for each 150 square feet
of floor space.



   (J)   Office buildings or professional offices having 6,000 square
feet or more of floor area. One parking space for each 150 square feet of
floor space for the first 6,000 square feet of floor area; thence one parking
space for each 200 square feet of floor area thereafter.



   (K)   Theater.  One parking space for each three seats.



   (L)   Recreation and sports training facilities.  One space for
every three occupants, based on the maximum occupant load of the building.



   (M)   Bowling alley.  Five parking spaces for each alley, plus
additional spaces as may be required herein for related uses such as a
restaurant or liquor facility.



   (N)   Motor fuel station.  Four off-street parking spaces, plus two
off-street parking spaces for each service stall if any.



   (O)   Retail store.  One parking space for each 150 square feet of
floor area up to a total floor area of 20,000 square feet; thereafter, one
space for each 200 square feet of floor area.



   (P)   Restaurants and on-sale liquor establishments:



      (1)   Class I restaurants and other establishments with
on-sale liquor licenses.  Class I restaurants without liquor licenses and
Class III restaurants: one space per 2.5 customer seats; and one space per
five seats of outdoor eating area, excluding the first ten outdoor seats.



      (2)   Class II restaurants.  One space per three customer
seats; and six stacking spaces for each drive-in window.



      (3)   Any restaurant and on-sale liquor establishment lawfully
existing on the effective date of this division shall not be subject to the
parking requirements in this division and shall continue to be subject to one
parking space for each three seats based on capacity design.  The parking
requirements in this division shall become applicable upon any expansion or
alteration which results in more customer seating of said restaurant or
on-sale liquor establishment.



   (Q)   Banks or savings and loans.  One parking space for each 250
square feet of gross floor area, plus six stacking spaces for each drive-in
window.



   (R)   Car wash.  Five parking spaces for each washing lane, plus
one space for every two employees.



   (S)   Auto repair, major; auto sales (new); auto sales (used); boat
and marine sales; garden supply store or building material sales.  Ten
customer parking spaces, plus one additional customer space for each 800
square feet of floor area over 1,000 square feet, plus one additional space
for every two employees.



   (T)   Manufacturing, fabricating or processing of a product or
material.  At least four off-street parking spaces, plus one additional
space for each 800 square feet of building.



   (U)   Furniture store, appliance store, wholesale or warehouse (up
to 6,000 square feet in area).  One space for each 400 square feet of gross
floor area, plus one additional space for each 800 square feet of gross floor
area over 6,000 square feet.



   (V)   Veterinary clinics.  One space for each 400 square feet of
gross floor area.



(‘81 Code, § A1-63)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 455, passed
7-27-89; Am. Ord. 479, passed 4-12-90; Am. Ord. 505, passed 3-14-91; Am. Ord.
730, passed 7-10-03; Am. Ord. 861, passed 6-11-09)



§ 155.380  PARKING MOBILE HOMES FOR HABITATION.



   Manufactured homes not meeting the standards of the Uniform Building
Code, not placed on a permanent foundation and having any horizontal axis
less than 18 feet shall not be permitted to be located, for storage or
habitation, in any zoning district, except in an approved manufactured home
park, without a special permit being issued by the City Council for a period
not to exceed one year.



(‘81 Code, § A1-22)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)  Penalty, see § 155.999



§ 155.381  RESERVED.



§ 155.382  ACCESSORY UNIT DWELLING.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to permit no more than
one accessory unit dwelling (AUD) in a one-family detached dwelling (R-1
district only) by conditional use permit. The R-1 zoning district requires a
minimum lot size of 40,000 square feet which ensures that additional housing
will have less impact on neighboring properties. Because this conditional use
will be located in established one-family residential districts (single
family home neighborhoods), the installation and use of accessory unit
dwelling must be strictly controlled to avoid adverse physical, social,
economic, environmental and aesthetic impacts. By allowing only those
accessory unit dwellings that are in compliance with all of the performance
standards of this section, the character and quality of existing
neighborhoods will be protected.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ACCESSORY UNIT DWELLING ("AUD").   A subordinate habitable unit
dwelling added to or created within a one-family detached dwelling
(hereinafter PRIMARY RESIDENCE ) that provides the basic requirements of
shelter, heating, cooking and sanitation.



   (C)   Conditional use permit required. No property within a
one-family residential district shall have more than one unit dwelling,
unless a conditional use permit is first obtained from the city for an AUD.



   (D)   Performance standards. In addition to the provisions governing
conditional use permits elsewhere in this chapter, any AUD permitted by a
conditional use permit hereunder shall meet the following requirements:



      (1)   The primary residence must be located within an R-1
zoning district and have a minimum lot size of 40,000 square feet.



      (2)   A property owner, which shall include title holders and
contract purchasers, must reside in either the primary residence or the AUD
as their permanent residence. The property owner may be absent from the
property for a period not to exceed 180 consecutive days, but must reside in
the home not less than 180 consecutive days per calendar year, and during
which period the subject property continues to be the applicant's legal and
principal residence.



      (3)   An AUD may not be subdivided or otherwise segregated in
ownership from the primary residence structure.



      (4)   An AUD's total floor area shall be no more than 40% of
the primary residence's footprint and an AUD shall not be less than 300
square feet. The City Council may approve a larger floor area where the
petitioner can demonstrate that the additional size is clearly subordinate to
the principal dwelling, the exterior changes to the house do not
substantially alter its single family character and the resulting total floor
area and size of the house is consistent with the size of the homes in the
immediate neighborhood.



      (5)   The lot area coverage from the primary residence, an AUD
and all other impervious surface shall not exceed 35% of the lot or parcel
area.



      (6)   An AUD shall be designed and maintained as to be
consistent with the architectural design, style, appearance and character of
the primary residence as a single-family residence. If an AUD extends beyond
the current footprint or existing height of the main building, such an
addition must be consistent with the existing facade, roof pitch, siding and
windows.



      (7)   An AUD shall be located within or attached to the
primary residence and shall not be permitted in structures detached from the
primary residence, including, but not limited to, accessory buildings,
detached garages, or workshops.



      (8)   An AUD may be created by the conversion of living space
within the primary residence, but not by conversion of garage space unless,
thereafter, space is available for a two-car garage on the lot without the
need for a variance and the converted AUD complies with all state and city
regulations and codes.



      (9)   The total number of occupants in the AUD may not exceed
three persons. The AUD shall contain no more than two bedrooms.



      (10)   Two off-street parking spaces shall be required for the
AUD, in addition to the two off- street parking spaces required for the
primary residence. In no case shall more than four motor vehicles be parked
outside of the primary residence.



      (11)   A home with an approved AUD shall not be eligible to
obtain a permit to park additional vehicles outside of the residence in
conjunction with § 155.373(B)(1)(c).



      (12)   No more than one AUD shall be permitted on a lot or
parcel.



      (13)   An AUD shall not be permitted if three AUDs exist, as
permitted under this section, within a radius of 2,640 feet (one-half mile)
of the proposed AUD.



      (14)   Home occupations may be allowed, subject to existing
regulations, but shall only be permitted in either the AUD or the primary
residence, but not both.



      (15)   The primary entrance to the AUD shall be located in
such a manner as to be unobtrusive from the same view of the building which
encompasses the entrance to the primary residence.



      (16)   An AUD shall comply with all state laws, City Code
requirements, and building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, and fire code
regulations.



      (17)   The primary residence and AUD shall be created and
maintained in compliance with the property maintenance regulations set forth
in the City Code.



      (18)   The primary residence and AUD shall be connected to
municipal sewer and water.



      (19)   In order to encourage the development of housing units
for people with disabilities, the city may allow reasonable deviation from
the City Code provisions to install features that facilitate accessibility.
Such facilities shall be in conformance with the UBC.



      (20)   AUDs shall be permitted only where it is demonstrated
that the accessory unit will not have an undue adverse impact on adjacent
properties and where there will not be a substantial alteration of the
character of the neighborhood.



      (21)   An additional garage may be constructed, provided only
one garage is visible from the public street and complies with all state and
city laws and regulations.



(Ord. 729, passed 6-26-03)



§ 155.383  OUTDOOR DINING AREAS.



   Purpose.  Outdoor dining areas are permitted accessory uses in
conjunction with a Class I, Class II, or Class III restaurant provided that
the following requirements are met:



   (A)   Site plan review required. The use and proposed site plan
shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and City Council, pursuant to §
155.402(B).



   (B)   Performance standards.



      (1)   No portion of the outdoor dining area shall be located
or occur within any public right-of-way, including sidewalks/trails,
boulevard areas or streets.



      (2)   No portion of the outdoor dining area shall be located
or occur closer than two feet from any property line.



      (3)   If the outdoor dining area is proposed to be within a
city drainage and utility easement, then the property owner shall be required
to execute a license agreement prepared by the City Attorney authorizing the
use of the city’s easement.



      (4)   The City Council may restrict days, hours, nature and
volume, and other aspects of entertainment in any outdoor dining area,
including a prohibition against all forms of music, radio, television, and
other entertainment, to protect the safety, repose, and welfare of residents,
businesses and other uses near the establishment.



      (5)   The outdoor dining area shall be handicap accessible and
not restrict accessibility in other areas inside or outside the restaurant or
food establishment.



      (6)   If the outdoor dining area is located on a private
sidewalk area abutting the restaurant building or within a parking area for
the building, then the outdoor dining area shall not interfere with any
pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the site.  A minimum five-foot wide area
of sidewalk shall remain clear for pedestrian travel.



      (7)   The outdoor dining area shall be subordinate to the
principal restaurant building and shall not exceed 40% in area of the square
footage of the principal restaurant building.



      (8)   The outdoor dining area shall be kept in a clean and
orderly manner.  No food or beverages may be stored outdoors, unless a
suitable means for such storage has been reviewed and approved by the city.



      (9)   The City Council may restrict the hours of operation of
an outdoor dining area based upon the proximity of the area to residential
dwelling units, and upon considerations relating to the safety, repose, and
welfare of residents, businesses, and other uses near the establishment.



      (10)   A fence surrounding an outdoor dining area shall be
suitable for the intended use.  If a fence is required, a fencing plan shall
be submitted with the site plan for the outdoor dining area for review and
approval by the city.



      (11)   The outdoor dining area must conform to all fire and
building codes related to the number and types of exits that are required.



      (12)   The Planning Commission or City Council may require the
notification of property owners if the outdoor dining area is located closer
than 600 feet from residential properties.



      (13)   The parking regulations related to minimum required
spaces as set forth in this chapter shall apply and compliance met.



      (14)   The maximum impervious surface requirements set forth
in this chapter shall apply and compliance met.



(Ord. 794, passed 8-24-06)



WIRELESS COMMUNICATION TOWERS



§ 155.385  TOWERS AND ANTENNAS SITE DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Co-location requirements.  All personal wireless
communication towers erected, constructed,or located within the city shall
comply with the following requirement:



      (1)   A proposal for a new personal wireless communication
service tower shall not be approved unless it can be documented by the
applicant that the communications equipment planned for the proposed tower
cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or building within a
one-half mile radius of the proposed tower due to one or more of the
following reasons:



         (a)   The planned equipment would exceed the structural
capacity of the existing or approved tower or building, as documented by a
qualified and licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved
tower cannot be reinforced or modified to accommodate planned equipment at a
reasonable cost;



         (b)   The planned equipment would cause interference
with other existing or planned equipment at the tower or building as
documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer, and the
interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost;



         (c)   No existing or approved towers or
commercial/industrial buildings within a half-mile radius meet the radio
frequency (RF) design criteria;



         (d)   Existing or approved towers and
commercial/industrial buildings within a one-half mile radius cannot
accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function
reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed professional radio
frequency (RF) engineer; and/or



         (e)   The applicant must demonstrate that a good faith
effort to co-locate on existing towers and structures within a one half mile
radius was made, but an agreement could not be reached.



   (B)   Tower construction requirements.  All towers erected,
constructed, or located within the city, and all wiring therefor, shall
comply with the following requirements:



      (1)   Monopoles using stealth technology are the preferred
tower design.  However, the city will consider alternative tower types in
cases where structure (RF) design considerations, and/or the number of
tenants required by the city preclude the use of a monopole.



      (2)   Towers and their antennas shall comply with all
applicable provisions of this code.



      (3)   Towers and their antennas shall be certified by a
qualified and licensed professional engineer to conform to the latest
structural standards of the Minnesota Building Code as adopted by the city
and all other applicable reviewing agencies.



      (4)   Towers and their antennas shall be designed to conform
to accepted electrical engineering methods and practices and to comply with
the provisions of the National Electrical Code.



      (5)   Metal towers shall be constructed of, or treated with,
corrosive resistant material.



      (6)   Any proposed communication service tower shall be
designed, structurally, electrically, and all other respects to accommodate
both the applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for at least one
additional user.  To allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the
tower, the tower shall be designed to accept antennas mounted at no less than
10-foot intervals.



      (7)   All towers shall be reasonably protected against
unauthorized climbing.  The bottom of the tower (measured from ground level
to 12 feet above ground level) shall be designed in a manner to preclude
unauthorized climbing and be enclosed by a six-foot high maintenance-free
fence with a locked gate as approved by the city.



      (8)   All towers and their antennas shall utilize building
materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that effectively blend
the tower facilities within the surrounding natural setting and built
environment to the greatest extent possible as determined by the city.



      (9)   No advertising or identification of any kind intended to
be visible from the ground or other structures is permitted, except
applicable warning and equipment information signage required by the
manufacturer or by federal, state, or local authorities.



      (10)   Towers and their antennas shall not be illuminated by
artificial means, except for camouflage purposes (e.g., designed as a lighted
tower for a parking lot or a ball field) or the illumination is specifically
required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other authority.



      (11)   No part of any antenna or tower, nor any lines, cable,
equipment, wires, or braces shall at any time extend across or over any part
of the right-of-way, public street, highway, or sidewalk, without approval by
the city through the building permit approval process.



      (12)   All communication towers and their antennas shall be
adequately insured for injury and property damage caused by collapse of the
tower.



      (13)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the City
Council.  After the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to
its original or an improved state.



      (14)   In addition to the submittal requirements required
elsewhere in this code, applications for building permits for towers and
their antennas shall be accompanied by the following information:



      (a)   Written statements from the Federal Aviation
Administration, Federal Communications Commission, and any appropriate state
review authority stating that the proposed tower complies with regulations
administered by that agency or that the tower is exempt from those
regulations;



         (b)   A report from a qualified and licensed
professional engineer which does the following:  describes the tower height
and design including a cross section and elevation; demonstrates the tower's
compliance with the aforementioned structural and electrical standards;
documents the height above grade for all potential mounting positions for
co-located antennas and the minimum separation distances between antennas;
describes the tower's capacity, including the number and type of antennas
that it can accommodate; and documents what steps the applicant will take to
avoid interference with established public safety communications; and



         (c)   A letter of intent committing the tower owner and
his or her successors to allow the shared use of the tower, as long as there
is no negative structural impact upon the tower, and there is no disruption
to the service provided.



   (C)   Antennas mounted on roofs, walls and existing towers.  The
placement of wireless communication antennas on roofs, walls, and existing
towers may be permitted on public facilities, industrial buildings, and other
commercial buildings with a building permit approved by the appropriate city
staff.  In addition to the submittal requirements required elsewhere in this
Code, an application for a building permit for antennas to be mounted on an
existing structure shall be accompanied by the following information:



      (1)   A site plan showing the location of the proposed
antennas on the structure and documenting that the request meets the
requirements of this Code.



      (2)   A building plan showing the construction of the
antennas, the proposed method of attaching them to the existing structure,
and documenting that the request meets the requirements of this Code.



      (3)   A report prepared by a qualified and licensed
professional engineer indicating the existing structure or tower's ability to
support the antennas.



      (4)   An intermodulation study to ensure there will be no
interference with existing tenants or public safety telecommunication
providers.



   (D)   Obsolete or unused towers.  All obsolete or unused towers and
accompanying accessory facilities shall be removed within 12 months of the
cessation of operations unless a time extension is approved by the council. 
If a time extension is not approved, the tower may be deemed a nuisance
pursuant to M.S. Ch. 429.  In the event a tower is determined to be a
nuisance, the city may act to abate such nuisance and require the removal of
the tower at the property owner's expense.  The owner shall provide the city
with a copy of the notice of the Federal Communication Commission's intent to
cease operations and shall be given 12 months from the date of ceasing
operations to remove the obsolete tower and all accessory structures.  In
the case of multiple operators sharing the use of a single tower, this
provision shall not become effective until all users cease operations for a
period of 12 consecutive months.  The equipment on the ground is not to be
removed until the tower structure has first been dismantled.  After the
facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or to an
improved state.



   (E)   Tower standards and requirements. 



 


Zoning District

 
Maximum Height
 
Distance from Structure (feet)
 
Setback from Property Line


R-1, R-2, R-3, R-5
 
150
 
300 from residential
 
1.5 x fall zone


M-1 - M-8
 
150
 
300 from residential
 
1.5 x fall zone


LB, RB, BP, P
 
200
 
2 x fall zone  from structures on neighboring properties
 
1.5 x fall zone


GB, I-1, I-2
 
250
 
2 x fall zone  from structures on neighboring properties
 
1.5 x fall zone



 



      (1)   For purposes of this division, the term FALL ZONE shall
mean either:



         (a)   If the tower is constructed with an engineered
breakpoint design, then the measured distance from ground level to the lowest
engineered breakpoint in the tower or from the top of the tower to the lowest
engineered breakpoint in the tower whichever is the greater distance, but in
no case shall the fall zone be less than the distance equal to 50% the height
of the tower and provided the applicant complies with the breakpoint design
requirements set forth herein; or



         (b)   The height of the tower if the tower is not
constructed with an engineered breakpoint design or the applicant fails to
comply with the breakpoint design requirements.



In measuring the height of the tower or fall zone, all appurtenances located
or intended to be located at the top of the tower, such as antennae,
satellite dishes, lighting or illumination structures required by law or
other equipment, shall be included.



      (2)   Breakpoint design requirements are:



         (a)   The tower shall be constructed using breakpoint
design technology, whereby a specified point on the tower is designed to have
stresses concentrated so that the point is more susceptible to structural
failure than any other part of the tower so as to prevent structural failure
at the base or any other part of the tower and the tower structure below the
lowest engineered breakpoint shall be designed at 1.25 times the design
requirements set forth in the Telecommunications Industry Association
Standards ANSI/TIA 222 and Minnesota State Building Code, whichever is more
restrictive; and



         (b)   The applicant submits to the city with the
conditional use permit application a written statement from a Minnesota
licensed structural engineer certifying:



               1.   That the design of the tower consists
of breakpoint design technology and



               2.   The point of the tower (elevation
height) at which the breakpoint is located; and



         (c)   If the tower is designed with one engineered
breakpoint, the breakpoint shall not be located at a point in the tower that
is less than 50% of the height of the tower, including any permanent base
platform and any appurtenances located or intended to be located at the top
of the tower.



   (F)   Transmitting, receiving, switching equipment and other ground
equipment shall be housed within an existing structure whenever possible. 
If a new equipment building is necessary for transmitting, receiving, and
switching equipment, it shall be situated in the rear yard of the principal
use and shall be properly screened in accordance with the requirements of
this section.



   (G)   Small wireless facilities.



      (1)   The placement of small wireless facilities may be
permitted on property on which communication towers are permitted.  Small
wireless facilities placed within a public right-of-way shall be subject to
the public right-of-way management regulations elsewhere in this code. 



      (2)   Small wireless facilities placed within a public
right-of-way within or abutting a property zoned for residential or
historical uses is not allowed except by conditional use permit subject to
the conditional use general conditions set forth in this chapter and the
following conditions:



         (a)   Height of all facilities shall not exceed the
average height of all structures on the block or the maximum height of
structures allowed in the district, whichever is less.



         (b)   All facilities shall be located in the public
right-of-way within the area defined by the side yard drainage and utility
easement area.  If an area does not have drainage and utility easements,
then the facilities shall be within five feet of a side property line.



         (c)   All facilities within the public right-of-way
abutting the front or rear lot line of a property shall be located closest to
the property line, furthest from the road centerline as possible, but no
further back from the curb or any sidewalk or trail than ten feet.



         (d)   All facilities shall be located as near as
practicable to intersections.



         (e)   All facilities shall be located to the extent
practicable on existing poles and other structures currently in the
right-of-way.



         (f)   Other conditions unique to the proposed placement
of facilities in the right-of-way may be attached to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of neighboring properties, other users of the
right-of-way, and the public.



(Ord. 760, passed 10-14-04; Am. Ord. 796, passed 9-28-06; Am. Ord. 891,
passed 8-26-10; Am. Ord. 1039, passed 2-8-18)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 155.395  ZONING ADMINISTRATOR; APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for enforcing
the special provisions contained herein and no building permit or certificate
of occupancy shall be approved unless the Zoning Administrator shall first
determine that the proposed use or addition will conform to these special
provisions. 



(‘81 Code, § A1-52)



   (B)   (1)   The Council shall designate a Zoning Administrator
who shall be primarily responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.



      (2)   The enforcing officer shall enforce this chapter and, in
furtherance of the authority, may:



         (a)   Enter upon the land or within a building during
reasonable working hours as found necessary to fulfill his or her duties as
Administrator of this chapter;



         (b)   Conduct inspections of buildings and use of land
to determine compliance with the terms of this chapter;



         (c)   Maintain permanent and current records of this
chapter including, but not limited to, maps, amendments and conditional uses,
variances, appeals, nonconforming uses, certificates of occupancy and
applications thereto;



         (d)   Institute, in the name of the city, appropriate
actions or proceedings against a violator as provided by law; and



         (e)   Establish and enforce necessary or desirable
regulations, in writing, clarifying or explaining any provision of this
chapter.



(‘81 Code, § A1-69)



(Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.396  BOARD OF APPEALS AND ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   Members.  The Board of Appeals and Adjustments for the city
shall consist of the individual members of the city’s Planning Commission.



   (B)   Functions.  Functions of the Board of Appeals and Adjustments:



      (1)   The Board shall make written recommendations to the City
Council on petitions received under this chapter within 90 days after having
been filed with the city;



      (2)   The Board shall have the duty of hearing all appeals
where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement,
decision or determination by the Zoning Administrator under this chapter or
any determination by the Zoning Administrator as to the location of the
boundary of a zoning district as shown on the zoning map; and



      (3)   The Board shall also have the duty of hearing requests
for variances from the literal provisions of this chapter as provided under
§ 155.397(B).



   (C)   Procedures and organization.



      (1)   The Board may establish its own rules of procedure which
shall not be inconsistent with or contrary to the statutes of the state or
the ordinances of the city.



      (2)   The Board shall keep written records of its minutes and
the findings and determinations made by it on all matters.



      (3)   Petitions or appeals shall be made on forms pertaining
thereto provided by the city.



      (4)   All findings and determinations of the board shall be
advisory to the Council and shall have no binding effect.  The City Council
may take action on the findings and recommendations of the Board as it deems
proper under the circumstances.  All final actions shall be by a majority
vote of a quorum of the City Council.



(‘81 Code, § A1-70)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.397  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Request for a variance, conditional use permit or rezoning. 
A request for a variance, conditional use permit or rezoning which has been
acted upon may not be requested again until a period of 12 months has passed,
unless the applicant can show to the satisfaction of the City Council that
the conditions which were present when the earlier request was filed, have
changed or that the request is substantially different.



(‘81 Code, § A1-20)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



   (B)   Variances.



      (1)   Purpose and scope of application.  The City Council may
grant variances from the strict application of the provisions of this
chapter, and impose conditions and safeguards in the variances so granted,
where practical difficulties result from carrying out the strict letter of
the regulations of this chapter.  PRACTICAL DIFFICULTIES, as used in
connection with the granting of a variance, mean that the applicant proposes
to use the property in a reasonable manner not permitted by the zoning
provisions of this Code; the plight of the applicant is due to circumstances
unique to the property not created by the applicant; and the variance, if
granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality.  Economic
considerations alone do not constitute PRACTICAL DIFFICULTIES.



      (2)   Petition.  A petition for a variance shall be filed
with the city and shall state the exceptional conditions and the peculiar and
practical difficulties claimed as a basis for a variance.  The petition
shall also include the name and address of each affected property owner of
directly abutting property along the side of the property under consideration.



      (3)   Referral to the Board.  Before authorization of any
variance, the request shall be referred to the Board of Appeals and
Adjustments for study concerning the effect of the proposed variance upon the
comprehensive guide plan and on the character and development of the
neighborhood, and for its recommendation to the Council in connection with
the request.  The Board shall make its recommendation within 30 days after
the request is referred to it, and after that time, the City Council may act
without the recommendation.  The Board may recommend the conditions related
to the variance regarding the location, character and other features of the
proposed building, structure or use as it may deem advisable.  Any condition
recommended must be directly related to, and must bear a rough
proportionality to the impact created by the variance.



      (4)   Action on request.



         (a)   The Board of Appeals and Adjustments may hold a
public hearing on the variance request if it deems it necessary or advisable.
The procedures for the notice and public hearing shall be the same as that
described in § 155.400, except that the public hearing shall be held by the
Board.



         (b)   The Board may recommend to the City Council and
the City Council may grant approval, approval with conditions, or denial of
the request.  In considering a request for a variance and whether the
applicant established that there are practical difficulties in complying with
provision(s) of this chapter, the Board and City Council shall consider the
following factors:



            (i)   Special conditions apply to the structures
or land in question that are particular to the property and do not apply
generally to other land or structures in the district or vicinity in which
the land is located;



            (ii)   The granting of the proposed variance will
not be contrary to the intent of this chapter;



            (iii)   The special conditions or circumstances do
not result from the actions of the owner/applicant;



            (iv)   The granting of the variance will not
merely serve as a convenience to the applicant, but is necessary to alleviate
practical difficulties in complying with the zoning provisions of this Code;
and



            (v)   The variance requested is the minimum
variance necessary to alleviate the practical difficulty.



         (c)   The Council may grant the variance and impose
certain conditions and safeguards therein that are directly related to and
bear a rough proportionality to the impact created by the variance.  The
variance, however, may not be granted for a use that is otherwise not allowed
in a particular zoning district, that is inconsistent with the comprehensive
guide plan, or that is not in harmony with the general purpose and intent of
the zoning provisions of this chapter.



      (5)   Referral back to the Board.  The City Council may refer
any variance petition back to the Board of Appeals and Adjustments for
further review and recommendation.



      (6)   Denial.  Variances may be denied by the City Council
and the denial shall constitute a finding and determination that the
conditions required for approval did not exist.



      (7)   Lapse of variance.  A variance shall become void one
year after it has been granted unless made use of within the year or a longer
period as the Council may provide.



(‘81 Code, § A1-71)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 920, passed
6-23-11)



§ 155.398  BUILDING PERMIT; CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   No structure shall hereafter be erected or structurally altered until a
building permit is issued by the city, except for farm buildings and
dwellings as exempted by the Minnesota State Building Code. No structure,
except one- or two-family dwellings shall hereafter be occupied after
construction until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the city.



(‘81 Code, § A1-15)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.399  CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.



   (A)   Purpose. 



      (1)   In order to give the district use regulations of this
chapter the flexibility necessary to achieve the objectives of the
comprehensive guide plan in certain districts, conditional uses are permitted
subject to the granting of a use permit.  Conditional uses include those
uses generally not suitable in a particular zoning district, but which may,
under some circumstances, be suitable.  When the circumstances exist, a
conditional use permit may be granted.



      (2)   Conditions may be applied to issuance of a permit and a
periodic review of the permit may be required.  The permit shall be issued
for a particular use and not for a particular person or firm. The applicant
shall have the burden of proof that the use is suitable and that the
standards set forth in this section have been met.



   (B)   Petition, public hearing, notice and procedure.  Except as
otherwise noted and provided under this section, the petition, public
hearing, public notice and procedural requirements for conditional use
permits shall be the same as those for zoning chapter amendments provided in
§ 155.400.



   (C)   Action by the City Council.  The City Council may grant a
conditional use permit, as the use permit was applied for or in modified
form, if it is determined that the proposed location of the conditional use
is in accord with the objectives of the comprehensive guide plan and the
purposes of the district in which the site is located and would not be
materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity.  The
City Council may grant a conditional use permit only by an affirmative vote
of a majority of a quorum of the City Council.



   (D)   Standards.  The Planning Commission shall recommend a
conditional use permit and the Council may issue conditional use permits if
it finds that the use at the proposed location:



      (1)   Will not be detrimental to or endanger the public
health, safety, or general welfare of the neighborhood or the city.



      (2)   Will be harmonious with the general and applicable
specific objectives of the comprehensive plan and code provisions.



      (3)   Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained
so as to be compatible or similar in an architectural and landscape
appearance with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity
and will not change the essential character of that area, nor substantially
diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood.



      (4)   Will be served adequately by existing (or those proposed
in the project) essential public facilities and services, including streets,
police and fire protection, drainage, structures, refuse disposal, water and
sewer systems and schools.



      (5)   Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials,
equipment and conditions of operation that will be hazardous or detrimental
to any persons, property or the general welfare because of excessive
production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare or odors.



      (6)   Will have vehicular ingress and egress to the property
which does not create traffic congestion or interfere with traffic on
surrounding public streets.



      (7)   Will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of a
natural, scenic or historic feature of major importance.



      (8)   These standards apply in addition to specific conditions
as may be applied throughout the code.



   (E)   Conditions.  In reviewing applications of conditional use
permits, the Planning Commission and the Council may attach whatever
reasonable conditions they deem necessary to mitigate anticipated adverse
impacts associated with these uses, to protect the value of other property
within the district, and to achieve the goals and objectives of the
comprehensive plan.  In all cases in which conditional uses are granted, the
Council shall require evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as
proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and
will be complied with.



   (F)   Denial for noncompliance.  If the Planning Commission
recommends denial of a conditional use permit or the Council orders the
denial, it shall include in its recommendation or determination findings as
to the manner in which the proposed use does not comply with the standards
required by this section.



   (G)   Periodic review, term of permit.  A periodic review of the
use may be attached as a condition of approval of a conditional use permit. 
Unless otherwise stipulated, the term shall be the life of the use.



   (H)   Lapse of conditional use permit by non-use. Whenever within
one year after granting a conditional use permit, the use as allowed by the
permit shall not have been completed or utilized, then the permit shall
become null and void unless a petition for an extension of time in which to
complete or utilize the use that has been granted by the City Council.  The
extension shall be requested in writing and filed with the Zoning
Administrator at least 30 days before the expiration of the original
conditional use permit. There shall be no charge for the filing of the
petition.  The request for extension shall state facts showing a good faith
attempt to complete or utilize the use permitted in the conditional use
permit.  The petition shall be presented to the Planning Commission for a
recommendation and to the City Council for decision.



   (I)   Enforcement and revocation.  Failure to comply with any
condition set forth in a conditional use permit, or any other violation of
this section, shall constitute sufficient cause for termination of the
conditional use permit by the City Council following a public hearing. 
Written notification of the public hearing shall be mailed at least ten days
prior to the hearing to the current holder of the conditional use permit. 
The notice should outline the violation(s) considered by the city to be
grounds for revocation and inform the current holder of the conditional use
permit of the opportunity to be heard at the public hearing.  In addition to
other remedies provided in this code or at law, failure to comply with any
condition set forth in a conditional use permit, or any other violation of
this section, shall be a misdemeanor.



(‘81 Code, § A1-72)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 512, passed
5-9-91)



§ 155.400  ZONING AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to prescribe the
procedure and requirements for any change to the zoning classification or
zoning boundaries of a property or any amendment to any provision of this
chapter.



   (B)   Initiation.  Proceedings for amendment of the chapter shall
be initiated by:



      (1)   A petition of the owner or owners of the property which
is to be rezoned;



      (2)   By action of the Planning Commission; and



      (3)   By action of the City Council.



   (C)   Petitions.  All petitions for amendments which are initiated
by the owner or owners of the property shall be filed with the City Clerk
and, if the application involves the changing of zoning districts and
boundaries thereof, the application shall be accompanied by an abstractor’s
certified property certificate showing the property owners within 350 feet of
the outer boundaries of the property in question.  The petition shall be
forwarded to the Planning Commission by the City Administrator.



   (D)   Public hearing, notice and procedure.  The Planning
Commission shall hold at least one public hearing, affording the parties
interested the opportunity to be heard, and shall give not less than ten
days’ notice of the time and place of the hearing, published in the
designated legal newspaper for the city.  The notice shall also include the
description of the land and the proposed changes in zoning.  At least ten
days before the hearing, the City Clerk shall mail an identical notice to the
owners of the property and to each of the property owners within 350 feet of
the outside boundaries of the land proposed to be rezoned.  Failure to give
mailed notice to individual property owners or defects in the notice shall
not invalidate the proceeding provided a bona fide attempt to comply with
this requirement has been made.  The City Council may waive the above mailed
notice requirement in connection with a citywide zoning or amendment to the
text of this chapter initiated by the Planning Commission or the City Council.



   (E)   Referral to Planning Commission.  The City Council shall not
rezone any land or area in any zoning district or make any other proposed
amendment to this chapter without first having referred it to the Planning
Commission for its consideration and recommendation.



   (F)   Maps or descriptions included.  Petitions for rezoning shall
include a detailed map and legal description clearly indicating the land or
area to be rezoned.



   (G)   Council action; time limits.  If the Planning Commission
fails to make a report within 30 days after the close of the hearing, the
City Council may act without the recommendation. The Council may grant the
petition, in whole or in part, or it may continue the petition, from time to
time, for further investigation and hearing.  The Council may also request
further information and report from the Planning Commission. The City Council
may adopt a zoning regulation, amend a zoning regulation herein, or change
the zoning classification or zoning boundaries of a property by a majority
vote of all its members, except any change to all or part of an existing
classification of a zoning district from residential to either commercial or
industrial requires a two-thirds majority vote of all members of the Council.



(‘81 Code, § A1-73)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 965, passed
5-8-14)



§ 155.401  INTERIM USE PERMITS.



   (A)   (1)   Purpose.  An interim use permit may be issued for a
temporary use of property until a particular date, until the occurrence of a
particular event or until zoning regulations no longer permit it.



      (2)   Conditions.  The Council may issue interim use permits
for an interim use of property if:



         (a)   The use is deemed to be temporary in light of the
comprehensive guide plan designation for the property site on which the use
is proposed to be located and the use conforms to the zoning regulations
herein;



         (b)   The date or event that will terminate the use can
be identified with certainty;



         (c)   Permission of the use will not impose additional
costs on the public if it is necessary for the public to take the property in
the future;



         (d)   The user agrees to any conditions that the Council
deems appropriate for permission of the use; and



         (e)   The use meets the standards set forth in the
zoning regulations herein governing conditional use permits.



      (3)   Termination.  Any interim use permitted shall terminate
upon the effective date of any amendment to this section that results in the
interim use being no longer permitted.



      (4)   Revocation.  All interim use permits shall be subject
to an annual administrative review. The purpose of the review shall be to
determine that the conditions of a permit issued hereunder are within
compliance.  Any interim use permit may be revoked for failure to comply
with any condition of the permit following notice of the noncompliance and a
hearing by the City Council with all interested parties being given an
opportunity to be heard.



      (5)   Public hearing required.  Public hearings on the
granting of interim use permits shall be required and shall be held in
accordance with § 155.400 of this chapter and, in all manner, conform with
M.S. § 462.357, subd. 3.



(‘81 Code, § A1-23)



   (B)   (1)   Petitions for permits as described in division (A)
above shall be filed with the City Clerk in accordance with § 155.400.  The
petition shall include a clear and complete description of the proposal,
including a dimensioned site plan illustrating the location on the property
where the interim use is proposed to occur.



      (2)   The City Council shall review petitions for special
permits at its next meeting.  Approvals by the City Council may include
special conditions related thereto including a time limit not to exceed one
year.



(‘81 Code, § A1-74)



(Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 644, passed 3-12-98)



§ 155.402  BUILDING PERMIT REVIEWS.



   (A)   (1)   Building permits for any principal structure(s) shall
not be issued by the city for any structures, except one- and two-family
dwellings on platted property and except for alterations or repairs, until
the building, site and landscape plans related thereto shall have been
reviewed by the Planning Commission and the plans shall have been approved by
the City Council.



      (2) The review and approval by the City Council shall be valid
for a period of one year, wherein, if a building permit has not been issued,
the approval shall be null and void.



(‘81 Code, § A1-24)



   (B)   (1)   In order to ensure compliance with the intent and
purpose of this chapter and compatibility with adjacent uses, the City
Council shall review and approve all building permits for commercial,
industrial, public and multiple-residential buildings before the same is
finally issued by the City Building Inspector.



      (2)   Petition.  In addition to completing the application
for a building permit, the petitioner shall provide the following information:



         (a)   A landscape plan as required under § 155.349;



         (b)   Building plans including scaled elevation plans;



         (c)   A detailed and dimensioned site plan;



         (d)   Drainage and utility plans;



         (e)   Building material sample(s); and



         (f)   Building massing model of proposed building, site,
paving, topography and surrounding structures.  Vertical and horizontal
scales shall be 1 inch equals 50 feet.



      (3)   Procedure.



         (a)   All information shall be submitted to the city
staff and the Planning Commission for review and recommendation to the City
Council.



         (b)   The City Council shall take the final action.



(‘81 Code, § A1-75)



(Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed 2-23-89)



§ 155.403  PETITION FORMS.



   The city shall provide the necessary petition forms for all petitions
required under this chapter.



(‘81 Code, § A1-76)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ 155.404  FEES AND ESCROWS.



   (A)   The required fees paid for each petition required under this
chapter shall be as specified in the appendix to Chapter 35.  Where the fees
do not cover costs incurred by the city in reviewing, investigating,
administering and processing of the petition, the petitioner shall be
required to pay additional fees upon receipt of an itemized invoice from the
city.



   (B)   Any costs incurred by the city for any legal services rendered
by its attorneys in connection with any zoning project under this chapter
shall be paid by the petitioner.



   (C)   When the city determined that a project will necessitate the
outside review or involvement of its consultants that it will incur costs in
excess of $250, a non-interest bearing cash escrow may be required.  An
escrow account shall be established in accordance with the appendix to
Chapter 35.



(‘81 Code, § A1-77)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 317, passed
4-12-84; Am. Ord. 480, passed 4-12-90; Am. Ord. 534, passed 2-13-92)



TEMPORARY FAMILY HEALTH CARE DWELLINGS



§ 155.500  OPT-OUT OF TEMPORARY FAMILY HEALTH CARE DWELLING ZONING LAWS.



   (A)   Purpose. On May 12, 2016, Governor Mark Dayton signed into law
the creation and zoning regulations of temporary family health care
dwellings, as defined in and codified as M.S. § 462.3593 (Laws 2016, Chapter
111, § 3). This new law provides that a municipality may, by ordinance,
“opt-out” of the application of the requirements of this new law.
Pursuant to authority granted by M.S. § 462.3593, subd. 9, it is in the best
interest of the city and its residents that the city not be subject to the
mandates of M.S. §4 62.3593 requiring temporary dwellings be allowed in
residential districts.



   (B)   Exercise of opt-out. The city opts-out of the application of
the requirements of Laws 2016, Chapter 111, § 3, codified at M.S. §
462.3593, and accordingly the provisions therein shall not apply within the
city.



(Ord. 1013, passed 7-28-16)



§ 155.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of §§ 155.285 through
155.293 or any permit issued therefrom, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the penalty prescribed in § 10.99 and/or shall be
subject to revocation of all pertinent permits. 



   (B)   Violations of conditions stipulated in a sand gravel mining
conditional use permit shall be considered as violations of the code and are
subject to the penalty prescribed in § 10.99.



(‘81 Code, § A1-48)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 472, passed
1-25-90)



APPENDIX A:  REQUIREMENTS FOR AGRICULTURAL AND SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICTS



   Agriculture and residential districts shall have the following lot
area, height, frontage and yard requirements.  The dimensions are measured
in feet, unless directly stated otherwise.



 



 
Setback Requirements
 


Symbol
 
Use District
 

Lot Area

 

Lot Width (in feet)

 

Front Yard Setback (in feet)

 

Side Yard Setback Interior Lot (in feet)

 

Side Yard Setback Corner Lot
(in feet)

 

Rear Yard Setback
(in feet)

 

Maximum Height
(in feet)

 

Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage (percent of lot area)




A*

 

Agricultural

 

5 acres

 

150

 

30

 

20

 

30

 

50

 

—

 

35%




R-1*

 

One-family residential

 

40,000 sq. ft.

 

150

 

30

 

20

 

30

 

30

 

35

 

35%




R-2*

 

One-family residential

 

18,000 sq. ft.

 

100

 

30

 

10

 

30

 

30

 

35

 

35%




R-3*

 

One-family residential

 

Interior lot 11,000 sq. ft

 

80

 

30

 

Dwelling Unit 10



Garage 5

 

—

 

30

 

35

 

35%





 


 

Corner lot



12,500 0 sq. ft.

 

90

 

30

 

—

 

Street side 20 Interior side same as interior lot setbacks

 

30

 

35

 

35%




RCL**

 

—

 

—

 

—

 

—

 

—

 

—

 

—

 

—

 

—




R-5*

 

Two-family residential

 

15,000 sq. ft. (7,500 per unit)

 

100 (50 per unit)

 

30

 

Dwelling Unit 10



Garage 7.5

 

30

 

30

 

35

 

35%





 



* - Without municipal sewer, the minimum lot size shall be 10 acres and
minimum lot width 200 feet.



** - Where not specifically addressed in the applicable subdivision
agreement, R-3 requirements shall prevail for RCL districts.



(‘81 Code, § A1-32)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 465, passed
10-26-89; Am. Ord. 760, passed 10-14-04)



APPENDIX B:  REQUIREMENTS FOR MULTIPLE-FAMILY DISTRICTS



   (A)   Units per acre.  In the multiple-family residential
districts, all improvements and lands shall be subject to the following
minimum area and dimensional requirements.



 



 
One or Two Story
 
Three Story


District
 
Square Feet of Land Per Unit
 
Maximum Units Per Acre
 
Minimum Units Per Acre
 
Square Feet of Land Per Unit
 
Maximum Units Per Acre
 
Minimum Units Per Acre




M-1 A, B or C
 
14,530
 
3
 
3
 
—
 
—
 
—


  (With bonus)
 
(10,890)
 
(4)
 
(3)
 
—
 
—
 
—


M-2 A, B or C
 
12,445
 
3.5
 
3
 
—
 
—
 
—


  (With bonus)
 
(8,710)
 
(5)
 
(3)
 
—
 
—
 
—


M-3 A, B or C
 
10,890
 
4
 
3
 
—
 
—
 
—


  (With bonus)
 
(7,260)
 
(6)
 
(3)
 
—
 
—
 
—


M-4 A, B or C
 
7,260
 
6
 
6
 
—
 
—
 
—


  (With bonus)
 
(5,455)
 
(8)
 
(6)
 
—
 
—
 
—


M-5 A, B or C
 
7,260
 
6
 
6
 
5,445
 
8
 
6


  (With bonus)
 
(5,445)
 
(8)
 
(6)
 
(4,335)
 
(10)
 
(8)


M-6 A, B or C
 
5,810
 
7.5
 
6
 
4,335
 
10
 
8


  (With bonus)
 
(4,335)
 
(10)
 
(6)
 
(3,630)
 
(12)
 
(10)


M-7 A, B or C
 
3,630
 
12
 
12
 
2,720
 
16
 
12


  (With bonus)
 
(3,110)
 
(14)
 
(12)
 
(2,180)
 
(20)
 
(12)


M-8 A, B or C
 
3,630
 
12
 
12
 
2,180
 
20
 
15


  (With bonus)
 
(2,970)
 
(15)
 
(12)
 
(1,815)
 
(24)
 
(15)


NOTES TO TABLE

  * - Additional density allowed as a conditional use.  See § 155.078.




 



(‘81 Code, § A1-33)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 465, passed 10-26-89)



   (B)   Height regulations and coverage percentage.  In the
multiple-family residential districts, all improvements and buildings shall
be subject to the following height requirements and building site coverage.



 




Zoning District

 
Maximum Number of Stories
 
Maximum Feet Above Ground
 
Maximum Building Coverage (in percentage)


M-1 A, B or C
 
2
 
30
 
15


M-2 A, B or C
 
2
 
30
 
20


M-3 A, B or C
 
2
 
35
 
25


M-4 A, B or C
 
2
 
35
 
25


M-5 A, B or C
 
3
 
45
 
25


M-6 A, B or C
 
3
 
45
 
25


M-7 A, B or C
 
3
 
45
 
30


M-8 A, B or C
 
5
 
65
 
35




 



(‘81 Code, § A1-33)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 465, passed 10-26-89)



   (C)   Setback requirements.  The minimum setbacks from adjacent
property and public streets shall be as follows, measured in feet.



 





 
Multiple Residential Buildings
 
Parking Lots
 
Garages; Accessory Buildings


 
 
A
 
B
 
C
 
A
 
B
 
C
 
A
 
B
 
C


Along principal or minor arterial
 
100
 
75
 
50
 
25
 
20
 
20
 
75
 
50
 
50


Along community or neighborhood collector
 
75
 
50
 
40
 
25
 
20
 
20
 
50
 
50
 
40


Along any other public street
 
50
 
40
 
35
 
20
 
20
 
15
 
40
 
35
 
35


Along any private street or drive
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
20
 
20
 
20


Along any side or rear yard
 
40
 
30
 
25
 
15
 
10
 
5
 
25
 
15
 
10


Abutting an R district
 
75
 
50
 
40
 
25
 
15
 
10
 
50
 
20
 
10


From multiple- residential buildings on the same lot
 
See § 155.080
 
20
 
20
 
10
 
25
 
25
 
15




 



(‘81 Code, § A1-33)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436, passed
2-23-89; Am. Ord. 465, passed 10-26-89)



APPENDIX C:  REQUIREMENTS FOR BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS



   The following minimum requirements and standards shall be met to enable
the placing of land improvements.



 





 
LB
 
LB-1
 
NCC
 
GB
 
GB-1
 
RB
 
SC
 
VB
 
I-1
 
I-2
 
BP


Minimum lot dimensions


Lot area (sq. ft.)
 
10,000
 
10,000
 
15,000
 
15,000
 
40,000
 
15,000
 
15,000*
 
15,000
 
20,000
 
40,000
 
80,000


Lot width (ft.)
 
100
 
100
 
100
 
100
 
200
 
100
 
100*
 
100
 
100
 
200
 
300


Minimum building setbacks (feet)


Along principal or minor arterial street
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
50


Along community or neighborhood collectors
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
40


Along other streets
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
30


Along side lot line
 
15
 
15
 
15
 
15
 
15
 
15
 
15
 
15
 
10
 
10
 
10


Along rear lot line
 
15
 
15
 
20
 
15
 
15
 
15
 
15
 
15
 
20
 
20
 
20


Abutting residential district
 
20
 
20
 
25
 
30
 
100
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
60
 
60
 
80


Minimum Parking Setbacks


Along public streets
 
20
 
20
 
15
 
15
 
15
 
15
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20


Side or rear lot line
 
5
 
5
 
5
 
5
 
5
 
5
 
5
 
5
 
5
 
5
 
5


Abutting residential lot
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20


Maximum Building Coverage (percentage)


Coverage of lot
 
20
 
20
 
25
 
25
 
35
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
 
 


With exterior storage of materials or equipment
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30
 
30
 
—


With interior storage, materials or equipment
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45
 
45
 
45


Maximum Building Height (feet)


Maximum height
 
35
 
30
 
25
 
45
 
35
 
45
 
45
 
45
 
40
 
40
 
40**


NOTES TO TABLE

* - Peripheral uses.

** - 24 feet when located within 250 feet of residential structures.




 



(‘81 Code, §§ A1-40 and A1-43)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 436,
passed 2-23-89; Am. Ord. 447, passed 6-22-89; Am. Ord. 471, passed 1-11-90)



APPENDIX D:  REQUIREMENTS FOR SAND AND GRAVEL DISTRICTS



   Berm heights and setback boundaries shall be as follows.  The
dimensions set out shall be measured in feet.



 

Operation
 
Housing, Schools, Parks, etc.
 
Commercial/
Industrial
 
Road R.O.W.




Minimum primary berm height
 
16
 
8
 
*


Maximum secondary or stockpile berm height
 
40
 
40
 
40


Crushing plant:


  Permanent
 
2,600
 
1,000
 
1,000


  Pit face-temporary
 
1,000
 
300
 
300


Concrete plant:


  In enclosed building
 
1,000
 
300
 
300


  Exterior
 
2,600
 
1,000
 
1,000


Asphalt plant:


  In enclosed building
 
1,000
 
600
 
600


  Exterior
 
2,600
 
1,000
 
1,000


  Scrubber ponds
 
600
 
600
 
600


Excavation and mining at pit face
 
300
 
200
 
200


Stockpiles
 
1,000
 
300
 
300


Truck parking and maintenance
 
1,000
 
300
 
300


NOTES TO TABLE

* - Amount varies.




 



(‘81 Code, § A1-48)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 472, passed
1-25-90)



   (B)   Recreational development waters setback and area requirements
shall be as follows.  The measurements shall be in feet unless otherwise
specified.



 

 
Sewered
 
Unsewered




Lot area (square feet):


  Waterfront lots
 
20,000
 
40,000


  Other lots
 
15,000
 
40,000


Water frontage and lot width at building line
 
75
 
150


Building setback from ordinary high water mark
 
75
 
100


Building setback from roads and highways
 


Federal, state or county
 
50
 
50


Municipal or private
 
30
 
30


Parking setback from ordinary high water mark
 
50
 
50


Elevation of lowest floor above highest known water level
 
3
 
3


Building height limitation
 
35
 
35


Total lot area covered by impervious surface with bonus, subsection
 
30
 
30


Section 155.309 (percentage): 


  Waterfront lots
 
40
 
—


  Other lots
 
50
 
—


Sewage system setback from ordinary high water mark
 
—
 
75


Sewage system elevation above highest groundwater level or bedrock
 
—
 
4




 



(‘81 Code, § A1-49)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 419, passed
6-30-88)



APPENDIX E:  REQUIREMENTS FOR YARDS AND OPEN SPACES



   The minimum requirements for yards and open spaces are as follows. 
The measurements shall be in feet, unless otherwise specified.



 

Thoroughfare
 
Right-of-Way Width
 
Minimum Setback


Interstate or state highway
 
 
50


Principal or minor arterial
 
150
 
50 or 125 from right-of- way center line, whichever is greater


Minor arterial
 
100-120
 
50 or 100 from right-of- way center line, whichever is greater


Community collector
 
80-100
 
40 or 80 from right-of- way center line, whichever is greater



 



(‘81 Code, § A1-9)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 492, passed
8-9-90)



APPENDIX F:  PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DESIGNATIONS



Section



Article 2.  Designation No. 290



   A2-1   Purpose



   A2-2   Permitted uses



   A2-3   Conditional uses



   A2-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A2-5   Minimum business area standards and requirements



Article 3.  Designation No. 138



   A3-1   Purpose



   A3-2   Permitted uses



   A3-3   Conditional uses



   A3-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A3-5   Minimum area requirements



Article 4.  Designation No. 163



   A4-1   Purpose



   A4-2   Permitted uses



   A4-3   Conditional uses



   A4-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A4-5   Minimum area requirements



Article 5.  Designation No. 167



   A5-1   Purpose



   A5-2   Permitted uses



   A5-3   Conditional uses



   A5-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A5-5   Minimum area requirements



Article 6.  Designation No. 168



   A6-1   Purpose



   A6-2   Permitted uses



   A6-3   Conditional uses



   A6-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A6-5   Minimum area requirements



Article 7.  Designation No. 170



   A7-1   Purpose



   A7-2   Permitted uses



   A7-3   Conditional uses



   A7-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A7-5   Minimum area requirements



Article 8.  Designation No. 251



   A8-1   Purpose



   A8-2   Permitted uses



   A8-3   Conditional uses



   A8-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A8-5   Minimum area requirements



Article 9.  Designation No. 244



   A9-1   Purpose



   A9-2   Permitted uses



   A9-3   Conditional uses



   A9-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A9-5   Minimum area requirements



Article 10.  Designation No. 254



   A10-1   Purpose



   A10-2   Permitted uses



   A10-3   Conditional uses



   A10-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A10-5   Minimum area requirements



   A10-6   Prohibited uses



Article 11.  Designation No. 144



   A11-1   Purpose



   A11-2   Permitted uses



   A11-3   Conditional uses



   A11-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A11-5   Minimum area requirements



Article 12.  Designation No. 315



   A12-1   Purpose



   A12-2   Permitted uses



   A12-3   Conditional uses



   A12-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A12-5   Minimum area requirements



Article 13.  Designation No. 341



   A13-1   Purpose



   A13-2   Permitted uses



   A13-3   Conditional uses



   A13-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A13-5   Minimum area requirements



   A13-6   Special performance standards



   A13-7   Street design



Article 14.  Designation No. 342



   A14-1   Purpose



   A14-2   Permitted uses



   A14-3   Conditional uses



   A14-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A14-5   Minimum area requirements



Article 15.  Designation No. 400



   A15-1   Purpose



   A15-2   Permitted uses



   A15-3   Conditional uses



   A15-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A15-5   Minimum area requirements



Article 16.  Designation No. 409



   A16-1   Purpose



   A16-2   Permitted uses



   A16-3   Conditional uses



   A16-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A16-5   Minimum area requirements



Article 17.  Designation No. 444



   A17-1   Purpose



   A17-2   Permitted uses



   A17-3   Conditional uses



   A17-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A17-5   Minimum area requirements



Article 18.  Designation No. 507



   A18-1   Purpose



   A18-2   Permitted uses



   A18-3   Conditional uses



   A18-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A18-5   Minimum area requirements



   A18-6   Special performance standards



Article 19.  Designation No. 532



   A19-1   Purpose



   A19-2   Permitted uses



   A19-3   Conditional uses



   A19-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A19-5   Minimum area standards and requirements



   A19-6   Special performance standards



Article 20.  Designation No. 541



   A20-1   Purpose



   A20-2   Permitted uses



   A20-3   Conditional uses



   A20-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A20-5   Minimum area standards and requirements



   A20-6   Special performance standards



Article 21.  Designation No. 580



   A21-1   Purpose



   A21-2   Permitted uses



   A21-3   Conditional uses



   A21-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A21-5   Minimum area requirements



Article 22.  Designation No. 629



   A22-1   Purpose



   A22-2   Permitted uses



   A22-3   Conditional uses



   A22-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A22-5   Minimum area requirements



   A22-6   Special performance standards



Article 23.  Designation No. 632



   A23-1   Purpose



   A23-2   Permitted uses



   A23-3   Conditional uses



   A23-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A23-5   Minimum area standards and requirements



   A23-6   Special performance standards



Article 24.  Designation No. 646



   A24-1   Purpose



   A24-2   Permitted uses



   A24-3   Conditional uses



   A24-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A24-5   Minimum area requirements



   A24-6   Special performance standards



Article 25.  Designation No. 679



   A25-1   Purpose



   A25-2   Permitted uses



   A25-3   Conditional uses



   A25-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A25-5   Minimum area standards and requirements



   A25-6   Special performance standards



Article 26.  Designation No. 681



   A26-1   Purpose



   A26-2   Permitted uses



   A26-3   Conditional uses



   A26-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A26-5   Minimum area standards and requirements



Article 27.  [Reserved]



Article 28.  Designation No. 703



       A28-1   Purpose



       A28-2   Permitted uses



       A28-3   Conditional uses



       A28-4   Permitted accessory uses



       A28-5   Minimum area standards and requirements



   A28-6   Special performance standards



Article 29. Designation No. 714



   A29-1   Purpose



   A29-2   Permitted uses



   A29-3   Conditional uses



   A29-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A29-5   Minimum area standards and requirements



   A29-6   Special performance standards



Article 30.  Designation No. 716



   A30-1   Purpose



   A30-1.1   Conflict of provisions



   A30-2   Permitted uses



   A30-3   Conditional uses



   A30-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A30-5   Minimum area standards and requirements



   A30-6   Special performance standards



Article A31. Designation No. 739



   A31-1   Purpose



   A31-2   Conflict provision



   A31-3   Definitions



   A31-4   Permitted uses



   A31-5   Conditional uses



   A31-6   [Reserved]



   A31-7   Permitted accessory uses



   A31-8   Area standards and requirements



   A31-9   Signage



Article A32.  Designation No. 746



   A32-1   Purpose



   A32-2   Permitted uses



   A32-3   Conditional uses



   A32-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A32-5   Minimum area standards and requirements



Article 33. Designation No. 856



   A33-1   Purpose



   A33-2   Permitted uses



   A33-3   Conditional uses



   A33-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A33-5   Minimum area standards and requirements



Article 34. Designation No. 975



   A34-1   Purpose



   A34-2   Permitted uses



   A34-3   Conditional uses



   A34-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A34-5   Minimum area standards and requirements



Article A35. Designation No. 1014



   A35-1   Purpose



   A35-2   Permitted uses



   A35-3   Conditional uses



   A35-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A35-5   Minimum area standards and requirements



Article A36. Designation No. 1025



   A36-1   Purpose



   A36-2   Permitted uses



   A36-3   Conditional uses



   A36-4   Permitted accessory uses



   A36-5   Minimum area standards and requirements



ARTICLE 2.  DESIGNATION NO. 290



§ A2-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this designation is to amend the zoning chapter by
establishing specific performance standards in compliance with §§ 155.260
through 155.267 for property so designated on the official zoning map.  The
purpose of this zone is to provide for an integrated mix of limited business
with certain retail business uses.



(‘81 Code, § A2-1)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ A2-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Art, interior decorating, photographic or music studio
provided no retail sales are made of products not manufactured on the site;



      (2)   Banks and savings and loans;



      (3)   Civic center or municipal offices;



      (4)   Clinics for human care;



      (5)   Coin-operated amusement devices in conjunction with a
restaurant facility or private club;



      (6)   Funeral homes or mortuaries;



      (7)   Historic buildings, museums, art institutes, galleries;



      (8)   Hospitals;



      (9)   Nursing or rest homes, retirement homes, day care
center, private schools;



      (10)   Off-street parking when the principal site if
off-street parking abuts on a lot which is in another zoning district;



      (11)   Offices of a professional or general nature where the
operations do not include over-the- counter retail sales or warehousing from
the site;



      (12)   On-sale wine, 3.2% liquor and/or intoxicating liquor in
conjunction with a restaurant facility;



      (13)   Private clubs or lodges not operated for a profit;



      (14)   Radio and television studios;



      (15)   Restaurants, Class I only;



      (16)   Theater or playhouse; and



      (17)   Hotels, motels, and banquet or meeting room facilities.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
City Council:



      (1)   Any use permitted in division (A);



      (2)   The following retail business uses, if contained within
a shopping center (one structure) of at least 20,000 square feet:  antique
or gifts shops, appliance store, art and school supply store, auto accessory
store (no installation facilities permitted), bakeries, barbershops, beauty
parlor, bicycle sales, books and stationery, candy, cameras and photographic
supplies, carpet sales, catering services, china and glassware sales,
clothing and costume sales or rental, commercial recreation including
bowling, billiards, coin-operated amusement devices and similar facilities,
department store, drugstore, dry cleaning, dry goods, florists, furniture
sales, garden supplies, hardware store, health or athletic clubs and
facilities, hobby store, interior decorating, jewelry and watch repair,
laundromat, leather goods and luggage, locksmith, musical instruments, paint
and wallpaper sales, phonograph records, pipe and tobacco shop, shoe sales or
repair, small engine or appliance repair, sporting goods, tailoring or toy
store; and



      (3)   Continuum of care retirement community, as defined in
the zoning code, except that comprehensive, intensive, or full care living is
not restricted to residents over the age of 55.



   (C)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



      (1)   Any use permitted in division (A); and



      (2)   In an office building, limited retail/commercial uses of
a nature primarily intended to serve the daily needs of tenants, employees
and patrons.



   (D)   Zone 4.  The purpose of this zone is to provide for limited
business and community-scale retail uses.  The maximum size for any
multiple-tenant building shall be 18,000 square feet with no single occupant
larger than 6,000 square feet. The maximum size of any single occupant
building shall be 6,000 square feet.  Within this zone, no structure or land
shall be used except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council:



      (1)   Art, interior decorating, photographic or music studio.



      (2)   Banks and savings and loans (a drive-thru shall require
a conditional use permit).



      (3)   The following retail business uses: Antique or gift
shops; appliance store; art and school supply store; auto accessory store (no
installation facilities permitted); bakeries; barbershops; beauty parlor;
bicycle sales; books and stationery; candy; cameras and photographic
supplies; catering services; china and glassware sales; clothing and costume
sales or rental; drugstore; dry cleaning; dry goods; florists; garden
supplies; hardware store; hobby store; interior decorating; jewelry and watch
repair; laundromat; leather goods and luggage; locksmith; musical
instruments; paint and wallpaper sales; phonograph records and equipment;
pipe and tobacco shop; shoe sales or repair; sporting goods; tailoring; toy
store; variety store; video tape and equipment sales or rental; wearing
apparel.



      (4)   Civic center or municipal offices.



      (5)   Clinics for human care.



      (6)   Coin-operated amusement devices in conjunction with a
restaurant facility or private club.



      (7)   Funeral homes or mortuaries.



      (8)   Historic buildings, museums, art institutes, galleries.



      (9)   Hospitals.



      (10)   Nursing or rest homes, retirement homes, day care
center, private schools.



      (11)   Offices of a professional or general nature where the
operations do not include over-the-counter retail sales or warehousing from
the site.



      (12)   On-sale wine, 3.2 beer and/or liquor in conjunction
with a Class I restaurant facility.



      (13)   Private clubs or lodges not operated for a profit.



      (14)   Radio and television studios.



      (15)   Restaurants, Class I or Class III only. Drive-thru in
conjunction with a Class III restaurant is permitted as a condition use; no
drive-thru permitted in conjunction with a Class I restaurant facility.



      (16)   Theater or playhouse.



      (17)   Hotels, motels, and banquet or meeting room facilities.



(‘81 Code, § A2-2)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 334, passed
2-28-85; Am. Ord. 596, passed 4-13-95; Am. Ord. 656, passed 1-14-99; Am. Ord.
919, passed 6-9-11; Am. Ord. 972, passed 6-26-14)



§ A2-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zones 1 and 3.  There are no conditional uses provided.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be uses
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Multiple dwellings when integrated into a multi-use
shopping center.  Access to and orientation of the dwelling units shall
provide for adequate separation from the transient vehicular and pedestrian
traffic associated with the retail operations in a manner to be approved by
the City Council;



      (2)   Outdoor display or sales in conjunction with a shopping
center and conducted by an occupant of the shopping center.  (The outdoor
area is to be screened and maintained in a manner to be approved by the City
Council.); and



      (3)   Service bays for the installation of auto accessories,
in conjunction with an auto accessories store in a shopping center, provided
that there are no more than two bays which shall be screened and oriented as
required by the City Council.



      (4)   Temporary seasonal outdoor recreational facility in
conjunction with, as an incidental use to and conducted by an existing
permitted Class I restaurant or commercial recreational facility, subject to
the following conditions:



         (a)   The temporary seasonal outdoor recreational
facility may not be operated more than 155 days, which shall be consecutive,
per calendar year.



         (b)   If the temporary seasonal outdoor recreational
facility is located in the parking lot, it shall not result in a loss of
parking spaces and drive aisles less than that required by the city code for
the primary use unless it can be shown that sufficient parking spaces will be
available with an approved shared parking agreement.



         (c)   The temporary seasonal outdoor recreational
facility shall not create traffic hazards.



         (d)   The temporary seasonal outdoor recreational
facility and all structures in connection therewith shall be compact and
contiguous to the primary building or the primary use within a multi-tenant
building.



         (e)   The temporary seasonal recreational facility shall
be delineated with a temporary physical barrier subject to minimum area
requirements pursuant to the Fire and Building Codes.



         (f)   No alcoholic beverages shall be possessed or
consumed outside of the delineated area of the temporary seasonal
recreational facility.  No sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages shall
occur within the temporary seasonal recreational facility area unless the
proper on-sale alcohol license has been issued by the city permitting on-sale
of alcohol within the temporary seasonal recreational facility area.



         (g)   During those dates when the temporary outdoor
season recreational facility is not in use under the conditional use permit,
all materials related to the temporary outdoor seasonal recreational facility
shall be removed and stored within a building or off-site.



         (h)   Any other conditions that the city determines to
be necessary for the protection of public health, safety and general welfare.



   (C)   Zone 4.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Drive-thru teller in conjunction with a bank or savings
and loan.



      (2)   Drive-thru service in conjunction with a Class III
Restaurant, subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Noise, headlights, traffic volume and emissions
from idling vehicles resulting from the operation of the window shall not
negatively impact surrounding residential and institutional uses and shall be
mitigated as required by the city.



         (b)   The drive-thru lane shall not impede or conflict
with vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian traffic circulation on the site as
determined by the City Traffic Engineer.



         (c)   When a Class III restaurant is located less than
1,000 feet from a residential or institutional use, the City Council may
restrict the hours of operation of a drive-thru window to mitigate any
adverse impacts caused by noise, headlights, traffic volume and emissions
from idling vehicles.



         (d)   If the installation of the drive-through
facilities result in the loss of parking spaces, then the resulting parking
spaces available for the entire site shall meet the parking requirements set
forth in this chapter or the petitioner shall demonstrate that the resulting
parking on the entire site can satisfactorily serve the current and any
future uses in accordance with the zoning code provisions.



(‘81 Code, § A2-3)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 334, passed
2-22-85; Am. Ord. 656, passed 1-14-99; Am. Ord. 941, passed 3-28-13; Am. Ord.
972, passed 6-26-14)



§ A2-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   Zones 1, 2, 3 and 4.  Within these zones, the following uses or uses
deemed similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



   (A)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on
the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary to complete the
construction.



   (B)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading space as
regulated by this chapter.



   (C)   Public telephone booths and other essential public service
facilities provided all yard requirements are met.



   (D)   Picnic area, plazas, amphitheaters and similar semi-public
gathering areas.



   (E)   Outdoor dining area, subject to the regulations set forth in
this chapter.



(‘81 Code, § A2-4)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 334, passed
2-28-85; Am. Ord. 656, passed 1-14-99; Am. Ord. 794, passed 8-24-06)



§ A2-5  MINIMUM BUSINESS AREA STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be
met.  No improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be
so used or improved shall meet the following minimum area and dimensional
requirements:



      (1)   Table of minimum area requirements and standards.



MINIMUM BUSINESS AREA STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR DESIGNATION NO. 290



 




 



 

Zone 2

 



 






 

Zone 1

 

"1" Uses

 

All Other Uses

 

Zone 3

 

Zone 4





Minimum Lot Dimensions


Lot area (square feet)
 

10,000

 

10,000

 

130,000

 

10,000

 

10,000



Lot width (feet)
 

100

 

100

 

150

 

100

 

100



Minimum Building Setbacks


Along principal or minor arterial streets (feet)
 

40

 

40

 

60

 

40

 

40



Along all other streets (feet)
 

30

 

30

 

60

 

30

 

30



Side lot line (feet)
 

10

 

10

 

10

 

10

 

10



Rear lot line (feet)
 

20

 

20

 

20

 

10

 

20



Abutting R district (feet)
 

20

 

--

 

--

 

--

 

20



Minimum Parking Setbacks


Along principal or minor arterial streets (feet)
 

20 1

 

20

 

15

 

20

 

5



Along all other streets (feet)
 

20

 

20

 

15

 

20

 

10



Side or rear lot line (feet)
 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5



Abutting R district (feet)
 

10

 

--

 

--

 

--

 

10



Maximum Building Coverage


Coverage of lot (percentage)
 

20

 

20

 

30

 

20

 

20



Maximum Building Height


Maximum height (feet)
 

30

 

30

 

45

 

30

 

30



If all minimum setbacks are increased by ten feet (feet)
 

45

 

45

 

--

 

--

 

--



  If minimum setbacks are increased 1½ feet for every one foot over 30 feet
and a minimum building separation of one-half times the combined height of
adjacent building faces is maintained  (feet)
 

--

 

--

 

--

 

100

 

--



Minimum Retail Floor Area


Initial building (square feet)
 

--

 

--

 

20,000

 

--

 

--



Dwelling Unit Density


One or two story
 

--

 

--

 

3,960*



(11)**

 

--

 

--



Three or four story
 

--

 

--

 

2,720*



(16)**

 

--

 

--



Sign Setbacks


Along principal or minor arterial streets (feet)
 

***

 

***

 

***

 

***

 

5



NOTES TO TABLE

*    Square feet on land per unit.
**    Units per acre.
***  As required in Chapter 154 of the City Code, Sign Regulations
1 The parking lot setback may be reduced to ten feet when the one-half
right-of-way dedication of the principal or minor arterial street is a
minimum of 90 feet.




 



      (2)   Maximum impervious surface, see § A1-57.



      (3)   Screening, see § A1-55.



      (4)   Landscaping, see § A1-56.



      (5)   Parking, see §§ A1-61, A1-62 and A1-63.



      (6)   Signs.  Signage shall be in accordance with Chapter 154
of the City Code except that the foundation or support structure of a
freestanding sign must be completely enclosed and such enclosure shall have
an exterior facing consisting of materials which shall match the exterior
construction materials of the primary building with which it is associated
and serves to identify.



   (B)   The following requirements are in addition to those in
division (A).  Where there may be a conflict, the requirements herein shall
prevail:



      (1)   Front setbacks prevailing.  Where adjoining structures
existing at the time of adoption of this article have a greater setback than
that required by this article, the front setback of a new structure shall
conform to the prevailing setback in the immediate vicinity.  The Building
Official shall determine the necessary front yard setback in such cases.  In
no case shall a building be required to be set back more than 50 feet, except
that shopping centers in Zone 2 shall not be required to be set back more
than 60 feet.



      (2)   Side and rear setbacks, party walls. Buildings may be
excluded from side and rear setback requirements if party walls are used and
if the adjacent buildings are constructed as an integral structure.  This
shall not permit structures closer to R districts, however, than required
under division (A)(1) above.



(‘81 Code, § A2-5)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 334, passed
2-28-85; Am. Ord. 656, passed 1-14-99; Am. Ord. 978, passed 11-13-14)



ARTICLE 3.  DESIGNATION NO. 138



§ A3-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this designation is to amend Ordinance No. 138 by
establishing specific performance standards in compliance with §§ 155.260
through 155.267 for property so designated on the official zoning map.  The
purpose of this zone is to provide for an integrated mix of low and moderate
density residential uses.



(‘81 Code, § A3-1)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 309, passed
11-8-83; Am. Ord. 449, passed 7-13-89)



§ A3-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state;



      (2)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (3)   One-family detached dwellings meeting the standards of
the Uniform Building Code, placed on permanent foundations and having no
horizontal axis less than 18 feet in length; and



      (4)   Public utility buildings and structures.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Any permitted use in division (A) above; and



      (2)   Two-family dwellings meeting the standards of the
Uniform Building Code.



   (C)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Parks and playgrounds;



      (2)   Public utility buildings and structures; and



      (3)   Recreational buildings, community centers and swimming
pools.



   (D)   Zone 4.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



      (1)   Apartment or condominium buildings;



      (2)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state;



      (3)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (4)   Public utility buildings and structures; and



      (5)   Townhouse multiple dwellings provided no single
structure contains in excess of 12 dwelling units.



   (E)   Zone 5.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses deemed similar by the City
Council:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state;



      (2)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (3)   One-family detached dwellings meeting the standards of
the Uniform Building Code, placed on permanent foundations and having no
horizontal axis less than 18 feet in length;



      (4)   Townhouse multiple dwellings, provided no single
structure contains in excess of two dwelling units.  Within the structure
may be a community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed under M.S.
§ 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically handicapped
licensed by the state; and



      (5)   Public utility buildings and structures.



   (F)   Zone 6.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state;



      (2)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (3)   One-family detached dwelling meeting the standards of
the Uniform Building Code, placed on permanent foundations and having no
horizontal axis less than 18 feet in length;



      (4)   Public utility buildings and structures;



      (5)   Townhouse multiple dwellings provided no single
structure contains in excess of 12 dwelling units; and



      (6)   Two-family dwellings meeting the standards of the
Uniform Building Code.



   (G)   Zone 7.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state;



      (2)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (3)   One-family detached dwellings meeting the standards of
the Uniform Building Code, placed on permanent foundations and having no
horizontal axis less than 18 feet in length; and



      (4)   Public utility buildings and structures.



(‘81 Code, § A3-2)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 309, passed
11-8-88; Am. Ord. 422, passed 8-25-88; Am. Ord. 449, passed 7-13-89)



§ A3-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zones 1, 2 and 7.  Within these zones, no structure or land
shall be used for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City
Council, except through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812 where:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes; or



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council may grant, except to the one-quarter mile rule
when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is closely
tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an effective
natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities.



      (2)   The conditional use permit shall be reviewed at one-year
intervals.



   (B)   Zone 3.  There are no conditional uses provided.



   (C)   Zone 4.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812 or a community based residential
care facility or day care facility when:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes; or



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities.



      (2)   A conditional use permit shall be reviewed at one-year
intervals.



   (D)   Zone 5.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812 where:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes;



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities; and



         (c)   The conditional use permit shall be reviewed at
one-year intervals.



      (2)   Any structure otherwise permitted but exceeding 40 feet
in height.



   (E)   Zone 6.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812 contained within a one- or
two-family dwelling where:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes;



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities; and



         (c)   A conditional use permit shall be reviewed at
one-year intervals.



      (2)   Community-based residential-care facility or day-care
facility in a multiple dwelling where:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes;



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities; and



         (c)   A conditional use permit shall be reviewed at
one-year intervals.



(‘81 Code, § A3-3)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 309, passed
11-8-83; Am. Ord. 422, passed 8-25-88)



§ A3-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Zones 1, 2 and 7.  Within these zones, the following uses or
uses deemed similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Building temporarily located for purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary
for the construction;



      (2)   Decorative landscape features;



      (3)   Gardening or other horticultural uses where no sale of
products is conducted on the premises;



      (4)   Keeping of domestic animals commonly referred to as
“house pets” for noncommercial purposes;



      (5)   Private parking space and garage, one attached and one
detached;



      (6)   One accessory storage building in addition to any
garage(s) except that it shall not exceed 144 square feet in area if a
detached garage exists on the same lot;



      (7)   Repair and maintenance of motor vehicles owned by the
occupant.  See screening requirements, § 155.348;



      (8)   Garage sales not to exceed three per calendar year; and



      (9)   Private swimming pool, tennis court and play apparatus
for use by the occupants of the premises.



   (B)   Zones 3, 4 and 5. Within these zones, the following uses or
uses deemed similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Any accessory use permitted in division (A) above;



      (2)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading spaces as
regulated in the zoning chapter;



      (3)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met;



      (4)   Putting greens, shuffleboard courts, picnic areas,
community buildings and similar recreational or service areas, when accessory
to a multiple-dwelling use, for use of the residents of the premises; and



      (5)   Rectories, parsonages and parish houses and religious
retreats when accessory to a church, chapel, temple or synagogue.



   (C)   Zone 6.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Any accessory use permitted in division (A) above;



      (2)   Off-street parking; and



      (3)   Putting greens, shuffleboard courts, picnic areas,
community buildings and similar recreational or service areas, when accessory
to a multiple-dwelling use, for the use of the residents of the premises.



(‘81 Code, § A3-4)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 422, passed
8-25-88)



§ A3-5  MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be
met.  No improvements shall be placed on such lands to be so used or
improved shall meet the following area and dimensional requirements:



      (1)   Table of minimum area requirements and standards.



MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS FOR DESIGNATION NO. 138



 




Standards

 
Zone 1
 

Zone 2

 
Zone 3
 
Zone 4
 
Zone 5
 
Zone 6
 
Zone 7



 
One-
Family*
 
Two-
Family
 

 

 

 
One-
Family*
 
Two- Family**
 
Multiple Residential
 
One- Family


Minimum Lot Dimensions


Lot area (square feet):
 

 

 
15,000/unit
 

 
—
 
4,3007
 

 

 
—
 



  Interior lot
 
11,000
 

 

 
10,000
 

 

 

 

 

 
5,0005


  Corner lot
 
12,500
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
8,5005


Lot width:
 

 

 
100
 
80
 
—
 

 

 

 
—
 



  Interior lot
 
80
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
45


  Corner lot
 
90
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
65


  Detached
 

 

 

 

 

 
50
 

 

 

 



  Attached
 

 

 

 

 

 
40
 

 

 

 



Dwelling Unit Density


One-story building
 
—
 

 
—
 
—
 
7,2601 (6)2
 
—
 

 

 
10,8901(4)2
 
—


Two-story building
 
—
 

 
—
 
—
 
3,630 (12)
 
—
 

 

 
8,270(5)
 
—


Three-story building
 
—
 

 
—
 
—
 
2,970 (15)
 
—
 

 

 
—
 
—


Minimum Building Setback


Along principal or arterial streets
 
50
 

 
50
 
50
 
50
 
25
 

 

 
50
 
50


Along community collector streets
 
40
 

 
40
 
40
 
40
 
25
 

 

 
40
 
40


Along all other streets
 
303
 

 
30
 
30
 
35
 
25
 

 

 
35
 
306


Side lot line
 

 

 

 
20
 
25
 
5
 

 

 
25
 
5


  Dwelling
 
10
 

 
10
 

 

 

 

 

 

 



  Garage
 
5
 

 
7½
 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Rear lot line
 
30
 

 
30
 
20
 
25
 
25
 

 

 
25
 
30


Between multiple dwellings
 
—
 

 
—
 
—
 
***
 
10
 

 

 
***
 
—




 



 




Standards

 
Zone 1
 
Zone 2
 
Zone 3
 
Zone 4
 
Zone 5
 
Zone 6
 
Zone 7


 
 
One-
Family*
 
Two-
Family
 

 

 

 
One-
Family*
 
Two- Family**
 
Multiple Residential
 
One- Family


Abutting one-family detached or two-family lot
 
—
 

 
—
 
—
 
50
 
—
 

 

 
50
 
—


Abutting P zone
 
—
 

 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
30


Minimum Detached Garage and Accessory Building Setback


Along principal or minor collector street
 
50
 

 
50
 
—
 
50
 
25
 

 

 
50
 
50


Along community collector street
 
40
 

 
40
 
—
 
40
 
25
 

 

 
40
 
40


Along all other streets
 
303
 

 
35
 
—
 
35
 
25
 

 

 
35
 
303


Side lot line
 
5
 
7½
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
5
 

 

 
10
 
5


Rear lot line
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
10
 

 

 
10
 
10


From multiple dwelling
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
15
 
15
 
—
 

 
—
 
15
 
—


From one- or two-family dwelling
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
—
 
—
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
—
 
10


Abutting one-family detached or two-family lot
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
20
 
20
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
20
 
—


Abutting P zone
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
—


Minimum Parking Setback


Along all streets
 
—
 
—
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
20
 
—


Side or rear lot line
 
—
 
—
 
5
 
5
 
5
 
5
 
—
 
—
 
5
 
—


From multiple dwelling
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
10
 
10
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
10
 
—


Abutting one-family detached or two-family lot
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
15
 
15
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
15
 
—


Maximum Building Coverage


Coverage of lot (percentage)
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
25
 
20
 
35
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
35




 



 


Standards

 
Zone 1
 
Zone 2
 
Zone 3
 
Zone 4
 
Zone 5
 
Zone 6
 
Zone 7


 
 
One-Family*
 
Two-Family
 

 

 

 
One-Family*
 
Two- Family**
 
Multiple Residential
 
One- Family


Maximum Building Height


Maximum height
 
25
 
25
 
70
 
40
 
40
 
30
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25


NOTES TO TABLE

  1 - Square feet of land per unit.

  2 - Units per acre.

  3 - Corner lot sideyard setbacks abutting a street shall be 20 feet.

  4 - Buried garages have a 400-square foot bonus.

  5 - Average lot size of all lots must exceed 7,800 square feet.

  6 - Alternative (even numbered) lots shall be permitted a 25-foot door
front setback; corner lot sideyard setbacks shall be 20 feet.

  7 - Average lot size of all lots must exceed 6,400 square feet.

  * - Same measurements as set out in Zone 1.

** - Same measurements as set out in Zone 2.

*** - See § A3-5(A)(2).



 



      (2)   Setbacks between multiple dwellings.



         (a)   The front and rear sides of a multiple dwelling
shall have a minimum setback of 50 feet from any side of an adjacent multiple
dwelling or a setback equal to the combined height of the adjacent multiple
dwellings, whichever is greater, except that in no case shall a setback
greater than 75 feet be required.  This minimum setback shall be reduced to
40 feet where a horizontal extension of the lines created by the nearest
exterior vertical surfaces of adjacent buildings would create an angle of not
less than 45 degrees.



         (b)   Minimum setbacks between adjacent multiple
dwellings on sides which are not a front or rear side of either building
shall be 20 feet or a distance equal to one-half of the combined height of
the adjacent buildings, whichever is greater, except that in no case shall a
setback greater than 50 feet be required.  This minimum setback shall be
reduced to 25 feet where a horizontal extension of the lines created by the
nearest exterior vertical surfaces of adjacent buildings would create an
angle of not less than 45 degrees.



      (3)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



      (4)   Screening, see § 155.348.



      (5)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.



      (6)   Parking, see §§ 155.370 through 155.379.



   (B)   The following requirements are in addition to those in
division (A).  Where there may be a conflict, the requirements herein shall
prevail:



      (1)   Front setbacks prevailing.  Where adjoining structures
existing at the time of adoption of this article have a greater setback than
that required by this article, the front setback of a new structure shall
conform to the prevailing setback in the immediate vicinity.  The Building
Official shall determine the necessary front yard setback in such cases.  In
no case shall a building be required to be set back more than 50 feet.



      (2)   Side and rear setbacks, party walls. Buildings may be
excluded from side and rear setback requirements if party walls are used and
if the adjacent buildings are constructed as an integral structure.  This
shall not permit structures closer to single-family detached or duplex lots,
however, than required under subsection (1) above.



(‘81 Code, § A3-5)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 422, passed
8-25-88)



ARTICLE 4.  DESIGNATION NO. 163



§ A4-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to amend Ordinance No. 163 by
establishing specific performance standards in compliance with §§ 155.260
through 155.267 for property so designated on the official zoning map.  The
purpose of this zone is to provide for an integrated mix of low and moderate
density residential uses.



(‘81 Code, § A4-1)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ A4-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state;



      (2)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (3)   One-family detached dwellings meeting the standards of
the Uniform Building Code, placed on permanent foundations and having no
horizontal axis less than 18 feet in length; and



      (4)   Public utility buildings and structures.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the uses permitted in division (A) above or
uses deemed similar by the City Council.



   (C)   Zone 3.  Within this zone no structure or land shall be used,
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



      (1)   Parks and playgrounds;



      (2)   Public utility buildings and structures; and



      (3)   Recreational buildings, community centers and swimming
pools.



   (D)   Zone 4.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (2)   Townhouse multiple dwellings provided no single
structure contains in excess of 12 dwelling units.  Within the structure may
be a community- based family-care home, day-care home licensed under M.S. §
245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically handicapped
licensed by the state; and



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures.



   (E)   Zone 5.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Any permitted use in division (D) above; and



      (2)   Apartment or condominium buildings. Within the building
may be a community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed under M.S.
§ 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically handicapped
licensed by the state.



   (F)   Zone 6.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state;



      (2)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures; and



      (4)   Zero lot line one-family dwellings meeting the standards
of the Uniform Building Code and placed on permanent foundations.



   (G)   Zone 7.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the permitted uses in division (A) or uses
deemed similar by the City Council.



(‘81 Code, § A4-2)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 325, passed
7-26-84; Am. Ord. 363, passed 6-12-86)



§ A4-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zones 1, 2 and 7.  Within these zones, no structure or land
shall be used for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City
Council, except through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812 where:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes; and



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between such
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities.



      (2)   A conditional use permit shall be reviewed at one-year
intervals.



   (B)   Zone 3.  There are no conditional uses provided.



   (C)   Zones 4 and 5.  Within these zones, no structure or land
shall be used for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City
Council, except through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812 or a community based residential
care facility or day care facility when:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes; and



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities.



      (2)   A conditional use permit shall be reviewed at one-year
intervals.



(‘81 Code, § A4-3)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 325, passed
7-26-84; Am. Ord. 363, passed 6-12-86)



§ A4-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Zones 1, 2 and 7.  Within these zones, the following uses or
uses deemed similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary
for the construction;



      (2)   Decorative landscape features;



      (3)   Gardening or other horticultural uses where no sale of
products is conducted on the premises;



      (4)   Keeping of domestic animals commonly referred to as
“house pets” for noncommercial purposes;



      (5)   Private parking space and garage, one attached and one
detached;



      (6)   One accessory storage building in addition to any
garage(s), except that it shall not exceed 144 square feet in area if a
detached garage exists on the same lot;



      (7)   Repair and maintenance of motor vehicles owned by the
occupant.  See screening requirements, § 155.348;



      (8)   Garage sales not to exceed three per calendar year; and



      (9)   Private swimming pool, tennis court and play apparatus
for use by the occupants of the premises.



   (B)   Zones 3, 4, 5 and 6.  Within these zones, the following uses
or uses deemed similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Any accessory use permitted in division (A) above;



      (2)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading spaces as
regulated in the zoning chapter;



      (3)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met; and



      (4)   Putting greens, shuffleboard courts, picnic areas,
community buildings and similar recreational or service areas, when accessory
to a multiple dwelling or zero lot line use, for the use of residents of the
premises.



(‘81 Code, § A4-4)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 325, passed
7-26-84; Am. Ord. 363, passed 6-12-86)



§ A4-5  MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be
met and no improvements shall be placed on lands unless the lands to be so
used or improved shall meet the following area and dimensional requirements:



      (1)   Table of minimum area requirements and standards.  The
measurements shall be in feet unless otherwise specified.



MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS FOR DESIGNATION NO. 163



 


Requirements

 
Zone 1
 
Zone 2
 
Zone 3
 
Zone 4
 
Zone 5
 
Zone 6
 
Zone 7




Minimum Lot Dimensions


Lot area (square feet)
 
 
 
 
 
10,000
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
7,500


  Interior
 
11,000
 
8,500
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


  Corner
 
12,500
 
10,500
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Lot width
 
 
 
 
 
80
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
60


  Interior
 
80
 
75
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


  Corner
 
90
 
85
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Dwelling Unit Density


One-story building
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
7,7251(6)2
 
5,4451(8)2
 
7,7241(6)2
 
—


Two-story building
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
7,725(6)
 
3,630(12)
 
7,725(6)
 
—


Three-story building
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
3,630(12)
 
—
 
—


Minimum Building Setback


Along principal or arterial streets
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
—


Along community collector streets
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
—


Along neighborhood collector streets
 
303
 
303
 
30
 
35
 
35
 
35
 
25


Along other streets
 
303
 
303
 
30
 
35
 
35
 
35
 
20


Along private streets
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
—


Side lot line
 
 
 
 
 
20
 
25
 
25
 
 
 
 


  Dwelling
 
10
 
104
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
106


  Garage
 
5
 
54
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
56


  Windowed side
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7
 
 


  Windowless side
 

 

 

 

 

 
0
 



Rear lot line
 
30
 
30
 
20
 
25
 
25
 
7
 
30


Between multiple dwellings
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
*
 
*
 
—
 
—


Abutting one-family detached lot
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
25
 
50
 
—
 
—


Minimum Detached Garage and Accessory Building Setback


Along principal or arterial streets
 
50
 
50
 
—
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
—


Along community collector streets
 
40
 
40
 
—
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
—


Along other streets
 
303
 
303
 
—
 
35
 
35
 
35
 
20


Along private streets
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
—


Side lot line
 
5
 
5
 
—
 
10
 
10
 
3
 
5


Rear lot line
 
10
 
10
 
—
 
10
 
10
 
3
 
10


From multiple dwelling
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
15
 
15
 
—
 
—


From one-family dwelling
 
10
 
10
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
10


Abutting one-family detached lot
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
20
 
20
 
—
 
—


Minimum Parking Setback


Along all streets
 
—
 
—
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
—
 
—


Side or rear lot line
 
—
 
—
 
5
 
5
 
5
 
—
 
—


From multiple dwelling
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
10
 
10
 
—
 
—


Abutting one-family detached lot
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
15
 
15
 
—
 
—


Maximum Building Coverage
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Coverage of lot (%)
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
25
 
25


Maximum Building Height
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Maximum height
 
35
 
35
 
40
 
30
 
40
 
30
 
30


NOTES TO TABLE

1 - Square feet of land per unit.

2 - Units per acre.

3 - Corner lot sideyard setbacks abutting a street shall be 20 feet.

4 - May be reduced to three feet provided 15 feet is maintained between
structures.

5 - Buried garages, 400-square foot bonus.

6 - May be reduced to three feet provided 13 feet is maintained between
structures.

* - See § A4-5(A)(2).




 



(‘81 Code, § A4-5)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 325, passed
7-26-84; Am. Ord. 363, passed 6-12-86)



      (2)   Setbacks between multiple dwellings.



         (a)   The front and rear sides of a multiple dwelling
shall have a minimum setback of 50 feet from any side of an adjacent multiple
dwelling or a setback equal to the combined height of the adjacent multiple
dwellings, whichever is greater, except that in no case shall a setback
greater than 75 feet be required.  This minimum setback shall be reduced to
40 feet where a horizontal extension of the lines created by the nearest
exterior vertical surfaces of adjacent buildings would create an angle of not
less than 45 degrees.



         (b)   Minimum setbacks between adjacent multiple
dwellings on sides which are not a front or rear side of either building
shall be 20 feet or a distance equal to one-half of the combines height of
the adjacent buildings, whichever is greater, except that in no case shall a
setback greater than 50 feet be required.  This minimum setback shall be
reduced to 25 feet where a horizontal extension of the lines created by the
nearest exterior vertical surfaces of adjacent buildings would create an
angle of not less than 45 degrees.



      (3)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



      (4)   Screening, see § 155.348.



      (5)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.



      (6)   Parking, see §§ 155.370 through 155.379.



   (B)   The following requirements are in addition to those in
division (A).  Where there may be a conflict, the requirements herein shall
prevail:



      (1)   Front setbacks prevailing.  Where adjoining structures
existing at the time of adoption of this article have a greater setback of a
new structure shall conform to the prevailing setback in the immediate
vicinity.  The Building Official shall determine the necessary front yard
setback in such cases.  In no case shall a building be required to be set
back more than 50 feet.



      (2)   Side and rear setbacks, party walls. Buildings may be
excluded from side and rear setback requirements if party walls are used and
if the adjacent buildings are constructed as an integral structure.  This
shall not permit structures closer to single-family detached or duplex lots,
however, than required under subsection (1) above.



      (3)   Fences.  Minimum six-foot high privacy fences shall be
required surrounding all private yard areas in Zone 6.  The fence shall be
set back a minimum of 35 feet from any public street and five feet from any
private street.  Each dwelling unit in Zone 6 shall be provided with two
enclosed parking spaces and a minimum of two unenclosed parking spaces.



      (4)   Each dwelling unit in Zone 7 shall be provided with two
enclosed parking spaces and a minimum of two unenclosed parking spaces.



(‘81 Code, § A4-5)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 325, passed
7-26-84; Am. Ord. 363, passed 6-12-86)



ARTICLE 5.  DESIGNATION NO. 167



§ A5-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to amend Ordinance No. 167 establishing
specific performance standards in compliance with §§ 155.260 through
155.267 for property so designated on the official zoning map.  The purpose
of this zone is to provide for a zoological garden with certain retail
business uses and educational/entertainment uses.



(‘81 Code, § A5-1)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ A5-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   First aid medical services;



      (2)   Food services;



      (3)   Internal zoo ride systems;



      (4)   Orientation theaters;



      (5)   Rentals of strollers, wheelchairs and other visitor
service items;



      (6)   Retail gift shops;



      (7)   Youth residence center; and



      (8)   Zoological garden.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   First aid medical services;



      (2)   Food services;



      (3)   Internal zoo ride systems;



      (4)   Orientation theaters;



      (5)   Rentals of strollers, wheelchairs, and other visitor
service items;



      (6)   Retail gift shops;



      (7)   Youth residence center;



      (8)   Zoological Garden;



      (9)   Educational facilities;



      (10)   Wireless communication towers as regulated in this
chapter.  The tower shall meet the requirements set forth for P
(institutional) zoning districts, except that the tower shall be set back a
minimum of one-and-one-half times the fall zone from right-of-way lines, and
two times the fall zone from any structure or parking lot on neighboring
property.



      (11)   Wind energy conversion systems that have an operating
capacity of not more than 20 kW, and meet all of the following requirements:



         (a)   The tower for the wind energy conversion system
shall meet all requirements set forth for wireless communication towers in P
(institutional) zoning districts provided in this chapter, except that the
tower shall be set back a minimum of one-and-one-half times the fall zone
from right-of-way lines, and two times the fall zone from any structure or
parking lot on neighboring property;



         (b)   All systems shall have an automatic speed control
device as part of the design;



         (c)   All systems shall comply with the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) Section (NPC 1 and NPC 2), as amended;



         (d)   All systems shall comply with applicable Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations;



         (e)   Any wind energy conversion system utilizing a
propeller shall have neither a blade rotation diameter of greater than 35
feet, nor a blade arc less than 30 feet above the ground; and



         (f)   No signs, other than for public safety warnings or
equipment information, shall be affixed to any portion of the system.



(‘81 Code, § A5-2)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 583, passed
9-8-94; Am. Ord. 812, passed 5-24-07)



§ A5-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   There are no conditional uses provided.



(‘81 Code, § A5-3)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ A5-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   Zones 1 and 2.  Within these zones, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



   (A)   Ancillary uses and services necessary for the function of a
zoological garden;



   (B)   Buildings temporarily located for the purpose of construction
on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary to complete
such construction;



   (C)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading space as
regulated in the zoning ordinance; and



   (D)   Public telephone booths and other essential public service
facilities provided all yard requirements are met.



(‘81 Code, § A5-4)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 583, passed
9-8-94)



§ A5-5  MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be met for
both Zones 1 and 2.  No improvements shall be placed on such lands unless
the lands to be so used or improved shall meet the following area and
dimensional requirements:



   (A)   Table of minimum area requirements and standards.



   Minimum Lot Dimensions



   Lot area (square feet)   10,000



   Lot width     80



   Minimum Building Setback



   Along principal or
   minor arterial streets     50



   Along community or
   neighborhood collector
   streets     40



   Along other streets     35



   Side lot line     10



   Rear lot line     20



   Between buildings     20



   Abutting R or M districts     20



   Minimum Parking Setback



   Along public street     20



   Side or rear lot line       5



   Abutting R or M districts     20



   Maximum Building Coverage



   Coverage of lot (%)     20



   Maximum Building Height



   Maximum height     50



   (B)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



   (C)   Screening, see § 155.348.



   (D)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.



   (E)   Parking, see §§ 155.370 through 155.379.



(‘81 Code, § A5-5)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 583, passed
9-8-94)



ARTICLE 6. DESIGNATION NO. 168



§ A6-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to amend Ordinance No. 168 by
establishing specific performance standards in compliance with §§ 155.260
through 155.267 for property so designated on the official zoning map.  The
purpose of this zone is to provide for a golf course with certain related
recreational, service and retail operations.



(‘81 Code, § A6-1)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ A6-2  PERMITTED USES.



   Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used, except for one or
more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council:



   (A)   Bowling, coin-operated amusement devices and other commercial
recreational activities;



   (B)   Clubhouse(s);



   (C)   Cross-country skiing;



   (D)   Driving range;



   (E)   Golf course;



   (F)   Handball or racquetball courts;



   (G)   Liquor sales (on-sale) in conjunction with a restaurant;



   (H)   Pro shop;



   (I)   Restaurant facility, Class I only;



   (J)   Swimming pool(s); and



   (K)   Tennis courts.



(‘81 Code, § A6-2)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ A6-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   There are no conditional uses provided.



(‘81 Code, § A6-3)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ A6-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City
Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



   (A)   Ancillary uses and services necessary for the operation of a
golf course;



   (B)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on
the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary to complete
construction;



   (C)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading spaces as
regulated in the zoning ordinance;



   (D)   Public telephone booths and other essential public service
facilities provided all yard requirements are met.



(‘81 Code, § A6-4)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ A6-5  MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be met. 
No improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be so used
or improved shall meet the following minimum area and dimensional
requirements:



   (A)   Table of minimum area requirements and standards.



   Minimum Lot Dimensions



   Lot area (square feet)   10,000



   Lot width     80



   Minimum Building Setback



   Along principal or
   minor arterial streets     50



   Along community or
   neighborhood collector
   streets     40



   Along other streets     35



   Side lot line     10



   Rear lot line     20



   Between buildings     20



   Abutting R or M districts     20



   Minimum Parking Setback



   Along public street     20



   Side or rear lot line     5



   Abutting R or M districts     20



   Maximum Building Coverage:



   Coverage of lot (%)     20



   Maximum Building Height



   Maximum height     50



   (B)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



   (C)   Screening, see § 155.348.



   (D)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.



   (E)   Parking, see §§ 155.370 through 155.379.



(‘81 Code, § A6-5)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



ARTICLE 7.  DESIGNATION NO. 170



§ A7-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to amend Ordinance No. 170 by
establishing specific performance standards in compliance with §§ 155.260
through 155.267 for property so designated on the official zoning map.  The
purpose of this zone is to provide for an integrated mix of moderate and high
density residential uses.



(‘81 Code, § A7-1)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ A7-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (2)   Townhouse multiple dwellings provided no single
structure contains in excess of four dwelling units.  Within the structure
may be a community- based family-care home, day-care home licensed under M.S.
§ 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically handicapped
licensed by the state; and



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (2)   Townhouse multiple dwellings provided no single
structure contains in excess of 12 dwelling units.  Within the structure may
be a community- based family-care home, day-care home licensed under M.S. §
245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically handicapped
licensed by the state; and



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures.



   (C)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Apartment or condominium buildings. Within the building
may be a community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed under M.S.
§ 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically handicapped
licensed by the state;



      (2)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003; and



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures.



(‘81 Code, § A7-2)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ A7-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   Zones 1, 2 and 3.  Within these zones, no structure or land shall be
used for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council,
except through the granting of a conditional use permit:



   (A)   Community-based family-care home or day- care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812 or a community-based
residential-care facility or day-care facility when:



      (1)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building and
housing codes; and



      (2)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities.



   (B)   A conditional use permit shall be reviewed at one-year
intervals.



(‘81 Code, § A7-3)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ A7-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary
for the construction;



      (2)   Decorative landscape features;



      (3)   Gardening or other horticultural uses where no sale of
products is conducted on the premises;



      (4)   Keeping of domestic animals commonly referred to as
“house pets” for noncommercial purposes;



      (5)   Private garages and parking space; and



      (6)   Private swimming pool, tennis court and play apparatus
for use by the occupants of the premises.



   (B)   Zones 2 and 3.  Within these zones, the following uses or
uses deemed similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Any accessory use permitted in division (A) above;



      (2)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading space as
regulated in the zoning chapter;



      (3)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met; and



      (4)   Putting greens, shuffleboard courts, picnic areas,
community buildings and similar recreational or service areas, when accessory
to a multiple-dwelling use, for use by the occupants of the premises.



(‘81 Code, § A7-4)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ A7-5  MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be
met.  No improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be
so used or improved shall meet the following area and dimensional
requirements:



      (1)   Table of minimum area requirements and standards.  The
dimensions listed are measured in feet unless otherwise specified.



 


Requirements

 
Zone 1
 
Zone 2
 
Zone 3




Minimum Lot Dimensions


Lot width
 
100
 
100
 
150


Lot area3
 

 

 



  One-story building
 
7,2251(6)2
 
4,8401(9)2
 
4,8401(9)2


  Two-story building
 
4,840(9)
 
3,960(11)
 
3,350(14)


  Three-story building
 
—
 
3,960(11)
 
2,9704(15)


Maximum Dwelling Unit Density


Total number of units
 
152
 
24
 
1044


Minimum Building Setback


Along principal or arterial streets
 
50
 
50
 
50


Along community collector streets
 
50
 
50
 
50


Along neighborhood collector streets on 80-foot or greater right-of-way
 
45
 
45
 
45


Along all other streets
 
30
 
30
 
30


Side lot line
 
25
 
25
 
25


Rear lot line
 
25
 
25
 
25


Between multiple buildings
 
*
 
*
 
*


Abutting one-family detached, duplex lot
 
30
 
40
 
40


Minimum Detached Garage and Accessory building Setback


Along principal or arterial streets
 
40
 
40
 
40


Along community collector streets
 
40
 
40
 
40


Along neighborhood collector streets on 80-foot or greater right-of-way
 
35
 
35
 
35


Along all other streets
 
30
 
30
 
30


Side lot line
 
10
 
10
 
10


Rear lot line
 
10
 
10
 
10


From multiple dwelling
 
15
 
15
 
15


Abutting one-family detached or duplex lot
 
20
 
20
 
20


Minimum Parking Setback


Along all streets
 
20
 
20
 
20


Side or rear lot line
 
5
 
5
 
5


From multiple dwelling
 
10
 
10
 
10


Abutting one-family detached or duplex lot
 
10
 
10
 
10


Minimum Building Coverage


Coverage of lot (percentage)
 
20
 
20
 
20


Maximum Building Height


Maximum height
 
28
 
40
 
40


NOTES TO TABLE

1 - Square feet of land per unit.

2 - Units per acre.

3 - Buried garages, 400-square foot bonus.

4 - An 806-square foot bonus, with 153 units maximum, if all the following
design criteria are met:  all required garage units are to be buried, no
exposed balconies are permitted, no building shall have a central axis
greater than 120 feet, maximum lot coverage of buildings shall be 18.6%, and
no dwelling unit shall contain more than two bedrooms.

* - See § A7-5(A)(2).




 



      (2)   Setbacks between multiple dwellings.



         (a)   The front and rear sides of a multiple dwelling
shall have a minimum setback of 50 feet from any side of an adjacent multiple
dwelling or a setback equal to the combined height of the adjacent multiple
dwellings, whichever is greater, except that in no case shall a setback
greater than 75 feet be required.  This minimum setback shall be reduced to
40 feet where a horizontal extension of the lines created by the nearest
exterior vertical surfaces of adjacent buildings would create an angle of not
less than 45 degrees.



         (b)   Minimum setbacks between adjacent multiple
dwellings on sides which are not a front or rear side of either building
shall be 20 feet or a distance equal to one-half of the combined height of
the adjacent buildings, whichever is greater, except that in no case shall a
setback greater than 50 feet be required.  This minimum setback shall be
reduced to 25 feet where a horizontal extension of the lines created by the
nearest exterior vertical surfaces of adjacent buildings would create an
angle of not less than 45 degrees.



      (3)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



      (4)   Screening, see § 155.348.



      (5)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.



      (6)   Parking, see §§ 155.370 through 155.379.



   (B)   The following requirements are in addition to those in
division (A).  Where there may be a conflict, the requirements herein shall
prevail:



      (1)   Front setbacks prevailing.  Where adjoining structures
existing at the time of adoption of this article have a greater setback than
that required by this ordinance, the front setback of a new structure shall
conform to the prevailing setback in the immediate vicinity.  The Building
Official shall determine the necessary front yard setback in such cases.  In
no case shall a building be required to be set back more than 50 feet.



      (2)   Side and rear setbacks, party walls. Buildings may be
excluded from side and rear setback requirements if party walls are used and
if the adjacent buildings are constructed as an integral structure.  This
shall not permit structures closer to single-family detached or duplex lots,
however, than required under division (A).



(‘81 Code, § A7-5)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



ARTICLE 8.  DESIGNATION NO. 251



§ A8-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to amend Ordinance No. 251 by
establishing specific performance standards in compliance with §§ 155.260
through 155.267 for property so designated on the official zoning map.  The
purpose of this zone is to provide for an integrated mix of low, moderate and
high density residential uses.



(‘81 Code, § A8-1)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ A8-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state;



      (2)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (3)   One-family detached dwellings meeting the standards of
the Uniform Building Code, placed on



permanent foundations and having no horizontal axis less than 18 feet in
length; and



      (4)   Public utility buildings and structures.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Any permitted use in division (A) above;



      (2)   Parks and playgrounds; and



      (3)   Recreation buildings, community centers and swimming
pools.



   (C)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (2)   Townhouse multiple dwellings provided no single
structure contains in excess of 12 dwelling units.  Within such structure
may be a community- based family-care home, day-care home licensed under M.S.
§ 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically handicapped
licensed by the state; and



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures.



   (D)   Zone 4. Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used,
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



      (1)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (2)   Townhouse multiple dwellings provided no single
structure contains in excess of 12 dwelling units.  Within the structure may
be a community- based family-care home, day-care home licensed under M.S. §
245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically handicapped
licensed by the state; and



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures.



   (E)   Zones 5 and 6.  Within these zones, no structure or land
shall be used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council:



      (1)   Townhouse multiple dwellings, provided no single
structure contains in excess of 12 dwelling units, and apartment or
condominium buildings.  Within the building may be a community- based
family-care home, day-care home licensed under the M.S. § 245.812 or a home
for the care of the mentally or physically handicapped licensed by the state;



      (2)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003; and



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures.



(‘81 Code, § A8-2)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 372, passed
10-9-86; Am. Ord. 562, passed 9-23-93)



§ A8-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zones 1 and 2.  Within these zones, no structure or land
shall be used for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City
Council, except through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812 where:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes; and



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities.



      (2)   A conditional use permit shall be reviewed at one-year
intervals.



   (B)   Zones 3, 4, 5 and 6.  Within these zones, no structure or
land shall be used for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City
Council, except through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812 or a community-based
residential-care facility or day-care facility when:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes; or



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities.



      (2)   A conditional use permit shall be reviewed at one-year
intervals.



(‘81 Code, § A8-3)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 372, passed
10-9-86)



§ A8-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Zones 1 and 2.  Within these zones, the following uses or
uses deemed similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary
for the construction;



      (2)   Decorative landscape features;



      (3)   Gardening or other horticultural uses where no sale of
products is conducted on the premises;



      (4)   Keeping of domestic animals commonly referred to as
“house pets” for noncommercial purposes;



      (5)   Private parking space and garage, one attached and one
detached;



      (6)   One accessory storage building in addition to any
garage(s) except that it shall not exceed 144 square feet in area if a
detached garage exists on the same lot;



      (7)   Repair and maintenance of motor vehicles owned by the
occupant.  See screening requirements, § 155.348;



      (8)   Garage sales not to exceed three per calendar year; and



      (9)   Private swimming pool, tennis court and play apparatus
for use by occupants of the premises.



   (B)   Zones 3, 4, 5 and 6.  Within these zones the following uses
or uses deemed similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Any accessory uses permitted in division (A) above;



      (2)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading space as
regulated in the zoning chapter;



      (3)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met; and



      (4)   Putting greens, shuffleboard courts, picnic area,
community building and similar recreational or service areas when accessory
to a multiple-dwelling use, for use by occupants of the premises.



(‘81 Code, § A8-4)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 372, passed
10-9-86)



§ A8-5  MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be
met.  No improvements shall be placed on the lands unless the lands to be so
used or improved shall meet the following area and dimensional requirements:



      (1)   Table of minimum area requirements and standards.  The
measurements are in feet unless otherwise specified.



 


Requirements

 
Zone 1
 
Zone 2
 
Zone 3
 
Zone 4
 
Zone 5
 
Zone 6




Minimum Lot Dimensions


Lot area (square feet)
 

 

 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—


  Interior
 
11,000
 
7,000
 

 

 

 



  Corner
 
12,500
 
10,000
 

 

 

 



Lot width
 

 

 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—


  Interior
 
80
 
56
 

 

 

 



  Corner
 
90
 
80
 

 

 

 



Dwelling Unit Density4


One-story building
 
—
 
—
 
5,8081

(7.5)2
 
5,4451

(8)2
 
4,8401

(9)2
 
4,8401

(9)2


Two-story building
 
—
 
—
 
5,808 (7.5)
 
5,445

(8)
 
3,960

(11)
 
3,960

(11)


Three-story building
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
3,350

(12)
 
3,110

(14)


Minimum Building Setback


Along principal or arterial streets
 
—
 
40
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
50


Along other streets
 
303
 
303
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
30


Side lot line
 

 

 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25


  Dwelling
 
10
 
10
 

 

 

 



  Garage
 
5
 
5
 

 

 

 



Rear lot line
 
30
 
30
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25


From multiple dwelling
 
—
 
—
 
*
 
*
 
*
 
*


Abutting one-family detached lot
 
—
 
—
 
30
 
—
 
—
 
—


Minimum Detached Garage and Accessory Building Setback


Along principal or arterial streets
 
—
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
40


Along other streets
 
303
 
303
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
30


Side lot line
 
5
 
5
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
10


Rear lot line
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
10


From multiple dwelling
 
—
 
—
 
15
 
15
 
15
 
15


Abutting one-family detached lot
 
—
 
—
 
20
 
—
 
—
 
—


Minimum Parking Setback


Along all streets
 
—
 
—
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20


Side or rear lot line
 
—
 
—
 
5
 
5
 
5
 
5


From multiple dwelling
 
—
 
—
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
10


Abutting one-family detached lot
 
—
 
—
 
15
 
—
 
—
 
—


Maximum Building Coverage


Coverage of lot (percentage)
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20


Maximum Building Height


Maximum height
 
35
 
35
 
25
 
25
 
40
 
45


NOTES TO TABLE

1 - Square feet of land per unit.

2 - Units per acre.

3 - Corner lot sideyard setbacks abutting a street shall be 20 feet.

4 - Buried garages, 400-square foot bonus.

* - See § A8-5(A)(2).




 



      (2)   Setbacks between multiple dwellings.



         (a)   The front and rear sides of a multiple dwelling
shall have a minimum setback of 50 feet from any side of an adjacent multiple
dwelling or a setback equal to the combined height of the adjacent multiple
dwellings, whichever is greater, except that in no case shall a setback
greater than 75 feet be required.  This minimum setback shall be reduced to
40 feet where a horizontal extension of the lines created by the nearest
exterior vertical surfaces of adjacent buildings would create an angle of not
less than 45 degrees.



         (b)   Minimum setbacks between adjacent multiple
dwellings on sides which are not a front or rear side of either building
shall be 20 feet or a distance equal to one-half of the combined height of
the adjacent buildings, whichever is greater, except that in no case shall a
setback greater than 50 feet be required.  This minimum setback shall be
reduced to 25 feet where a horizontal extension of the lines created by the
nearest exterior vertical surfaces of adjacent buildings would create an
angle of not less than 45 degrees.



      (3)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



      (4)   Screening, see § 155.348.



      (5)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.



      (6)   Parking, see §§ 155.370 through 155.379.



   (B)   The following requirements are in addition to those in
division (A).  Where there may be a conflict, the requirements herein shall
prevail:



      (1)   Front setbacks prevailing.  Where adjoining structures
existing at the time of adoption of this article have a greater setback than
that required by this article, the front setback of a new structure shall
conform to the prevailing setback in the immediate vicinity.  The Building
Official shall determine the necessary front yard setback in such cases.  In
no case shall a building be required to be set back more than 50 feet.



      (2)   Side and rear setbacks, party walls. Buildings may be
excluded from side and rear setback requirements if party walls are used and
if the adjacent buildings are constructed as an integral structure.  This
shall not permit structures closer to single-family detached or duplex lots,
however, than required under subsection (1) above.



(‘81 Code, § A8-5)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 372, passed
10-9-86)



ARTICLE 9.  DESIGNATION NO. 244



§ A9-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to amend Ordinance No. 244 by
establishing specific performance standards in compliance with §§ 155.260
through 155.267 for property so designated on the official zoning map.  The
purpose of this zone is to provide for an integrated mix of shopping center,
freestanding retail and limited business uses.



(‘81 Code, § A9-1)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 448, passed
7-13-89)



§ A9-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



      (1)   Retail shopping center or single retail use of initial
minimum floor area of 100,000 square feet.  Permitted uses shall include:
antique or gift shop, appliance store (sales and/or repair), art and school
supply store, auto accessory store (no installation facilities permitted),
bakery, bank, savings and loan, barbershop, beauty parlor, bicycle sales,
books, stationery and office supplies, candy, camera and photographic
supplies, carpet sales, catering service, china and glassware sales, clothing
and costume sales or rental, coin-operated amusement devices and similar
facilities, department store, drugstore, dry cleaning, dry goods, florist,
furniture store, garden supplies, hardware store, health or athletic club and
facilities, hobby store, interior decorating, jewelry and watch repair,
laundromat, leather goods and luggage, locksmith, musical instruments,
off-sale liquor store, on-sale wine or 3.2% liquor in conjunction with a
restaurant facility, paint and wallpaper sales, phonograph records,
photography studio, pipe and tobacco shop, restaurant (Class I or II), shoe
sales or repair, sporting goods, tailoring, theater (except open air
drive-in) and toy store.



      (2)   Peripheral, freestanding uses not a part of the shopping
center building shall be permitted after construction of the initial 100,000
square foot minimum center as follows:  bank or savings and loan, club,
lodge or convention center, furniture store, office building, on-sale wine or
3.2% liquor in conjunction with a restaurant facility, restaurant (Class I
only), sports and health club, theater (except open air drive-in).  Each of
the preceding freestanding uses may have up to 40% of its floor area occupied
by other accessory retail or office uses as otherwise listed in (1) or (2)
hereof.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Retail shopping center of initial minimum floor area of
10,000 square feet.  Permitted uses within the center shall include: 
antique or gift shop, appliance store (sales and/or repair), art and school
supply store, auto accessory store (no installation facilities permitted),
bakery, bank, savings and loan, barbershop, beauty parlor, bicycle sales,
books, stationery and office supplies, candy, cameras and photographic
supplies, carpet sales, catering service, china and glassware sales, clothing
and costume sales or rental, coin-operated amusement devices and similar
facilities, department store, drugstore, dry cleaning, dry goods, florists,
furniture store, garden supplies, grocery store, hardware store, health or
athletic club and facilities, hobby store, interior decorating, jewelry and
watch repair, laundromat, leather goods and luggage, locksmith, musical
instruments, off-sale liquor store, on-sale wine or 3.2% liquor in
conjunction with a restaurant facility, paint and wallpaper sales, phonograph
records, photography studio, pipe and tobacco shop, restaurant (Class I or
II), shoe sales or repair, small engine or appliance repair, sporting goods,
tailoring, theater (except open air drive-in) and toy store.



      (2)   Freestanding uses shall be permitted as follows:



         (a)   Any use permitted in subsection  (1) above,
excepting therefrom Class II restaurants;



         (b)   Community facilities such as library, swimming
pool, health center, day-care center, religious facilities or community
center;



         (c)   Offices for doctors, dentists, lawyers and real
estate brokers and similar uses oriented toward serving the residential
community; and



         (d)   Veterinary hospital or clinic when contained
within a building.



   (C)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for open space, including landscape features, water features,
plazas and decorative structures or uses deemed similar by the City Council.



   (D)   Zone 4.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council and when in compliance with the special performance
standards of division (C) above:



      (1)   Lumber, heating, hardware, home supplies and plumbing
shops and similar construction material sales and service facilities (outdoor
storage permitted when screened as required by the City Council);



      (2)   Wholesale office, sales or showroom for furniture,
carpets and rugs and similar household goods which shall not include retail
food sales;



      (3)   Bowling alley, tennis club, skating, theater, archery,
coin-operated amusement devices and similar commercial recreation facilities
when contained within a building;



      (4)   Car wash (motor fuel sales subject to conditional use);



      (5)   Auto accessories sales (service facilities subject to
conditional use);



      (6)   Armories or convention hall;



      (7)   Motor vehicle sales when conducted entirely within a
building (outdoor sales or storage subject to conditional use);



      (8)   Motor vehicle repair and auto body shop (only in
conjunction with a motor vehicle sales facility.  Outdoor storage subject to
conditional use);



      (9)   Rental shop (outdoor display or storage subject to
conditional use);



      (10)   Garden store when conducted within a building (outdoor
sales subject to conditional use);



      (11)   Bicycle, boat and snowmobile sales and service (outdoor
display or storage subject to conditional use); and



      (12)   Warehouse/outlet store.



(‘81 Code, § A9-2)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 351, passed
11-14-85; Am. Ord. 448, passed 7-13-89; Am. Ord. 578, passed 6-30-94)



§ A9-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Bowling alley or similar commercial recreation facility;



      (2)   On-sale liquor in conjunction with a restaurant facility;



      (3)   Outdoor display or sales conducted by an occupant of a
shopping center or free standing facility. Outdoor area to be screened and
maintained in a manner to be approved by the City Council;



      (4)   Service bays for the installation of auto accessories,
in conjunction with an auto accessories store, provided there are no more
than three bays which shall be screened and oriented as required by the City
Council; and



      (5)   A free-standing building, no larger than 100 square feet
in size, with one or more drive-up windows to sell gourmet coffee and
ready-to-consume pastries to patrons in automobiles provided that the
following conditions are met:



         (a)   Only one drive-thru structure is permitted within
this zone;



         (b)   Exterior of structure must match surrounding
buildings. (Alternate building materials require a conditional use permit);



         (c)   Design of structure must be compatible with
surrounding buildings;



         (d)   The drive-thru must not eliminate more than the
minimum number of parking spaces required for all uses on the parcel;



         (e)   Stacking lanes must be designed so they do not
interfere with existing parking and vehicle circulation;



         (f)   Landscaping equal to a minimum of 2½% of the
value of the building must be installed around the structure;



         (g)   A minimum of 150 feet for a single stacking lane
or 80 feet per lane when there is more than one stacking lane is required;



         (h)   All stacking lanes must be clearly identified
through striping, landscaping and/or signs;



         (i)   No alcoholic beverages may be sold;



         (j)   Evidence of issuance of a permit from the
Minnesota Department of Health must be provided to the city; and



         (k)   If the use of the building to sell gourmet coffee
and pastries ceases for a period of 30 days, the conditional use permit shall
lapse and the building shall be removed.  The operator shall be responsible
for removal of the building and clean up of the site.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Motor fuel station and/or service station with minor
auto repair facilities, provided that any service bays are screened and
oriented as required by the City Council;



      (2)   On-sale liquor in conjunction with a restaurant facility;



      (3)   Outdoor display or sales conducted by an occupant of a
shopping center.  Outdoor area to be screened and maintained in a manner to
be approved by the City Council;



      (4)   Private clubs and lodges not operated for a profit;



      (5)   Service bays for the installation of auto accessories,
in conjunction with auto accessories store, provided there are no more than
three bays which shall be screened and oriented as required by the City
Council;



      (6)   Bowling alley or similar commercial recreation facility;
and



      (7)   Class II restaurant as a free-standing facility,
provided that the following conditions are met:



         (a)   A minimum indoor seating capacity of 75 persons is
provided;



         (b)   The indoor seating area overlooks a landscaped
green area at least 30 feet in depth;



         (c)   Kitchen or broiler exhaust systems shall be
equipped with state-of-the-art odor scrubber and pollution control devices;



         (d)   All refuse and trash shall be kept within the
building; and



         (e)   The building, delivery and any drive-through
windows shall be oriented and/or screened in a manner to be approved by the
City Council.



   (C)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for temporary outdoor display or promotion carried out by an occupant of the
shopping center or by a non-profit civic organization or uses deemed similar
by the City Council, except through the granting of a conditional use permit.



   (D)   Zone 4.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Outdoor display, sales or storage in conjunction with a
permitted use.  Outdoor area to be screened and/or maintained in a manner to
be approved by the City Council;



      (2)   Service bays as accessory uses for the installation of
auto accessories in conjunction with an auto accessory store, provided the
bays shall be screened and oriented as required by the City Council;



      (3)   Motor fuel stations and minor auto repair facilities;



      (4)   Nursing home, rest home, retirement home or hospital for
human care, day-care center, private school;



      (5)   Off-street parking when the principal site of the
off-street parking abuts on a lot which is in another zoning district;



      (6)   On-sale liquor in conjunction with a restaurant facility;



      (7)   Private clubs and lodges not operated for a profit; and



      (8)   Radio and television studio.



(‘81 Code, § A9-3)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 351, passed
11-14-85; Am. Ord. 448, passed 7-13-89; Am. Ord. 606, passed 9-28-95)



§ A9-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Zones 1, 2 and 3.  Within these zones, the following uses or
uses deemed similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary to
complete the construction;



      (2)   Delivery bays provided the bays are screened and
oriented as required by the City Council;



      (3)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading space as
regulated in the zoning chapter;



      (4)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met; and



      (5)   Outdoor dining area, subject to the regulations set
forth in this chapter.



   (B)   Zone 4.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary to
complete the construction;



      (2)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading space as
regulated in the zoning chapter; and



      (3)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met.



(‘81 Code, § A9-4)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 448, passed
7-13-89; Am. Ord. 794, passed 8-24-06)



§ A9-5  MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be
met.  No improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be
so used or improved shall meet the following area and dimensional
requirements:



      (1)   Table of minimum area requirements and standards is set
out below.  The dimensions shall be measured in feet unless otherwise
specified.



 




Requirements

 
Zone 1
 
Zone 2
 
Zone 3 and Zone 4


Shopping Center
 
Free- Standing Peripheral
 
Shopping Center
 
Free- Standing Peripheral


Minimum Lot Dimensions


Lot area (square feet)
 

 

 

 

 



  Interior
 
550,000
 
15,000
 
50,000
 
25,000
 
10,000


  Corner
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
12,500


Lot width (fronting principal, arterial or community collector streets)
 
300
 
100
 
150
 
100
 
100


  Interior
 
300
 
100
 
150
 
100
 
100


  Corner
 
300
 
100
 
150
 
150
 
125


Minimum Building Setback


Along principal or arterial streets
 
100
 
40
 
50
 
50
 
40


Along community collector streets
 
50
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
40


Along all other streets
 
20
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
25


Side lot line
 
30
 
10
 
15
 
15
 
5


Rear lot line (feet)
 
30
 
15
 
15
 
15
 
15


Minimum Parking Setback


Along all other streets
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20


Side lot line
 
5
 
5
 
5
 
5
 
5


Rear lot line
 
10
 
5
 
10
 
10
 
5


Driveway setback from principal or arterial street
 
300
 
100
 
300
 
100
 
100


Maximum Building Coverage


Coverage of lot (percentage)
 
35
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
20


Maximum Building Height


Maximum height
 
50
 
45
 
45
 
45
 
35


Minimum Floor Area


Initial building (square feet)
 
100,000
 
—
 
10,000
 
—
 
—




 



      (2)   Building materials, see § 155.346.



      (3)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



      (4)   Screening, see § 155.348.



      (5)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.



      (6)   Parking, see §§ 155.370 through 155.379.  In Zone 1,
a business occupying a tenant space of over 150,000 square feet shall be
permitted to provide up to 8% less than the require amount of parking spaces,
provided the property owner can provide sufficient evidence that parking
spaces are not needed because of cross-parking easements, land-use studies,
or other data as accepted by the City Council.



      (7)   Signage shall be in accordance with Chapter 150,
except  as follows:



         (a)   The foundation or support structure of a
freestanding sign must be completely enclosed, and such enclosure shall have
an exterior facing consisting of materials which shall match the exterior
construction materials of the primary building with which it is associated
and serves to identify.



         (b)   In Zone 1, a business occupying a tenant spaces
over 150,000 square feet which has two different business operations within
the space, shall be allowed signage in addition to the primary business sign
to direct customers to the business operations within the tenant space.  The
additional signage shall not exceed 55 square feet and must be located above
the entrance to each business operation.  Only two additional business
operation identification signs shall be allowed per tenant space.



   (B)   The following requirements are in addition to those in
division (A) above.  Where there may be a conflict, the requirements herein
shall prevail:



      (1)   Front setbacks prevailing.  Where adjoining structures
existing at the time of adoption of this article have a greater setback than
that required by this article, the front setback of a new structure shall
conform to the prevailing setback in the immediate



vicinity.  The Building Official shall determine the necessary front yard
setback in such cases.  In no case shall a building be required to be set
back more than 50 feet.



      (2)   Side and rear setbacks, party walls. Buildings may be
excluded from side and rear setback requirements if party walls are used and
if the adjacent buildings are constructed as an integral structure.  This
shall not permit structures closer to single-family detached or duplex lots,
however, than required under subsection (1).



   (C)   The following special performance standards shall be
applicable to uses occurring in Zones 1 and 2.  Where there may be a
conflict between these standards and standards required elsewhere, these
standards shall prevail:



      (1)   Lighting.



         (a)   Lights installed along circulation drives which do
not immediately abut parking stalls shall match the city specification for
“Ring Route” decorative lights.



         (b)   Lights installed within parking lots shall be of a
uniform design and color, with downcast shoe box fixtures.



      (2)   Circulation driveways which do not immediately abut
parking stalls shall have a minimum width of 30 feet.



   (D)   The following special performance standards shall be
applicable to uses occurring in Zone 4. Where there may be a conflict between
these standards and standards required elsewhere, these standards shall
prevail:



      (1)   No outdoor public address system(s) shall be permitted.



      (2)   No driveway access shall be permitted to streets
abutting a residential or multiple-residential zone.  This provision does
not apply to principal or arterial streets.



      (3)   Landscaping in accordance with § 155.349 shall be
subject to the following additional minimum design standards:



         (a)   Berms.  An undulating sodded berm or berms shall
be installed adjacent to any street which abuts a residential or
multiple-residential zone, except for principal or arterial streets. 
Berm(s) shall provide for an obstruction of horizontal view from the
street(s) for a minimum vertical distance of three feet above grade for its
entire length and a minimum vertical distance of four feet for no less than
80% of its entire length.  Berm(s) shall be subject to the traffic
visibility requirements of § 155.335, maximum slope, 3:1.



         (b)   Trees.  Along berm(s) specified in subsection (a)
above, Marshall Seedless Ash and Norway Maple trees shall be required. 
Trees shall have a caliper of two inches, balled and burlapped. Trees shall
be placed at intervals along the street of not more than 25 feet apart. 
Plantings shall be alternated such that no more than two of the same species
will be located adjacent to one another. Plantings shall be made only in the
toe area of any berm’s slope.



         (c)   Shrubs.  Associated with each tree in subsection
(b) above, there shall be a minimum of two Junipers Manxi planted.  The
plantings to be a minimum size of 24 inches, balled and burlapped.



      (4)   Permitted signage shall be in accordance with Chapter
150.  For the purpose of determining permitted signage, any structure in
excess of 20,000 square feet shall be defined as a “multi-occupant” use
in accordance with the chapter.



(‘81 Code, § A9-5)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 448, passed
7-13-89; Am. Ord. 578, passed 6-30-94; Am. Ord. 691, passed 5-15-00)



ARTICLE 10.  DESIGNATION NO. 254



§ A10-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to amend Ordinance No. 254 by
establishing specific performance standards in compliance with §§ 155.260
through 155.267 for property so designated on the official zoning map.  The
purpose of this zone is to provide for an integrated mix of heavy commercial,
light industrial and general office uses.



(‘81 Code, § A10-1)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ A10-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Animal hospital or clinic when contained within a
building;



      (2)   Armory or convention hall;



      (3)   Auto accessories sales and installation facilities;



      (4)   Bicycle, boat or snowmobile sales and service (outdoor
display or storage subject to conditional use);



      (5)   Car wash (motor fuel sales subject to conditional use);



      (6)   Garden store when conducted within a building (outdoor
sales subject to conditional use);



      (7)   Light fabrication/manufacturing where at least 25% of
goods produced are retailed on site;



      (8)   Lumber, heating and plumbing shop and similar
construction material sales and service facilities (outdoor storage subject
to conditional use);



      (9)   Motor vehicle repair and auto body shop (outdoor storage
subject to conditional use);



      (10)   Motor vehicle sales when conducted entirely within a
building (outdoor sales or storage subject to conditional use);



      (11)   Offices as accessory to the principal use.  Medical,
professional, real estate and office buildings are not permitted;



      (12)   Rental shop (outdoor display or storage subject to
conditional use);



      (13)   Research or testing laboratory conducted entirely
within a building;



      (14)   Small engine or appliance repair conducted entirely
within a building;



      (15)   Stone or monument sales (outdoor display or storage
subject to conditional use);



      (16)   Storage facilities contained within a building (outdoor
storage subject to conditional use);



      (17)   Television or radio studio (towers subject to
conditional use);



      (18)   Warehouse/outlet store;



      (19)   Warehousing or wholesale business when conducted within
a building.  Office/warehouse combination permitted when office space does
not exceed 30% of floor area; and



      (20)   Wholesale office, sales or showroom for furniture,
carpet, rugs and similar household goods which shall not include retail food
sales.



      (21)   Sports training facility, not to exceed 4,500 square
feet.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Contractor’s office (outside storage subject to
conditional use);



      (2)   Offices of a general nature; no professional offices
such as doctor, lawyer, and the like; and



      (3)   Office/warehouse (warehouse portion of building not to
exceed 90% of net floor area).



(‘81 Code, § A10-2)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 861,passed
6-11-09)



§ A10-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Motor fuel sales either as a principal or accessory use;



      (2)   Outdoor display, sales or storage conducted by an
occupant.  Outdoor area to be screened and/or maintained in a manner to be
approved by the City Council;



      (3)   Outdoor research or testing facilities; and



      (4)   Restaurant facilities only when incidental to another
use and not principal use of the site.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except
through the granting of a conditional use permit: outdoor storage of
materials or vehicles in conjunction with a permitted use.  Outdoor area to
be screened and maintained in a manner to be approved by the City Council.



(‘81 Code, § A10-3)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ A10-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   Zones 1 and 2.  Within these zones, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



   (A)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on
the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary to complete the
construction;



   (B)   Essential security and safety facilities as approved by the
City Council;



   (C)   Off-street parking, refuse storage, loading bays and space and
storage garage or building as regulated in the zoning chapter; and



   (D)   Public telephone booths and other essential public service
facilities provided all yard requirements are met.



(‘81 Code, § A10-4)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ A10-5  MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be
met.  No improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be
so improved or used shall meet the following area and dimensional
requirements:



      (1)   Table of minimum area requirements and standards.  The
dimensions shall be measured in feet unless otherwise specified.



 


Requirements

 
Zone 1
 
Zone 2




Minimum Lot Dimensions


Lot area (square feet)
 

 



  Interior
 
15,000
 
20,000


  Corner
 
17,250
 
23,000


Lot width (fronting principal, arterial or community collector street)
 
150
 
200


  Interior
 
100
 
100


  Corner
 
115
 
115


Minimum Building Setback


Along principal or arterial streets
 
40
 
40


Along community collector streets
 
40
 
40


Along all other streets
 
30
 
30


Side lot line
 
10
 
10


Rear lot line
 
15
 
20


Abutting one-family detached, duplex or multiple lot
 
30
 
60


Minimum Parking Setback


Along all streets
 
20
 
20


Side or rear lot line
 
5
 
5


Abutting one-family detached, duplex or multiple lot
 
20
 
20


Driveway setback from principal or arterial street
 
100
 
100


Maximum Building Coverage


Coverage of lot (percentage)
 
30
 
30


Maximum Building Height


Maximum height
 
35
 
40




 



      (2)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



      (3)   Screening, see § 155.348.



      (4)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.



      (5)   Parking, see §§ 155.370 through 155.379.



   (B)   The following requirements are in addition to those in
division (A).  Where there may be a conflict, the requirements herein shall
prevail:



      (1)   Front setbacks prevailing.  Where adjoining structures
existing at the time of adoption of this article have a greater setback than
that required by this article, the front setback of a new structure shall
conform to the prevailing setback in the immediate vicinity.  The Building
Official shall determine the necessary front yard setback in such cases.  In
no case shall a building be required to be set back more than 50 feet.



      (2)   Side and rear setbacks, party walls. Buildings may be
excluded from side and rear setback requirements if party walls are used and
if the adjacent buildings are constructed as an integral structure.



(‘81 Code, § A10-5)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ A10-6  PROHIBITED USES.



   Notwithstanding the permitted and conditional uses listed in §§ A10-2
and A10-3, the following uses shall be prohibited in Zones 1 and 2:



   (A)   Any use resulting in sanitary sewer effluent flows in excess
of 780 gallons per acre per day; and



   (B)   Car washes not part of an automobile dealership or service
station.



(‘81 Code, § A10-6)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



ARTICLE 11.  DESIGNATION NO. 144



§ A11-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to amend Ordinance No. 144 by
establishing specific performance standards in compliance with §§ 155.260
through 155.267 for property so designated on the official zoning map.  The
purpose of this zone is to provide for an integrated mix of low and moderate
density residential uses in conjunction with a limited amount of commercial
uses.



(‘81 Code, § A11-1)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ A11-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state;



      (2)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (3)   One-family detached dwellings meeting the standards of
the Uniform Building Code, placed on permanent foundations and having no
horizontal axis less than 18 feet in length; and



      (4)   Public utility buildings and structures.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Any permitted use in division (A) above; and



      (2)   Townhouse multiple dwellings provided no single
structure contains in excess of 12 units.



   (C)   Zones 3 and 4.  Within these zones, no structure or land
shall be used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council:



      (1)   Apartment or condominium buildings;



      (2)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state;



      (3)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (4)   Public utility buildings and structures; and



      (5)   Townhouse multiple dwellings provided no single
structure contains in excess of 12 dwelling units.



   (D)   Zone 5.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Any use permitted in division (C) above;



      (2)   General or professional office uses in either a
free-standing building or as a tenant in a multi-tenant building;



      (3)   Motel or hotel;



      (4)   Mass transit terminal or pick-up station;



      (5)   Convenience grocery store not to exceed a total of 3,500
square feet in floor area as a free-standing use or as a use within a
multi-tenant building;



      (6)   Restaurant, free-standing: Class I only and a minimum of
5,000 square feet in area, when located within a free-standing building, and
which does not operate between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m;



      (7)   Restaurant, multi-tenant occupants: Either Class I or
II, when located within a multi-tenant building, with no minimum floor area
requirement, which does not operate between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m., and which under no circumstances includes any type of drive-thru window
service;



      (8)   Retail sales when such operations are located within a
multi-tenant building (not as free- standing uses) and not to exceed 10,000
square feet of floor area in aggregate for the entire zone, exclusive of the
area of any convenience grocery store established pursuant to subsection (5)
above.  Permitted retail business uses in multi-tenant buildings shall be
limited to the following unless similar uses are specifically approved by the
City Council:  stores and shops selling the personal service or goods over a
counter.  These include: antiques; art and school supplies; bakeries;
barbershop; beauty parlor; bicycles; books and stationery; candy; cameras and
photographic supplies; carpets and rugs; catering establishments; china and
glassware; Christmas tree sales; clothes pressing; clothes and costume
rental; custom dressmaking; drugs; dry goods; electrical and household
appliances; florists; food; furniture; furrier shops; garden supplies; gifts;
hardware; hats; hobby shops; interior decorating; jewelry; watch repair;
laundry and dry cleaning pickup; laundromat; leather goods and luggage;
liquor store; off-sale; locksmith shops; musical instruments; office supply;
paint and wallpaper; phonograph records; photograph studios; shoes; sporting
goods; tailoring; theater, except open air drive-in; tobacco; toys; variety
stores; and wearing apparel; and



      (9)   Coin-operated amusement devices in conjunction with a
restaurant facility.



      (10)   Veterinary clinic when contained within a building; no
outdoor pens or kennels permitted.



(‘81 Code, § A11-2)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 613, passed
3-14-96; Am. Ord. 698, passed 8-9-01)



§ A11-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812 where:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes; and



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities.



      (2)   A conditional use permit shall be reviewed at one year
intervals.



   (B)   Zones 2, 3 and 4.  Within these zones, no structure or land
shall be used for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City
Council, except through granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812 contained within a one-family
dwelling where:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes;



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities; and



         (c)   A conditional use permit shall be reviewed at
one-year intervals.



      (2)   Community-based residential-care facility or day-care
facility in a multiple-dwelling where:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes;



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities; and



         (c)   A conditional use permit shall be reviewed at
one-year intervals.



   (C)   Zone 5.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except
through the granting of a conditional use permit.



      (1)   Motor fuel station in accordance with the design
standards of § 155.356;



      (2)   Motor vehicle car wash in conjunction with a motor fuel
station.  The car wash to be restricted to one bay and must be incorporated
into the primary structure and subject to the same design standards as a
motor fuel station as stipulated in § 155.356;



      (3)   Restaurant, extended hours of operation.  Either Class
I or Class II located as regulated in § A11-1(D), having hours of operation
up to 24 hours per day, provided that they are not located in a structure
which is immediately adjacent (lot line to lot line) to an established
residential use;



      (4)   On-sale liquor or wine and beer in conjunction with a
restaurant operation; and



      (5)   Outdoor display and sales of retail goods associated
with a retail business operation located in either a free-standing or
multi-tenant building.  The outdoor display or sales to be located in a
manner so as not to impede or restrict vehicular or pedestrian movements,
with the retail goods to be placed on appropriate display racks and not
placed directly upon the ground or paved surface, and to be stored indoors
when the operation is not open for business.



(‘81 Code, § A11-3)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 613, passed
3-14-96)



§ A11-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Building temporarily located for purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary
for the construction;



      (2)   Decorative landscape features;



      (3)   Gardening or other horticultural uses where no sale of
products is conducted on the premises;



      (4)   Keeping of domestic animals commonly referred to as
“house pets” for noncommercial purposes;



      (5)   Private parking space and garage, one attached and one
detached;



      (6)   One accessory storage building in addition to any
garage(s), except that it shall not exceed 144 square feet in area if a
detached garage exists on the same lot;



      (7)   Repair and maintenance of motor vehicles owned by the
occupant. See screening requirements, § 155.348;



      (8)   Garage sales not to exceed three per calendar year; and



      (9)   Private swimming pool, tennis court and play apparatus
for use by occupants of the premises.



   (B)   Zones 2, 3, 4 and 5.  Within these zones, the following uses
or uses deemed similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading spaces as
regulated in the zoning chapter;



      (2)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities providing all yard requirements are met; and



      (3)   Putting greens, shuffleboard courts, picnic areas,
community buildings and similar recreational or service areas when accessory
to a multiple-dwelling use, for use by occupants of the premises.



(‘81 Code, § A11-4)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83)



§ A11-5  MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be
met.  No improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be
so used or improved shall meet the following area and dimensional
requirements:



      (1)   Table of minimum area requirements and standards.  The
dimensions shall be measured in feet unless otherwise specified.



MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS FOR DESIGNATION NO. 144



 




Requirements

 
Zone 1
 
Zone 2
 
Zone 3
 
Zone 4
 
Zone 5


One-Family
 
Multiple Residential
 
Multiple Residential**
 



Minimum Lot Dimensions


Lot area (square feet)
 

 

 
—
 
—
 
—
 

 
15,000


  Interior
 
11,000
 
11,000
 

 

 

 

 



  Corner
 
12,500
 
12,500
 

 

 

 

 



Lot width
 

 

 
—
 
—
 
—
 

 
100


  Interior
 
80
 
80
 

 

 

 

 



  Corner
 
90
 
90
 

 

 

 

 



Dwelling Unit Density


One-story building
 
—
 
—
 
10,8901(4)2
 
10,8901(4)2
 
7,2601(6)2
 

 
—


Two-story building
 
—
 
—
 
8,710(5)
 
7,260(6)
 
5,445(8)
 

 
—


Three-story building
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
4,355(10)
 
3,630(12)
 

 
—


Buried Garages
 
—
 
—
 
3
 
3
 
3
 

 



Buffer Zone
 
—
 
—
 
4
 
4
 
4
 

 
—


Minimum Building Setbacks


Along principal, arterial or collector streets
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
50
 

 
50


Along all other streets
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
30
 

 
30


Side lot line
 

 

 
25
 
25
 
25
 

 
30


  Dwelling
 
10
 
10
 

 

 

 

 



  Garage
 
5
 
5
 

 

 

 

 



Rear lot line
 
30
 
30
 
25
 
25
 
25
 

 
15


Between multiple dwellings
 
—
 
—
 
*
 
*
 
*
 

 
15


Abutting a one-family lot
 
—
 
—
 
60
 

 

 

 
—




 



  One-story
 

 

 

 

 
60
 

 
60


  Two-story
 

 

 

 

 
75
 

 
75


  Three-story
 

 

 

 

 
100
 

 
100


Minimum Detached Garage and Accessory Building Setbacks


Along principal, arterial or collector streets
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
50
 

 
—


Along all other streets
 
305
 
305
 
30
 
30
 
30
 

 
—


Side lot line
 
5
 
5
 
10
 
10
 
10
 

 
—


Rear lot line
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
10
 

 
—


From one-family dwelling
 
10
 
10
 
—
 
—
 
—
 

 
—


From multiple dwelling
 
—
 
—
 
15
 
15
 
15
 

 
—


Abutting one-family lot
 
—
 
—
 
60
 
60
 
60
 

 
—


Minimum Parking Setback


Along all streets
 
—
 
—
 
20
 
20
 
20
 

 
20


Side or rear lot lines
 
—
 
—
 
5
 
5
 
5
 

 
5


From multiple dwelling
 
—
 
—
 
10
 
10
 
10
 

 
—


Abutting one-family lot
 
—
 
—
 
55
 
55
 
55
 

 
—


Maximum Building Coverage


Lot coverage (percentage)
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
15
 
15
 

 
30




 

Maximum Building Height


Maximum height
 
35
 
35
 
25
 
40
 
40
 

 
45


NOTES TO TABLE

1 - Square feet of land per unit.

2 - Units per acre.

3 - Where garages are buried to the extent that the side area normally
covered by garages can be occupied by other uses, each of the preceding 
square footage requirements shall be reduced by 600 square feet.

4 - Fifty feet of unaltered natural land adjacent to any single-family lot.

5 - Corner lot sideyard setbacks where abutting a street shall be 20 feet.

* - See § A11-5(A)(2).

** - Same requirements as Zone 4.



 



      (2)   Setbacks between multiple dwellings.



         (a)   The front and rear sides of a multiple dwelling
shall have a minimum setback of 50 feet from any side of an adjacent multiple
dwelling or a setback equal to the combined height of the adjacent multiple
dwellings, whichever is greater, except that in no case shall a setback
greater than 75 feet be required.  This minimum setback shall be reduced to
40 feet where a horizontal extension of the lines created by the nearest
exterior vertical surfaces of adjacent buildings would create an angle of not
less than 45 degrees.



         (b)   Minimum setbacks between adjacent multiple
dwellings on sides which are not a front or rear side of either building
shall be 20 feet or a distance equal to one-half of the combined height of
the adjacent buildings, whichever is greater, except that in no case shall a
setback be greater than 50 feet be required.  This minimum setback shall be
reduced to 25 feet where a horizontal extension of the lines created by the
nearest exterior vertical surfaces of adjacent buildings would create an
angle of not less than 45 degrees.



      (3)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



      (4)   Screening, see § 155.348.



      (5)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.



      (6)   Parking, see §§ 155.370 through 155.379.



      (7)   Architecture and building design, see § 155.346.  In
addition, all commercial buildings constructed in Subzone 5 shall be designed
with a residential character and shall have pitched roofs.



   (B)   The following requirements are in addition to those in
division (A).  Where there may be a conflict, the requirements herein shall
prevail:



      (1)   Front setbacks prevailing.  Where adjoining structures
existing at the time of adoption of this article have a greater setback than
that required by this article, the front setback of a new structure shall
conform to the prevailing setback in the immediate vicinity.  The Building
Official shall determine the necessary front yard setback in such cases.  In
no case shall a building be required to be set back more than 50 feet.



      (2)   Side and rear setbacks, party walls. Buildings may be
excluded from side and rear setback requirements if party walls are used and
if the adjacent buildings are constructed as an integral structure.  This
shall not permit structures closer to single-family detached lots, however,
than required under subsection (1) above.



(‘81 Code, § A11-5)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 613, passed
3-14-96)



ARTICLE 12.  DESIGNATION NO. 315



§ A12-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish specific performance
standards in compliance with §§ 155.260 through 155.267 for property
designated by Ordinance No. 315 on the official zoning map.  The purpose of
this zone is to provide for an integrated mix of low and moderate density
residential uses.



(‘81 Code, § A12-1)  (Ord. 315, passed 4-26-84)



§ A12-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state;



      (2)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (3)   One-family detached dwellings meeting the standards of
the Uniform Building Code, placed on permanent foundations and having no
horizontal axis less than 18 feet in length; and



      (4)   Public utility buildings and structures.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (2)   Townhouse multiple dwellings provided no single
structure contains in excess of 12 dwelling units.  Within the structure may
be a community- based family-care home, day-care home licensed under M.S. §
245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically handicapped
licensed by the state; and



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures.



(‘81 Code, § A12-2)  (Ord. 315, passed 4-26-84)



§ A12-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812 where:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes; and



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities.



      (2)   A conditional use permit shall be reviewed at one-year
intervals.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812 or a community-based
residential-care facility or day-care facility when:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes; and



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities.



      (2)   A conditional use permit shall be reviewed at one-year
intervals.



(‘81 Code, § A12-3)  (Ord. 315, passed 4-26-84)



§ A12-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary
for the construction;



      (2)   Decorative landscape features;



      (3)   Gardening or other horticultural uses where no sale of
products is conducted on the premises;



      (4)   Keeping of domestic animals commonly referred to as
“house pets” for noncommercial purposes;



      (5)   Private parking space and garage, one attached and one
detached;



      (6)   One accessory storage building in addition to any
garage(s), except that it shall not exceed 144 square feet in area if a
detached garage exists on the same lot;



      (7)   Repair and maintenance of motor vehicles owned by the
occupant.  See screening requirements, § 155.348;



      (8)   Garage sales not to exceed three per calendar year; and



      (9)   Private swimming pool, tennis court and play apparatus
for use by occupants of the premises.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Any accessory uses permitted in division (A) above;



      (2)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading space as
regulated in the zoning chapter;



      (3)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met; and



      (4)   Putting greens, shuffleboard courts, picnic area,
community building and similar recreational or service areas when accessory
to a multiple-dwelling use, for use by occupants of the premises.



(‘81 Code, § A12-4)  (Ord. 315, passed 4-26-84)



§ A12-5  MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be
met.  No improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be
so used or improved shall meet the following area and dimensional
requirements:



      (1)   Table of minimum area requirements and standards.  The
dimensions shall be measured in feet unless otherwise specified.



 

Requirements
 
Zone 1
 
Zone 2




Minimum Lot Dimensions


Lot area (square feet)
 

 
—


  Interior
 
8,400
 



  Corner
 
10,000
 



Lot width
 

 
—


  Interior
 
70
 



  Corner
 
80
 



Dwelling Unit Density4


One-story building
 
—
 
7,2601(6)2


Two-story building
 
—
 
6,220(7)


Minimum Building Setback


Along principal or arterial streets
 
40
 
40


Along other streets
 
303
 
30


Side lot line
 

 
25


  Dwelling
 
10
 



  Garage
 
5
 



Rear lot line
 
30
 
25


From multiple dwelling
 
—
 
**


Abutting one-family detached lot
 
—
 
30


Minimum Detached Garage and Accessory Building Setback


Along principal or arterial streets
 
*
 
35


Along other streets
 
*
 
30


Side lot line
 
*
 
10


Rear lot line
 
*
 
10


From multiple dwelling
 
—
 
15


Abutting one-family detached lot
 
—
 
20


Minimum Parking Setback


Along all streets
 
—
 
15


Side or rear lot line
 
—
 
5


From multiple dwelling
 
—
 
10


Abutting one-family detached lot
 
—
 
15


Maximum Building Coverage


Coverage of lot (percentage)
 
20
 
20


Maximum Building Height


Maximum height
 
35
 
30


NOTES TO TABLE

1 - Square feet of land per unit.

2 - Units per acre.

3 - Corner lot sideyard setbacks abutting a street shall be 20 feet.

4 - Buried garages, 400-square foot bonus.  Ponding or unbuildable areas
shall not exceed 20% of

    required lot area.

* - See § 115.332.

** - See § A12-5(A)(2).




 



      (2)   Setbacks between multiple dwellings.



         (a)   The front and rear sides of a multiple dwelling
shall have a minimum setback of 50 feet from any side of an adjacent multiple
dwelling or a setback equal to the combined height of the adjacent multiple
dwellings, whichever is greater, except that



in no case shall a setback greater than 75 feet be required.  This minimum
setback shall be reduced to 40 feet where a horizontal extension of the lines
created by the nearest exterior vertical surfaces of adjacent buildings would
create an angle of not less than 45 degrees.



         (b)   Minimum setbacks between adjacent multiple
dwellings on sides which are not a front or rear side of either building
shall be 20 feet or a distance equal to one-half of the combined height of
the adjacent buildings, whichever is greater, except that in no case shall a
setback greater than 50 feet be required.  This minimum setback shall be
reduced to 25 feet where a horizontal extension of the lines created by the
nearest exterior vertical surfaces of adjacent buildings would create an
angle of not less than 45 degrees.



      (3)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



      (4)   Screening, see § 155.348.



      (5)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.



      (6)   Parking, see §§ 155.370 through 155.379.



   (B)   The following requirements are in addition to those in
division (A).  Where there may be a conflict, the requirements herein shall
prevail:



      (1)   Front setbacks prevailing.  Where adjoining structures
existing at the time of adoption of this article have a greater setback than
that required by this article, the front setback of a new structure shall
conform to the prevailing setback in the immediate vicinity.  The Building
Official shall determine the necessary front yard setback in such cases.  In
no case shall a building be required to be set back more than 50 feet.



      (2)   Side and rear setbacks, party walls. Buildings may be
excluded from side and rear setback requirements if party walls are used and
if the adjacent buildings are constructed as an integral structure.  This
shall not permit structures closer to single-family detached or duplex lots,
however, than required under subsection (1) above.



(‘81 Code, § A12-5)  (Ord. 315, passed 4-26-84)



ARTICLE 13.  DESIGNATION NO. 341



§ A13-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish specific performance
standards in compliance with §§ 155.260 through 155.267 for property
designated by Ordinance No. 341 on the official zoning map.  The purpose of
this zone is to provide for an integrated mix of low, moderate, and high
density residential uses as well as shopping center, freestanding retail,
institutional and limited business uses.



(‘81 Code, § A13-1)  (Ord. 341, passed 9-26-85)



§ A13-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state;



      (2)   One-family detached dwellings meeting the standards of
the Uniform Building Code, placed on permanent foundations and having no
horizontal axis less than 18 feet in length; and



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (2)   Townhouse multiple dwellings provided no single
structure contains in excess of 12 dwelling units.  Within the structure may
be a community- based family-care home, day-care home licensed under M.S. §
245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically handicapped
licensed by the state; and



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures.



   (C)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Armory;



      (2)   Public utility buildings and structures;



      (3)   Public libraries;



      (4)   Parks and playgrounds;



      (5)   Public recreation buildings, community centers and
swimming pools; and



      (6)   Municipal government administrative buildings.



   (D)   Zone 4A.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Retail shopping centers of initial minimum floor area of
50,000 square feet.  Permitted uses within the center shall include: 
Antique or gift shop; appliance store (sales and/or repair); art and school
supply store; auto accessory store (no installation facilities permitted);
bakery; bank; savings and loan; barbershop; beauty parlor; bicycle sales;
books, stationery and office supplies; candy; cameras and photographic
supplies; carpet sales; catering service; china and glassware sales; clothing
and costume sales or rental; coin-operated amusement devices and similar
facilities; department store; drugstore; dry cleaning; dry goods; florist;
furniture store; garden supplies; grocery store; hardware store; health or
athletic club and facilities; hobby store; interior decorating; jewelry and
watch repair; laundromat; leather goods and luggage; locksmith; musical
instruments; off-sale liquor store; on-sale wine or 3.2% malt liquor or beer
in conjunction with a restaurant facility; paint and wallpaper sales;
phonograph records; photography studio; pipe and tobacco shop; restaurant,
Class I and Class III; shoe sales or repair; small engine or appliance
repair; sporting goods; tailoring; theater (except open air drive-in); toy
store; and



      (2)   No more than four peripheral lots for freestanding
structures for uses as listed in subsection (1) above.  Peripheral uses
shall be permitted after the construction of a minimum 50,000 square foot
center in Zone 4A.



   (E)   Zone 4B.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Stores and shops selling personal service or goods over
a counter.  These include: antiques; art and school supplies; bakeries;
barbershop; beauty parlor; bicycles; books and stationery; candy; cameras and
photographic supplies; carpets and rugs; catering establishments; china and
glassware; Christmas tree sales; clothes pressing; clothing and costume
rental; custom dressmaking; department stores and junior department stores;
drugs; dry goods; electrical and household appliances; florists; food;
furniture; furrier shops; garden supplies; gifts; hardware; hats; hobby
shops; interior decorating; jewelry; watch repair; laundry and dry cleaning
pick up; locksmith shops; musical instruments; office supply; paint and
wallpaper; phonograph records; photography studios; restaurants; shoes;
sporting goods; tailoring; theater (except open air drive-in); toys; variety
stores; wearing apparel; and grocery store and off-sale liquor store;



      (2)   Banks, savings and loan offices, offices for doctors,
dentists, lawyers, real estate and similar uses to serve the adjoining
residential area;



      (3)   Community facilities such as library, swimming pool,
health center, day care center, religious facilities or community center;



      (4)   On-sale wine and/or 3.2% liquor in conjunction with a
restaurant facility;



      (5)   Health clubs or athletic clubs and facilities;



      (6)   Animal hospital or clinic when contained within a
building;



      (7)   Small engine and appliance repair conducted entirely
within a building and accessory to a principal use;



      (8)   Commercial recreation including theater, coin-operated
amusement devices, athletic club, billiard room and similar facilities when
contained within a building; and



      (9)   Retail sales of auto accessories except that of
installation facilities.



   (F)   Zone 5.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Municipal building including police, fire, emergency
management, and the like, but not public works;



      (2)   Professional offices, banks and savings and loan;



      (3)   Offices of a general nature where the operations do not
include over-the-counter retail sales or warehousing from the site;



      (4)   Clinics for human care;



      (5)   Institutional uses: library, swimming pool, church,
public schools, religious centers, health centers and community building;



      (6)   On-sale wine and/or 3.2% liquor in conjunction with a
restaurant facility; and



      (7)   Coin-operated amusement devices in conjunction with a
restaurant facility or private club.



(‘81 Code, § A13-2)  (Ord. 341, passed 9-26-85; Am. Ord. 424, passed
9-22-88; Am. Ord 682, passed 9-28-00)



§ A13-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zones 1 and 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall
be used for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council,
except through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812 or a community-based
residential-care facility or day-care facility in a multiple dwelling when:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes; and



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities.



      (2)   A conditional use permit shall be reviewed at one-year
intervals.



   (B)   Zone 3.  There are no conditional uses provided.



   (C)   Zone 4A.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council,
except through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Bowling alley or similar commercial recreation facility;



      (2)   On-sale liquor in conjunction with a restaurant facility;



      (3)   Outdoor display or sales conducted by an occupant of a
shopping center.  Outdoor area to be screened and maintained in a manner to
be approved by the City Council; and



      (4)   Restaurant, Class II, either freestanding or contained
within a shopping center.  Such use may be located no closer than 500 feet
to the right-of-way line of a minor or principal arterial road unless the
Class II restaurant meets the following requirements:



         (a)   Hours of operation are limited to 10:00 a.m. to
11:00 p.m. daily; and



         (b)   The Class II restaurant does not serve foods which
require the installation of a Type I ventilation hood (grease and smoke
removing) as defined in the Uniform Mechanical Code.



   (D)   Zone 4B.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council,
except through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Motor fuel station and/or service station with minor
auto repair facilities;



      (2)   On-sale liquor in conjunction with a restaurant facility;



      (3)   Outdoor display or sales conducted by an occupant of a
shopping center.  Outdoor area to be screened and maintained in a manner to
be approved by the City Council;



      (4)   Private clubs and lodges not operated for a profit; and



      (5)   Service bays for the installation of auto accessories,
in conjunction with auto accessories store, provided there are no more than
three bays which shall be screened and oriented as required by the City
Council.



   (E)   Zone 5.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Nursing homes, rest homes, retirement homes or hospitals
for human care, day care centers and private schools;



      (2)   Funeral homes and mortuaries;



      (3)   Art, interior decorating, photographic or music studio
provided no retail sales are made of products not manufactured on the site;



      (4)   Radio and television studios;



      (5)   Private clubs and lodges not operated for a profit;



      (6)   Historical buildings, museums, art institutes, galleries
and playhouses;



      (7)   Off-street parking when the principal site of the
off-street parking abuts on a lot which is in another zoning district;



      (8)   On-sale liquor in conjunction with a restaurant
facility; and



      (9)   Restaurants, Class I only.



(‘81 Code, § A13-3)  (Ord. 341, passed 9-26-85; Am. Ord. 424, passed
9-22-88; Am. Ord. 687, passed 11-21-00)



§ A13-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary
for construction;



      (2)   Decorative landscape features;



      (3)   Gardening or other horticultural uses where no sale of
products is conducted on the premises;



      (4)   Keeping of domestic animals commonly referred to as
“house pets” for noncommercial purposes;



      (5)   Private parking space and garage, one attached and one
detached;



      (6)   One accessory storage building in addition to any
garages, except that it shall not exceed 144 square feet in area if a
detached garage exists on the same lot;



      (7)   Repair and maintenance of motor vehicles owned by the
occupant.  See screening requirements, § 155.348;



      (8)   Garage sales not to exceed three per calendar year; and



      (9)   Private swimming pool, tennis court and play apparatus
for use by occupants of the premises.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Any accessory uses permitted in division (A) above;



      (2)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading space as
regulated in the zoning chapter;



      (3)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met; and



      (4)   Putting greens, shuffleboard courts, picnic area,
community building and similar recreational or service areas, when accessory
to a multiple-dwelling use, for use by occupants of the premises.



   (C)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Any accessory uses permitted in division (A) above;



      (2)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading space as
regulated in the zoning chapter;



      (3)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met; and



      (4)   Putting greens, shuffleboard courts, picnic area,
community building and similar recreational or service areas, when accessory
to a multiple-dwelling use, for use by occupants of the premises.



   (D)   Zone 4A.  Within this zone, the following uses deemed similar
by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Building temporarily located for purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary
for construction;



      (2)   Delivery bays provided the bays are screened and
oriented as required by the City Council;



      (3)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading space as
regulated in the zoning chapter; and



      (4)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met.



   (E)   Zone 4B.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary
for construction;



      (2)   Delivery bays provided the bays are screened and
oriented as required by the City Council;



      (3)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading space as
regulated in the zoning chapter;



      (4)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met; and



      (5)   Outdoor sidewalk cafes in conjunction with a
freestanding restaurant facility.  The use shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission and City Council pursuant to § 155.402(B) and shall provide
adequate visual screening and physical barriers if intoxicating or
nonintoxicating alcoholic beverages are to be served.  Notwithstanding §
A13-5(A)(1), decorative structures not exceeding 12 feet in height and not
designed to be occupied more than six months a year may be set back a
distance of two feet from any property line.  The use shall be prohibited if
within 600 feet of any residential use.



   (F)   Zone 5.  Within the zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading space as
regulated in the zoning chapter;



      (2)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary
for construction; and



      (3)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met.



(‘81 Code, § A13-4)  (Ord. 341, passed 9-26-85; Am. Ord. 424, passed
9-22-88)



§ A13-5  MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be
met.  No improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be
so used or improved shall meet the following area and dimensional
requirements:



      (1)   Table of minimum area requirements and standards.  The
dimensions listed shall be measured in feet unless otherwise specified.



MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS FOR DESIGNATION NO. 341



 




   Requirements

 
Zone 1
 
Zone 2
 
Zone 3
 

Zone 4

 
Zone 4B
 
Zone 5



Shopping Center

 

Free- Standing



Minimum Lot Dimensions


Lot area
 

 

 

 

 

 

 



  Interior
 
8,000
 
—
 
15,000
 
167,000
 
15,000
 
50,000
 
40,000


  Corner
 
15,000
 
167,000
 
15,000
 
50,000
 
—
 
50,000
 
—


Lot width
 

 

 

 

 

 

 



  Interior
 
65
 
—
 
100
 
400
 
100
 
150
 
125


  Corner
 
85
 
—
 
100
 
500
 
125
 
200
 
—


Dwelling Unit Density1


One-story building
 
—
 
7,1602(6)3
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—


Two-story building
 
—
 
3,960(11)
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—


Minimum Building Setback


Along principal or arterial streets
 
—
 
—
 
50
 
150
 
100
 
—
 
—


Along community or neighborhood collector streets
 
30
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
40


Along all other streets
 
304
 
35
 
40
 
—
 
—
 
35
 
—


Side lot line
 

 
25
 
20
 
25
 
25
 
15
 
15


  Dwelling
 
10
 

 

 

 

 

 



  Garage
 
5
 

 

 

 

 

 



Rear lot line
 
30
 
25
 
20
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25


Between multiple dwellings
 
—
 
*
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—


Abutting one-family lot
 
—
 
40
 
50
 
—
 
—
 
40
 
40


Minimum Detached Garage and Accessory Building Setback


Along principal or arterial streets
 
—
 
—
 
50
 
150
 
100
 
—
 
—




 



Along community or neighborhood collector streets
 
30
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
40


Along all other streets
 
304
 
35
 
40
 
—
 
—
 
35
 
—


Side lot line
 
5
 
10
 
20
 
25
 
25
 
15
 
15


Rear lot line
 
10
 
10
 
20
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25


Between multiple dwellings
 
—
 
15
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—


Abutting a one-family lot
 
—
 
20
 
50
 
—
 
—
 
40
 
40


Minimum Parking Setback


Along principal or arterial streets
 
—
 
—
 
20
 
30
 
30
 
—
 
—


Along all other streets
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
15
 
20


Side or rear lot line
 
5
 
5
 
5
 
5
 
5
 
5
 
5


From a multiple dwelling
 
—
 
10
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—


Abutting one-family
 
—
 
10
 
40
 
—
 
—
 
15
 
—


Driveway setback from principal or arterial street intersections
 
—
 
—
 
200
 
200
 
200
 
—
 
—


Driveway setback from all other street intersections
 
30
 
80
 
100
 
150
 
150
 
150
 
80


Maximum Building Coverage


Coverage of lot (percentage)
 
20
 
25
 
25
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
30


Maximum Building Height


Maximum height
 
45
 
30
 
28 (2 stories)
 
305
 
305
 
20
 
20




 

Minimum Floor Area


Minimum area
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
50,000
 
—
 
—
 
—


NOTES TO TABLE

1 - Where garages are buried to the extent that the site area normally
covered by garages can be occupied by other uses, each of the square footage
requirements shall be reduced by 400 square feet.

2 - Square feet of land per unit.  Ponding or unbuildable area shall not
exceed 20% of required lot area per unit.

3 - Units per acre.

4 - Corner lot sideyard setbacks abutting a local access street shall be 20
feet.

5 Unoccupied architectural details, such as parapets or entry features
comprising less than 40% of the lineal dimension of the front elevation, may
have a maximum height of 35 feet.

* - See § A13-5(A)(2)



 



      (2)   Setbacks between multiple dwellings.



         (a)   The front and rear sides of a multiple dwelling
shall have a minimum setback of 50 feet from any side of an adjacent multiple
dwelling or a setback equal to the combined height of the adjacent multiple
dwellings, whichever is greater, except that in no case shall a setback
greater than 75 feet be required.  This minimum setback shall be reduced to
40 feet where a horizontal extension of the lines created by the nearest
exterior vertical surfaces of adjacent buildings would create an angle of not
less than 45 degrees.



         (b)   Minimum setbacks between adjacent multiple
dwellings on sides which are not a front or rear side of either building
shall be 20 feet or a distance equal to half the combined height of the
adjacent buildings, whichever is greater, except that in no case shall a
setback greater than 50 feet be required.  This minimum setback shall be
reduced to 25 feet where a horizontal extension of the lines created by the
nearest exterior vertical surfaces of adjacent buildings would create an
angle of not less than 45 degrees.



      (3)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



      (4)   Screening, see § 155.348.



      (5)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.



      (6)   Parking, see §§ 155.370 through 155.379.



      (7)   Lighting, see § 155.353.



      (8)   Off-street loading, see § 155.354.



   (B)   (1)   The following requirements are in addition to those
in division (A) above.  Where there may be a conflict, the requirements
herein shall prevail:



      (2)   Side and rear setbacks, party walls. Buildings may be
excluded from side and rear setback requirements if party walls are used and
if the adjacent buildings are constructed as an integral structure.  This
shall not permit structures closer to single-family detached or duplex lots,
however, than required under subsection (A)(1) above.



(‘81 Code, § A13-5)  (Ord. 341, passed 9-26-85; Am. Ord. 424, passed
9-22-88; Am. Ord. 588, passed 11-22-94; Am. Ord. 805, passed 3-25-07)



§ A13-6  SPECIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   In order to insure a properly integrated design among
competing land uses, special performance standards shall be established in
certain zones pursuant to this section.



   (B)   Zone 4A.  Within this zone, the following special performance
and design standards shall be observed:



      (1)   Access control.  In addition to the standards set forth
in § A13-5(A)(1), no direct private access shall be permitted to a principal
or minor arterial.  Direct private access onto collector roads having a
right-of-way width of 80 feet or greater shall be limited to locations
directly aligned with public street intersections.



      (2)   Landscaping.  Landscaping in accordance with § 155.349
shall be subject to the following minimum design standards:



         (a)   Berms.  An undulating sodded berm or berms shall
be installed adjacent to any principal or minor arterial street.  Berm(s)
shall provide for an obstruction of horizontal view from the street(s) for a
minimum vertical distance of three feet above grade for its entire length and
a minimum vertical distance of four feet for no less than 80% of its entire
length, with any contiguous four-foot section to occur for a distance of not
more than 20% of the entire length.  Berm(s) shall be subject to the traffic
visibility requirements of § 155.335, maximum slope, 3:1.



         (b)   Trees.  Along berm(s) specified in subsection (a)
above, Marshall Seedless Ash and Norway trees shall be required.  Trees
shall have a caliper of two inches, balled and burlapped.  Trees shall be
planted at intervals along the principal or minor arterial street of not more
than 25 feet apart, with not less than 60% or more than 80% of the trees to
be planted on the street side of the berm.  Plantings shall be alternated
such that no more than two of the same species will be located adjacent to
one another.  Plantings shall be made only in the toe area of any berm’s
slope.



         (c)   Shrubs.  Associated with each tree in subsection
(b) above, there shall be a minimum of two Junipers Manxi planted.  The
plantings to be a minimum size of 24 inches, balled and burlapped.



         (d)   Inspection.  Landscape and berm installation
shall not be considered complete until after an inspection and approval by
the City Forester.



      (3)   Signage. 



         (a)   Notwithstanding Chapter 150, only one freestanding
pylon sign for the purpose of area identification shall be permitted within
the confines of this zone.  The sign shall be a maximum of 28 feet in height
and 200 square feet in area.  The sign shall be allowed only along a
principal or minor arterial, except that it shall not be allowed in any area
directly across the arterial from a residential use.  Any sign shall have a
minimum setback of 13 feet from any public street right-of-way.  Building
signs to be permitted as per Chapter 150, based upon retail business uses.



         (b)   A business occupying 150,000 square feet or more
of interior building space, which has more than one type of retail service
component to its business operations (e.g., general merchandise, grocery,
garden and/or pharmacy), may have a building sign, in addition to the primary
business building sign permitted by this code, to direct customers to each
separate retail area within the business space.  Each additional sign shall
not exceed 55 square feet, and shall be located over the building entrance
into the retail service component of the business for which the sign
relates.  No more than three building signs for the retail service
components of the business shall be permitted.



   (C)   Zone 4B.  Within this zone, the following special performance
and design standards shall be observed:



      (1)   Access control.  In addition to the standards set forth
in § A13-5(A)(1), no direct private access shall be permitted to collector
streets having a right-of-way width of 80 feet or greater or to any local
access residential street.



      (2)   Screening.  Adjacent to any local access residential
street a berm of a minimum height of six feet shall be constructed.  Any
berm shall be landscaped to provide a visual buffering of the commercial area
from the street.



   (D)   Zone 5.  Within this zone, adjacent to any residential lot a
berm of a minimum height of four feet shall be constructed.  Any berm shall
be landscaped to provide a visual buffering (not a barrier) between the
commercial and residential uses.  Berm shall have a maximum slope of 3:1.



   (E)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, adjacent to any residential lot a
berm of a minimum height of four feet shall be constructed.  Any berm shall
be landscaped to provide a visual buffering (not a barrier) between the
institutional and residential uses.  Berm shall have a maximum slope of 3:1.



(‘81 Code, § A13-6)  (Ord. 341, passed 9-26-85; Am. Ord. 424, passed
9-22-88; Am. Ord. 810, passed 5-10-07)



§ A13-7  STREET DESIGN.



   Notwithstanding § 153.51, minimum street rights-of-way for
neighborhood collector roads within the development, not abutting, shall be
64 feet in width.  Minimum local access road rights-of-way shall be 50 feet
in width.



(‘81 Code, § A13-7)  (Ord. 341, passed 9-26-85)



ARTICLE 14.  DESIGNATION NO. 342



§ A14-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish specific performance
standards in compliance with §§ 155.260 through 155.267 for property
designated by Ordinance No. 342 on the official zoning map.  The purpose of
this zone is to provide for an integrated mix of low and moderate density
residential uses as well as park uses.



(‘81 Code, § A14-1)  (Ord. 342, passed 9-26-85)



§ A14-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state;



      (2)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (3)   One-family detached dwellings meeting the standards of
the Uniform Building Code, placed on permanent foundations and having no
horizontal axis less than 18 feet in length; and



      (4)   Public utility buildings and structures.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (2)   Multiple-residential dwellings.  Within the structure
may be a community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed under M.S.
§ 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically handicapped
licensed by the state; and



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures.



   (C)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Parks and playgrounds;



      (2)   Public utility buildings and structures; and



      (3)   Recreational buildings, community centers and swimming
pools.



(‘81 Code, § A14-2)  (Ord. 342, passed 9-26-85)



§ A14-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812 where:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes; and



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities.



      (2)   A conditional use permit shall be reviewed at one-year
intervals.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812 or a community-based
residential-care facility or day-care facility when:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes; and



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities.



      (2)   A conditional use permit shall be reviewed at one-year
intervals.



   (C)   Zone 3.  There are no conditional uses provided.



(‘81 Code, § A14-3)  (Ord. 342, passed 9-26-85)



§ A14-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary
for construction;



      (2)   Decorative landscape features;



      (3)   Gardening or other horticultural uses where no sale of
products is conducted on the premises;



      (4)   Keeping of domestic animals commonly referred to as
“house pets” for noncommercial purposes;



      (5)   Private parking space and garage, one attached and one
detached;



      (6)   One accessory storage building in addition to any
garage(s) except that it shall not exceed 144 square feet in area if a
detached garage exists on the same lot;



      (7)   Repair and maintenance of motor vehicles owned by the
occupant.  See screening requirements, § 155.348;



      (8)   Garage sales not to exceed three per calendar year; and



      (9)   Private swimming pool, tennis court and play apparatus
for use by occupants of the premises.



   (B)   Zones 2 and 3.  Within these zones, the following uses or
uses deemed similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Any accessory uses permitted in division (A) above;



      (2)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading space as
regulated in the zoning chapter;



      (3)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met; and



      (4)   Putting greens, shuffleboard courts, picnic area,
community building and similar recreational or service areas when accessory
to a multiple-dwelling use, for use by occupants of the premises.



(‘81 Code, § A14-4)  (Ord. 342, passed 9-26-85)



§ A14-5  MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be
met.  No improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be
so used or improved shall meet the following area and dimensional
requirements:



      (1)   Table of minimum area requirements and standards.  The
dimensions are measured in feet unless otherwise specified.



 

   Requirements
 
Zone 1
 
Zone 2
 
Zone 3




Minimum Lot Dimensions


Lot area (square feet):
 

 
—
 



  Interior
 
8,500
 

 
10,000


  Corner
 
10,500
 

 
—


Lot width
 

 
—
 



  Interior
 
68
 

 
80


  Corner
 
85
 

 
—


Dwelling Unit Density4


One-story building
 
—
 
7,2601(6)2
 
—


Two- or three-story building
 
—
 
3,630(12)
 
—


Minimum Building Setback


Along neighborhood collector streets
 
30
 
40
 
40


Along other streets
 
303
 
30
 
30


Side lot line
 

 
25
 
20


  Dwelling
 
10
 

 



  Garage
 
5
 

 



Rear lot line
 
30
 
25
 
20


From multiple-dwelling
 
—
 
*
 
—


Abutting one-family detached lot
 
—
 
30
 
—


Minimum Detached Garage and Accessory Building Setback


Along neighborhood collector streets
 
**
 
35
 
—


Along other streets
 
**
 
30
 
—


Side lot line
 
**
 
10
 
—


Rear lot line
 
**
 
10
 
—


From multiple dwelling
 
—
 
15
 
—


Abutting one-family detached lot
 
—
 
20
 
—


Minimum Parking Setback


Along all streets
 
—
 
15
 
20


Side or rear lot line
 
—
 
5
 
10


From multiple dwelling
 
—
 
10
 
—


Abutting one-family detached lot
 
—
 
15
 
—


Maximum Building Coverage


Coverage of lot (percentage)
 
20
 
20
 
20


Maximum Building Height


Maximum height
 
35
 
40
 
40


NOTES TO TABLE

1 - Square feet of land per unit.

2 - Units per acre.

3 - Corner lot sideyard setbacks abutting a street shall be 20 feet.

4 - Buried garages, 400-square foot bonus.  Ponding or unbuildable areas
shall not exceed 20% of required lot area.

* - See § A14-5(A)(2).

** - See § 155.332.




 



      (2)   Setbacks between multiple dwellings.



         (a)   The front and rear sides of a multiple dwelling
shall have a minimum setback of 50 feet from any side of an adjacent multiple
dwelling or a setback equal to the combined height of the adjacent multiple
dwellings, whichever is greater, except that in no case shall a setback
greater than 75 feet be required.  This minimum setback shall be reduced to
40 feet where a horizontal extension of the lines created by the nearest
exterior vertical surfaces of adjacent buildings would create an angle of not
less than 45 degrees.



         (b)   Minimum setbacks between adjacent multiple
dwellings on sides which are not a front or rear side of either building
shall be 20 feet or a distance equal to half the combined height of the
adjacent buildings, whichever is greater, except that in no case shall a
setback greater than 50 feet be required.  This minimum setback shall be
reduced to 25 feet where a horizontal extension of the lines created by the
nearest exterior vertical surfaces of adjacent buildings would create an
angle of not less than 45 degrees.



      (3)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



      (4)   Screening, see § 155.348.



      (5)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.



      (6)   Parking, see §§ 155.370 through 155.379.



   (B)   The following requirements are in addition to those in
division (A).  Where there may be a conflict, the requirements herein shall
prevail:



      (1)   Front setbacks prevailing.  Where adjoining structures
existing at the time of adoption of this article have a greater setback than
that required by this article, the front setback of a new structure shall
conform to the prevailing setback in the immediate vicinity.  The Building
Official shall determine the necessary front yard setback in such cases.  In
no case shall a building be required to be set back more than 50 feet.



      (2)   Side and rear setbacks, party walls. Buildings may be
excluded from side and rear setback requirements if party walls are used and
if the adjacent buildings are constructed as an integral structure.  This
shall not permit structures closer to single family detached or duplex lots,
however, than required under division (A)(1) above.



(‘81 Code, § A14-5)  (Ord. 342, passed 9-26-85)



ARTICLE 15.  DESIGNATION NO. 400



§ A15-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish specific performance
standards in compliance with §§ 155.260 through 155.267 for property
designated by Ordinance No. 400 on the official zoning map.  The purpose of
this zone is to provide for an integrated mix of low and high density
residential uses.



(‘81 Code, § A15-1)  (Ord. 400, passed 8-27-87)



§ A15-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state;



      (2)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (3)   One-family detached dwellings meeting the standards of
the Uniform Building Code, placed on permanent foundations and having no
horizontal axis less than 18 feet in length; and



      (4)   Public utility buildings and structures.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (2)   Multiple-residential dwellings.  Within such structure
may be a community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed under M.S.
§ 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically handicapped
licensed by the state; and



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures.



   (C)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



      (1)   Public utility buildings and structures;



      (2)   Parks and playgrounds; and



      (3)   Public recreation buildings, community centers and
swimming pools.



(‘81 Code, § A15-2)  (Ord. 400, passed 8-27-87; Am. Ord. 413, passed
2-11-88)



§ A15-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except
through the granting of a conditional use permit: 



      (1)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812 where:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes; and



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities.



      (2)   A conditional use permit shall be reviewed at one-year
intervals.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812 or a community-based
residential-care facility or day-care facility when:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes; and



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities.



      (2)   A conditional use permit shall be reviewed at one-year
intervals.



   (C)   Zone 3.  There are no conditional uses provided.



(‘81 Code, § A15-3)  (Ord. 400, passed 8-27-87; Am. Ord. 413, passed
2-11-88)



§ A15-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary
for construction;



      (2)   Decorative landscape features;



      (3)   Gardening or other horticultural uses where no sale of
products is conducted on the premises;



      (4)   Keeping of domestic animals commonly referred to as
“house pets” for noncommercial purposes;



      (5)   Private parking space and garage, one attached and one
detached;



      (6)   One accessory storage building in addition to any
garage(s), except that it shall not exceed 144 square feet in area if a
detached garage exists on the same lot;



      (7)   Repair and maintenance of motor vehicles owned by the
occupant.  See screening requirements, § 155.348;



      (8)   Garage sales not to exceed three per calendar year; and



      (9)   Private swimming pool, tennis court and play apparatus
for use by occupants of the premises.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Any accessory uses permitted in division (A);



      (2)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading space as
regulated in the zoning chapter;



      (3)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met; and



      (4)   Putting green, shuffleboard courts, picnic area,
community building and similar recreational or service areas when accessory
to a multiple-dwelling use, for use by occupants of the premises.



   (C)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, off-street parking, service and
storage areas in conjunction with a public park or uses deemed similar by the
City Council shall be permitted accessory uses.



(‘81 Code, § A15-4)  (Ord. 400, passed 8-27-87; Am. Ord. 413, passed
2-11-88)



§ A15-5  MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be
met.  No improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be
so used or improved shall meet the following area and dimensional
requirements:



      (1)   Table of minimum area requirements and standards.  The
dimensions are measured in feet unless otherwise specified.



 

Requirements
 
Zone 1
 
Zone 2
 
Zone 3




Minimum Lot Dimensions


Lot area (square feet)1
 

 
—
 
40,000


  Interior
 
8,400
 

 



  Corner
 
11,000
 

 



Lot width2
 

 
—
 
100


  Interior
 
65
 

 



  Corner
 
85
 

 



Dwelling Unit Density3


One-story building
 
—
 
7,2604(6)5
 
—


Two-story building
 
—
 
3,630(12)
 
—


Three-story building
 
—
 
2,420(18)
 
—


Minimum Building Setback


Along principal or arterial streets
 
40
 
50
 
40


Along community or neighborhood collector streets
 
30
 
40
 
40


Along other streets
 
306
 
35
 
35


Minimum Lot Dimensions


Side lot line
 

 
25
 
15


  Dwelling
 
10
 

 



  Garage
 
5
 

 



Rear lot line
 
30
 
25
 
15


From multiple dwelling
 
—
 
*
 
—


Abutting one-family detached lot
 
—
 
40
 
15


Minimum Detached Garage and Accessory Building Setback


Along principal or arterial streets
 
—
 
35
 
—


Along community or neighborhood collector streets
 
—
 
35
 
—


Along other streets
 
—
 
30
 
35


Side lot line
 
—
 
10
 
15


Rear lot line
 
—
 
10
 
15


From multiple dwelling
 
—
 
15
 
—


Abutting one-family detached lot
 
—
 
20
 
15


Minimum Parking Setback


Along all streets
 
—
 
15
 
15


Side or rear lot line
 
—
 
5
 
5


From multiple dwelling
 
—
 
10
 
—


Abutting one-family detached lot
 
—
 
15
 
—


Maximum Building Coverage


Coverage of lot (percentage)
 
20
 
25
 
20


Maximum Building Height


Maximum height
 
35
 
40
 
35


NOTES TO TABLE

1 - Average size of all lots must exceed 10,400 square feet.

2 - Average width of all lots must exceed 73.5 feet.  No two consecutive
lots to have widths less than 70 feet.

3 - Buried garages, 480-square foot bonus.  Ponding or unbuildable areas
shall not exceed 20% of the required lot area.

4 - Square feet of land per unit.

5 - Units per acre.

6 - Alternate, even numbered, lots shall be permitted a 25-foot setback. 
Corner lot sideyard setbacks shall be 20 feet.

* - See § A15-5(A)(2).




 



      (2)   Setbacks between multiple dwellings.



         (a)   The front and rear sides of a multiple dwelling
shall have a minimum setback of 50 feet from any side of an adjacent multiple
dwelling or a setback equal to the combined height of the adjacent multiple
dwellings, whichever is greater, except that in no case shall a setback
greater than 75 feet be required.  This minimum setback shall be reduced to
40 feet where a horizontal extension of the lines created by the nearest
exterior vertical surfaces of adjacent buildings would create an angle of not
less than 45 degrees.



         (b)   Minimum setbacks between adjacent multiple
dwellings on sides which are not a front or rear side of either building
shall be 20 feet or a distance equal to one-half of the combined height of
the adjacent buildings, whichever is greater, except that in no case shall a
setback greater than 50 feet be required.  This minimum setback shall be
reduced to 25 feet where a horizontal extension of the lines created by the
nearest exterior vertical surfaces of adjacent buildings would create an
angle of not less than 45 degrees.



      (3)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



      (4)   Screening, see § 155.348.



      (5)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.



      (6)   Parking, see §§ 155.370 through 155.379.



   (B)   The following requirements are in addition to those in
division (A).  Where there may be a conflict, the requirements herein shall
prevail:



      (1)   Front setbacks prevailing.  Where adjoining structures
existing at the time of adoption of this article have a greater setback than
that required by this article, the front setback of a new structure shall
conform to the prevailing setback in the immediate vicinity.  The Building
Official shall determine the necessary front yard setback in such cases.  In
no case shall a building be required to be set back more than 50 feet.



      (2)   Side and rear setbacks, party walls. Buildings may be
excluded from side and rear setback requirements if party walls are used and
if the adjacent buildings are constructed as an integral structure.  This
shall not permit structures closer to single family detached or duplex lots,
however, than required under division (A)(1).



   (C)   The following special performance standards shall be
applicable to uses as specified.  Where there may be a conflict between
these standards and standards required elsewhere, these standards shall
prevail.



      (1)   Within Zone 1, the following provisions apply:



         (a)   Architectural design.  Identical single-family
building elevations shall not be permitted on lots directly adjacent to or
directly across a street from one another; and



         (b)   Berms.  An undulating sodded berm or berms shall
be installed adjacent to any principal or arterial streets.  Berm(s) shall
provide for an obstruction of horizontal view from the street(s) for a
minimum vertical distance of four feet above grade for its entire length and
a minimum vertical distance of six feet for no less than 80% of its entire
length.  Berm(s) shall be subject to the traffic visibility requirements of
§ 155.335, maximum slope, 3:1.



      (2)   Within Zone 2, the following provisions apply:



         (a)   Berms.  An undulating sodded berm or berms shall
be installed adjacent to all streets or abutting detached single-family
lots.  Berm(s) adjacent to principal or arterial streets or detached
single-family lots shall provide for an obstruction of horizontal view for a
minimum vertical distance of four feet above grade for its entire length and
a minimum vertical distance of six feet for no less than 80% of its entire
length, except that no berm shall be required adjacent to a single-family lot
when separated by a ponding area.  Berm(s) adjacent to a local access street
shall provide for an obstruction of horizontal view from the street(s) for a
minimum vertical distance of three feet above grade for its entire length and
a minimum vertical distance of four feet for no less than 80% of its entire
length.  All berm(s) shall be subject to the traffic visibility requirements
of § 155.335, maximum slope, 3:1;



         (b)   Trees.  Along berm(s) specified in subsection (a)
above, Marshall Seedless Ash and Norway Maple trees shall be required. 
Trees shall have a caliper of two inches, balled and burlapped. Trees shall
be placed at intervals along the berm of not more than 25 feet apart. 
Plantings shall be alternated such that no more than two of the same species
will be located adjacent to one another. Plantings shall be made only in the
toe area of any berm’s slope; and



         (c)   Shrubs.  Associated with each tree in subsection
(b) above, there shall be a minimum of two Junipers Manxi planted.  The
plantings to be a minimum size of 24 inches, balled and burlapped.



(‘81 Code, § A15-5)  (Ord. 400, passed 8-27-87; Am. Ord. 413, passed
2-11-88)



ARTICLE 16.  DESIGNATION NO. 409



§ A16-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish specific performance
standards in compliance with §§ 155.260 through 155.267 for property
designated by Ordinance No. 409 on the official zoning map. The purpose of
this zone is to provide for an integrated mix of limited industrial, general
business, retail business and limited business uses.



(‘81 Code, § A16-1)  (Ord. 409, passed 1-14-88)



§ A16-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Animal hospital or clinic when contained within a
building;



      (2)   Auto, marine, truck storage completely within a building;



      (3)   Bicycle, boat or snowmobile sales and service;



      (4)   Contractor’s office;



      (5)   Garden store when conducted within a building;



      (6)   Light fabrication, manufacturing and assembly, including
the fact that some or all goods produced are retailed on site;



      (7)   Lumber, heating, plumbing and other construction
material sales and service facilities;



      (8)   Motor vehicle repair, body shop and accessory sales and
service;



      (9)   Office as accessory to the principal use;



      (10)   Rental shop;



      (11)   Research or testing laboratory conducted entirely
within a building;



      (12)   Small engine or appliance repair conducted entirely
within a building;



      (13)   Stone or monument sales;



      (14)   Storage facilities contained within a building;



      (15)   Television or radio studio (towers subject to
conditional use);



      (16)   Training facilities;



      (17)   Warehouse/outlet store;



      (18)   Office warehouse, warehousing or wholesale business
when conducted within a building;



      (19)   Retail, sales and service uses subject to the following
restrictions:



         (a)   The uses when combined with the uses in subsection
(20) below shall not occupy more than 35% of the total floor area of existing
buildings within the district;



         (b)   The uses when combined with the uses in subsection
(20) below shall not occupy more than 50% of the floor area of any one
building; and



         (c)   High traffic or high volume uses are specifically
prohibited.  These uses include, but are not limited to, grocery or food
sales, drug stores, restaurants, convenience photo finishing, motor fuel
sales and personal services;



      (20)   Limited business office uses subject to the following
restrictions:



         (a)   The uses when combined with the uses in subsection
(19) above shall not occupy more than 35% of the total floor area of existing
buildings within the district;



         (b)   The uses when combined with the uses in subsection
(19) above shall not occupy more than 50% of the floor area of any one
building; and



         (c)   Any medical or dental office use, for purposes of
this division, shall be limited to outpatient examination and nonsurgical and
noninvasive surgery treatment for human care provided by a medical doctor,
dentist, orthodontist, optician, psychologist or psychiatrist, chiropractor,
or other licensed health provider. The use shall not operate as an emergency
care or "urgent care" center or clinic and shall not operate between the
hours of 8:00 pm and 7:00 am;



      (21)   Car washes, either self-service or automatic, with bay
doors to be oriented and screened as required by the City Council.



(‘81 Code, § A16-2)  (Ord. 409, passed 1-14-88; Am. Ord. 649, passed
8-27-98; Am. Ord. 889, passed 5-27-10)



§ A16-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used for the
following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council except through the
granting of a conditional use permit:



   (1)   Outdoor storage of materials or vehicles in conjunction with a
permitted use.  Outdoor area to be screened and maintained in a manner to be
approved by the City Council.



(‘81 Code, § A16-3)  (Ord. 409, passed 1-14-88)



§ A16-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   Zone 1.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed similar
by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



   (A)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on
the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary to complete
construction;



   (B)   Essential security and safety facilities as approved by the
City Council;



   (C)   Off-street parking, refuse storage, loading bays and space and
storage garage or building as regulated in the zoning chapter; and



   (D)   Public telephone booths and other essential public service
facilities provided all yard requirements are met.



(‘81 Code, § A16-4)  (Ord. 409, passed 1-14-88)



§ A16-5  MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be
met.  No improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be
so used or improved shall meet the following area and dimensional
requirements:



      (1)   Table of minimum area requirements and standards.  The
dimensions shall be measured in feet unless otherwise specified.



   Minimum Lot Dimensions



   Lot area (square feet)   43,560



   Lot width     150



   Minimum Building Setback



   Along principal or



   arterial streets     40



   Along community collector



   streets     40



   Along all other streets     30



   Side lot line     10



   Rear lot line     15



   Abutting one-family detached,



   duplex or multiple lot     50



   Minimum Parking Setback



   Along all other streets     20



   Side or rear lot line       5



   Abutting one-family detached,



   duplex or multiple lot     20



   Maximum Building Coverage



   Coverage of lot (%)     20



   Maximum Building Height



   Maximum height     35



      (2)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



      (3)   Screening, see § 155.348.



      (4)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.



   (B)   The following requirements are in addition to those in
division (A).  Where there may be a conflict, the requirements herein shall
prevail:



      (1)   Side and rear setbacks, party walls. Buildings may be
excluded from side and rear setback requirements if party walls are used and
if the adjacent buildings are constructed as an integral structure.



      (2)   Parking requirements.  The minimum required number of
parking stalls shall be computed based upon the most intensive use of the
property as permitted under the terms of §§ A16-2(A) and A16-5(A).  See
also §§ 155.370 through 155.379 .



(‘81 Code, § A16-5)  (Ord. 409, passed 1-14-88)



ARTICLE 17.  DESIGNATION NO. 444



§ A17-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish specific performance
standards in compliance with §§ 155.260 through 155.267 for property
designated by Ordinance No. 444 on the official zoning map.  The purpose of
this zone is to provide for an integrated mix of low and moderate density
residential uses.



(‘81 Code, § A17-1)  (Ord. 444, passed 6-1-89)



§ A17-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state;



      (2)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (3)   One-family detached dwellings meeting the standards of
the Uniform Building Code, placed on permanent foundations and having no
horizontal axis less than 18 feet in length; and



      (4)   Public utility buildings and structures.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (2)   Townhouse multiple-residential dwellings provided no
single structure contains in excess of six dwelling units.  Within the
structure may be a community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state; and



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures.



(‘81 Code, § A17-2)  (Ord. 444, passed 6-1-89)



§ A17-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812 where:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes; and



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities.



      (2)   A conditional use permit shall be reviewed at one-year
intervals.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812 or a community based
residential-care facility or day-care facility when:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes; and



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities.



      (2)   A conditional use permit shall be reviewed at one-year
intervals.



(‘81 Code, § A17-3)  (Ord. 444, passed 6-1-89)



§ A17-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary
for construction;



      (2)   Decorative landscape features;



      (3)   Gardening or other horticultural uses where no sale of
products is conducted on the premises;



      (4)   Keeping of domestic animals commonly referred to as
“house pets” for noncommercial purposes;



      (5)   Private parking space and garage, one attached and one
detached;



      (6)   One accessory storage building in addition to any
garage(s) except that it shall not exceed 144 square feet in area if a
detached garage exists on the same lot;



      (7)   Repair and maintenance of motor vehicles owned by the
occupant.  See screening requirements, § 155.348;



      (8)   Garage sales not to exceed three per calendar year; and



      (9)   Private swimming pool, tennis court and play apparatus
for use by occupants of the premises.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Any accessory uses permitted in division (A);



      (2)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading space as
regulated in the zoning chapter;



      (3)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met; and



      (4)   Putting green, shuffleboard courts, picnic area,
community building and similar recreational or service areas when accessory
to a multiple-dwelling use, for use by occupants of the premises.



(‘81 Code, § A17-4)  (Ord. 444, passed 6-1-89)



§ A17-5  MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be
met.  No improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be
so used or improved shall meet the following area and dimensional
requirements:



      (1)   Table of minimum area requirements and standards.  The
dimensions shall be measured in feet unless otherwise specified.



 

   Requirements
 
Zone 1
 
Zone 2




Minimum Lot Dimensions


Lot area (square feet)1
 

 
—


  Interior
 
5,000
 



  Corner
 
7,500
 



Lot width
 

 
—


  Interior
 
50
 



  Corner
 
70
 



Dwelling Unit Density


One-story building
 
—
 
7,2602(6)3


Two-story building
 
—
 
5,445(8)


Minimum Building Setback


Along principal or arterial streets
 
50
 
50


Along community or neighborhood collector streets
 
30
 
35


Along other streets
 
254
 
255


Side lot line
 
5
 
5


Rear lot line
 
30
 
25


From multiple dwelling
 
—
 
*


Abutting one-family detached lot
 
—
 
25


Minimum Detached Garage and Accessory Building Setback


Along principal or arterial streets
 
—
 
35


Along community or neighborhood collector streets
 
—
 
35


Along other streets
 
—
 
25


Side lot line
 
—
 
5


Rear lot line
 
—
 
25


From multiple dwelling
 
—
 
15


Abutting one-family detached lot
 
—
 
20


Minimum Parking Setback


Along all streets
 
—
 
15


Side or rear lot line
 
—
 
5


From multiple dwelling
 
—
 
10


Abutting one-family detached lot
 
—
 
15


Maximum Building Coverage


Coverage of lot (percentage)
 
20
 
25


Maximum Building Height


Maximum height
 
35
 
35


NOTES TO TABLE

1 - Average size of all lots must exceed 7,000 square feet.

2 - Square feet of land per unit.

3 - Units per acre.

4 - Future lots in Outlot E and lots 16-22 and 33-40, Block 1, shall have a
20-foot minimum setback.

5 - Lots 33-40, Block 1, shall have a 20-foot minimum setback to the curbline
of a private street.

* - See § A17-5(A)(2).




 



      (2)   Setbacks between multiple dwellings.



         (a)   The front and rear sides of a multiple-dwelling
structure containing more than two dwelling units shall have a minimum
setback of 50 feet from any side of an adjacent multiple dwelling or a
setback equal to the combined height of the adjacent multiple dwellings,
whichever is greater, except that



in no case shall a setback greater than 75 feet be required.  This minimum
setback shall be reduced to 40 feet where a horizontal extension of the lines
created by the nearest exterior vertical surfaces of adjacent buildings would
create an angle of not less than 45 degrees.



         (b)   Minimum setbacks between adjacent
multiple-dwelling structures containing more than two dwelling units on sides
which are not a front or rear side of either building shall be 20 feet or a
distance equal to half the combined height of the adjacent buildings,
whichever is greater, except that in no case shall a setback greater than 50
feet be required.  This minimum setback shall be reduced to 25 feet where a
horizontal extension of the lines created by the nearest exterior vertical
surfaces of adjacent buildings would create an angle of not less than 45
degrees.



      (3)   Building materials, see § 155.346.



      (4)   Screening, see § 155.348.



      (5)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.



      (6)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



      (7)   Parking, see § 155.370 through 155.379.



   (B)   The following requirements are in addition to those in §
A14-5(A).  Where there may be a conflict, the requirements herein shall
prevail:



      (1)   Front setbacks prevailing.  Where adjoining structures
existing at the time of adoption of this article have a greater setback than
that required by this article, the front setback of a new structure shall
conform to the prevailing setback in the immediate vicinity.  The Building
Official shall determine the necessary front yard setback in such cases.  In
no case shall a building be required to be set back more than 50 feet.



      (2)   Side and rear setbacks, party walls. Buildings may be
excluded from side and rear setback requirements if party walls are used and
if the adjacent buildings are constructed as an integral structure.  This
shall not permit structures closer to single-family detached or duplex lots,
however, than required under § A17-5(A)(1).



   (C)   (1)   The following special performance standards shall be
applicable to uses as specified.  Where there may be a conflict between
these standards and standards required elsewhere, these standards shall
prevail.



      (2)   Within zone, the following provisions apply.  Identical
single-family building elevations shall not be permitted on lots directly
adjacent to or directly across a street from one another.



(‘81 Code, § A17-5)  (Ord. 444, passed 6-1-89)



ARTICLE 18.  DESIGNATION NO. 507



§ A18-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish specific performance
standards in compliance with §§ 155.260 through 155.267 for property
designated by Ordinance No. 507 on the official zoning map. The purpose of
this zone is to provide for an integrated mix of certain types of
neighborhood convenience retail, office, medical, restaurant, commercial
recreation, transit- related and institutional uses as well as multiple-
residential uses.



(‘81 Code, § A18-1)  (Ord. 507, passed 4-25-91; Am. Ord. 628, passed
6-26-97)



§ A18-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Dairy, grocery or convenience store not to exceed 5,000
square feet of floor area;



      (2)   Class I restaurant;



      (3)   Offices for doctors, dentists, lawyers, realtors,
veterinarians (no outdoor animal pens allowed), insurance agents and similar
uses to serve the adjoining residential area;



      (4)   Day-care centers;



      (5)   Retail operations selling personal services or goods
over-the-counter as limited to the following uses unless otherwise
specifically approved by the City Council:  antiques, art and school
supplies, bakeries, barbershop, beauty parlor, bicycles, books and
stationery, candy, cameras and photographic supplies, catering
establishments, china and glassware, clothes pressing, custom dressmaking,
drugs, dry goods, florists, garden supplies, gifts, hardware, hats, hobby
shops, household appliance repair, interior decorating studio (no retail
furniture sales), jewelry and watch repair, laundry and dry cleaning,
locksmith shops, musical instruments, paint and wallpaper, phonograph records
and equipments, pets (no outdoor animal pens allowed), photography studio,
shoes, sporting goods, tailoring, tanning salon, tobacco, toys, variety
stores, video tape and equipment sales or rental and wearing apparel;



      (6)   Movie theaters, bowling alleys, athletic clubs, skating
rinks, coin-operated amusement devices and similar commercial recreation
facilities when contained within a building;



      (7)   Class II restaurant, lunch counter or delicatessen
facilities within a multi-tenant building. No Class II fast food restaurants
or drive-through restaurant facilities may be located as a separate,
stand-alone building; and



      (8)   On-sale liquor in conjunction with a restaurant facility.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Municipal buildings including police, fire, emergency
management, transit/transfer stations, park-and-ride lots, and the like, but
no public works;



      (2)   Professional offices, banks and savings and loan;



      (3)   Offices of a general nature where the operations do not
include over-the-counter retail sales or warehousing from the site;



      (4)   Clinics for human care;



      (5)   Institutional uses, such as library, swimming pool,
church, public schools, religious centers, health centers and community
building;



      (6)   On-sale wine and/or 3.2% liquor in conjunction with a
restaurant facility;



      (7)   Coin-operated amusement devices in conjunction with a
restaurant facility of private club;



      (8)   Farmers’ market;



      (9)   Apartment buildings, at least two stories in height,
provided they are serviced by public sanitary sewer and water systems;



      (10)   Home occupations, as defined by § 155.003;



      (11)   Public utility buildings and structures; and



      (12)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home
licensed under M.S. § 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or
physically handicapped licensed by the state.



   (C)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Townhouse dwellings, provided they are serviced by
public sanitary sewer and water systems and provided that no single structure
contains in excess of 12 dwelling units;



      (2)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures; and



      (4)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812, or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state.



   (D)   Zone 4.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Townhouse dwellings, provided they are serviced by
public sanitary sewer and water systems and provided that no single structure
contains in excess of 12 dwelling units;



      (2)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures; and



      (4)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812, or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state.



   (E)   Zone 5.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Townhouse dwellings, provided they are serviced by
public sanitary sewer and water systems and provided that no single structure
contains in excess of 12 dwelling units;



      (2)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures; and



      (4)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812, or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state.



   (F)   Zone 6.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Townhouse dwellings, provided they are serviced by
public sanitary sewer and water systems and provided that no single structure
contains in excess of 12 dwelling units;



      (2)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures; and



      (4)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state.



   (G)   Zone 7a.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Transit stations for exclusive use by public transit
providers.



      (2)   A minimum 300-space structured parking ramp. 



   (H)   Zone 7b.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used except multi-story, mixed use development, either vertical or
horizontal, which shall consist of multiple residential apartments, and one
or more of the following uses, or uses deemed similar by the City Council:



      (1)   The following retail uses: antique or gift shops;
appliance store (sales and/or repair); art and school supply store; bakery;
bank; savings and loan (drive-up teller service and outdoor ATM service are
subject to conditional use permit), barbershop; beauty salon; bicycle sales;
books; stationary and office supplies; candy; camera and photographic
supplies; carpet and rug sales; catering services; china and glassware sales;
clothing and costume sales and rental; coin operated amusement devices and
similar facilities; department store; drugstore; dry cleaning; dry goods;
electronic sales and/or service; florist; furniture store; garden supplies;
grocery; hardware store; hobby store; interior decorating; jewelry and watch
repair; laundromat; leather goods and luggage; locksmith; musical
instruments; nail salon, off-sale liquor store paint and wallpaper sales;
photography studio; pipe and tobacco shop; recorded music sales; class I, II,
or III restaurant (no drive-through facilities allowed), subject to the
installation of state of the art ventilation equipment in restaurants where
applicable; shoe sales or repair; sporting goods; tailoring; toy store; video
rental and sales.



      (2)   Professional offices for doctors, dentists, lawyers,
realtors, insurance agents, and similar uses. 



      (3)   Offices of a general nature where the operations do not
include over-the-counter retail sales or warehousing from the site



      (4)   Community-based family care home, day care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or such home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state.



      (5)   Public utility buildings and structures.



      (6)   Home occupation as defined in § 155.003.



      (7)   Parks and playgrounds.



      (8)   Public libraries.



      (9)   Municipal government administrative buildings.



      (10)   Parking ramps and structures in conjunction with a
commercial retail building, residential structure, or residential/commercial
mixed use structure.



   The apartment multiple residential building shall be serviced by public
sanitary sewer and water systems and the minimum density shall be at least 24
units per acres and the maximum density shall not exceed 54 units per acre.



      (11)   Bus layover facilities for the exclusive use of public
transit providers.



(‘81 Code, § A18-2)  (Ord. 507, passed 4-25-91; Am. Ord. 628, passed
6-26-97; Am. Ord. 853, passed 12-23-08; Am. Ord. 970, passed 6-26-14; Am.
Ord. 1034, passed 10-26-17)



§ A18-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except by
conditional use permit:



      (1)   Motor fuel sales as an accessory use to a dairy/grocery
store operation.  No motor vehicle repair facilities allowed;



      (2)   Car-wash bay as an accessory use to a combination
dairy/grocery operation with motor fuel sales;



      (3)   Hours of operation in excess of those listed in §
A18-6(F); and



      (4)   Buildings constructed with exposed vertical exterior
finish material other than those provided under § 155.346 when:



         (a)   The proposed materials represent the same or
similar materials used on at least 66.7% of the existing buildings adjacent
to the site;



         (b)   The proposed materials are demonstrated to be of
comparable grade and quality as those otherwise required; and



         (c)   Under no circumstances shall sheet or corrugated
aluminum, iron, steel, asbestos, sheet plywood, plain or painted plain
concrete block or similar materials be used.  Any decorative concrete block
shall be colored only by means of a pigment impregnated throughout the entire
block.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except by
conditional use permit:



      (1)   Nursing homes, rest homes, retirement homes or hospitals
for human care, day-care centers and private schools;



      (2)   Funeral homes and mortuaries;



      (3)   Art, interior decorating, photographic or music studio
provided no retail sales are made of products not manufactured on the site;



      (4)   Radio and television studios;



      (5)   Private clubs and lodges not operated for a profit;



      (6)   Historical buildings, museums, art institutes, galleries
and playhouses;



      (7)   Off-street parking when the principal site of the
off-street parking abuts on a lot which is in another zoning district;



      (8)   On-sale liquor in conjunction with a restaurant facility;



      (9)   Nurseries and greenhouses;



      (10)   Restaurants, Class I only;



      (11)   Parking decks no more than one level or 15 feet in
height, when set back at least 50 feet from any residential property line; and



      (12)   Buildings constructed with exposed vertical exterior
finish materials other than those provided under § 155.346 when:



         (a)   The proposed materials represent the same or
similar materials used on at least 66.7% of the existing buildings adjacent
to the site;



         (b)   The proposed materials are demonstrated to be of
comparable grade and quality as those otherwise required; and



         (c)   Under no circumstance shall sheet or corrugated
aluminum, iron, steel, asbestos, sheet plywood, plain or painted plain
concrete block or similar materials be used.  Any decorative concrete block
shall be colored only by means of a pigment impregnated throughout the entire
block.



   (C)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, no structure  or land shall be
used for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council,
except by conditional use permit:



      (1)   Municipal buildings including police, fire, emergency
management, and the like, but no public works;



      (2)   Professional offices, banks and savings and loan;



      (3)   Offices of a general nature where the operations do not
include over-the-counter retail sales or warehousing from the site;



      (4)   Clinics for human care;



      (5)   Institutional uses, such as library, swimming pool,
church, public schools, religious centers, health centers and community
building;



      (6)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812, or community-based
residential-care facility when:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing code; and



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities.  A
conditional use permit shall be reviewed at one-year intervals;



      (7)   Buildings constructed with exposed vertical exterior
finish materials other than those provided under § 155.346 when:



         (a)   The proposed materials represent the same or
similar materials used on at least 66.7% the existing buildings within 350
feet of the site;



         (b)   The proposed materials are demonstrated to be of
comparable grade and quality as those otherwise required; and



         (c)   Under no circumstance shall sheet or corrugated
aluminum, iron, steel, asbestos, sheet plywood or similar materials be used
which have no three dimensional relief, nor shall plain or painted concrete
block be used.  Any decorative concrete block shall be colored only by means
of a pigment impregnated throughout the entire block.  Materials used for
apartment or townhouse dwelling units have the appearance of wood siding
having a maximum plank width of 12 inches.



   (D)   Zone 4.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except by
conditional use permit:



      (1)   Institutional uses, such as library, swimming pool,
church, public schools, religious centers, health centers or medical clinics
for human care and community building;



      (2)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812, or community-based
residential-care facility when:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes; and



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities.  A
conditional use permit shall be reviewed at one-year intervals;



      (3)   Buildings constructed with exposed vertical exterior
finish materials other than those provided under § 155.346 when:



         (a)   The proposed materials represent the same or
similar materials used on at least 66.7% of the existing buildings within 350
feet of the site;



         (b)   The proposed materials are demonstrated to be of
comparable grade and quality as those otherwise required; and



         (c)   Under no circumstances shall sheet or corrugated
aluminum, iron, steel, asbestos, sheet plywood or similar materials be used
which have no three dimensional relief, nor shall plain or painted concrete
block be used.  Any decorative concrete block shall be colored only by means
of a pigment impregnated throughout the entire block.  Materials used for
apartments or townhouse dwelling units have the appearance of wood siding
having a maximum plank width of 12 inches.



   (E)   Zone 5.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except by
conditional use permit:



      (1)   Increased density and/or height for multiple-residential
buildings intended for exclusive occupancy by the elderly as follows:



         (a)   In a one-story building, no increase is permitted;



         (b)   In a two-story building, a maximum of 12 dwelling
units per acre may be permitted.  With applicable density bonuses, this may
be increased to 14 units per acre;



         (c)   A three-story building, up to a maximum height of
45 feet, may be permitted.  A three-story building must be designed so that
the third story has a distinctive architectural treatment from the lower two
stories and be integrated into the roofline with dormers, cupolas or similar
treatments.  The purpose of these differing architectural treatments is to
visually lower the overall building height by de- emphasizing continuous
vertical elements, textures, and colors; and



         (d)   In a three-story building, if permitted under
division (c) above, a maximum of 20 dwelling units per acre may be
permitted.  With applicable density bonuses, this may be increased to 22
units per acre;



      (2)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812, or community-based
residential-care facility when:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes; and



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities.  A
conditional use permit shall be reviewed at one-year intervals.



      (3)   Apartment or townhouse dwelling units constructed with
exposed vertical exterior finish materials other than those provided under §
155.346 when:



         (a)   The proposed materials represent the same or
similar materials used on at least 66.7% of the existing buildings within 350
feet of the site;



         (b)   The proposed materials are demonstrated to be of
comparable grade and quality as those otherwise required;



         (c)   Any materials used must have the appearance of
wood siding having a maximum plank width of 12 inches.  Under no
circumstances shall sheet or corrugated aluminum, iron, steel, asbestos,
sheet plywood or similar materials be used which have no three dimensional
relief, nor shall plain or painted concrete block be used.  Any decorative
concrete block shall be colored only by means of a pigment impregnated
throughout the entire block; and



         (d)   No increase density is sought for elderly housing
under § A18-3(E)(1) preceding.



   (F)   Zone 6.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except by
conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under the M.S. § 245.812, or community-based
residential-care facility when:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes; and



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities.  A
conditional use permit shall be reviewed at one-year intervals;



      (2)   Apartment or townhouse dwelling units constructed with
exposed vertical exterior finish materials other than those provided under §
155.346 when:



         (a)   The proposed materials represent the same or
similar materials used on at least 66.7% of the existing buildings within 350
feet of the site;



         (b)   The proposed materials are demonstrated to be of
comparable grade and quality as those otherwise required; and



         (c)   Any materials used must have the appearance of
wood siding having a maximum plank width of 12 inches.  Under no
circumstance shall sheet or corrugated aluminum, iron, steel, asbestos, sheet
plywood or similar materials be used which have no three dimensional relief,
nor shall plain or painted concrete block be used.  Any decorative concrete
block shall be colored only by means of a pigment impregnated throughout the
entire block.



   (G)   Zone 7a.  There are no conditional uses within this zone.



   (H)   Zone 7b.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council,
except by conditional use permit, except for one or more of the following
uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council:



      (1)   On-sale liquor, wine or 3.2 beer  in conjunction with a
class I restaurant;



      (2)   Drive-up teller service and drive-up ATM service in
conjunction with a bank or savings and loan.



(‘81 Code, § A18-3)  (Ord. 577, passed 6-16-94; Am. Ord. 628, passed
6-26-97; Am. Ord. 853, passed 12-23-08)



§ A18-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading spaces,
as regulated by this article;



      (2)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of
construction on the premises for a period of not to exceed the time necessary
to complete said construction; and



      (3)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading spaces,
as regulated by this article;



      (2)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of
construction on the premises for a period of not to exceed the time necessary
to complete the construction; and



      (3)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met.



   (C)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Any accessory use permitted in the R districts;



      (2)   Accessory uses customarily associated with and
incidental to the conditional uses permitted in the multiple-dwelling
districts; and



      (3)   Putting greens, shuffleboard courts, picnic areas,
community buildings and similar recreational or service areas for use by the
residents of the premises.



   (D)   Zone 4.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Any accessory use permitted in the R district;



      (2)   Accessory uses customarily associated with and
incidental to the conditional uses permitted in the multiple-dwelling
districts; and



      (3)   Putting greens, shuffleboard courts, picnic areas,
community buildings and similar recreational or service areas for use by the
residents of the premises.



   (E)   Zone 5.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Any accessory use permitted in the R district;



      (2)   Accessory uses customarily associated with and
incidental to the conditional uses permitted in the multiple-dwelling
districts; and



      (3)   Putting greens, shuffleboard courts, picnic areas,
community buildings and similar recreational or service areas for use by the
residents of the premises.



   (F)   Zone 6.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Any accessory use permitted in the R districts;



      (2)   Accessory uses customarily associated with and
incidental to the conditional uses permitted in the multiple-dwelling
districts; and



      (3)   Putting greens, shuffleboard courts, picnic areas,
community buildings and similar recreational or service areas for use by the
residents of the premises.



   (G)   Zone 7a.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Surface parking lot to serve a transit station with a
minimum 300-space parking ramp.



   (H)   Zone 7b.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for the purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary
for such construction.



      (2)   Temporary sales office.



      (3)   Decorative landscape features.



      (4)   Parking ramps and structures in conjunction with a
commercial retail building, residential structure, or residential/commercial
mixed use structure.



      (5)   Gardening and other horticultural uses where no sale of
products in conducted on the premises.



      (6)   The keeping of domestic animals commonly referred to as
"house pets" for noncommercial purposes.



      (7)   Repair and maintenance of motor vehicles owned by a
resident of an apartment building; see screening requirements, § 155.348.



      (8)   Garage sales by a resident of an apartment building;
garage sales shall not to exceed three per calendar year.



      (9)   Parks, playgrounds, putting greens, shuffleboard courts,
picnic area, community building, swimming pool, tennis court, play apparatus,
and similar recreational or service areas, for use by occupants of the
premises.



      (10)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met.



      (11)   Walk-up outdoor ATM in conjunction with a bank or
savings and loan.



      (12)   Off-street parking, refuse storage, and loading space
as regulated elsewhere in this code.



      (13)   Outdoor restaurant seating by and adjacent to a
permitted restaurant hereunder provided physical barriers are installed to
delineate the outdoor seating area; a minimum of five feet of sidewalk along
the curb and leading to the entrance of the restaurant shall be unobstructed
by tables and other encumbrances; and the area is kept in a clean and
sanitary condition at all times.



      (14)   Temporary outdoor display or sales of retail goods
conducted by an occupant of a multi-tenant retail space subject to the
following conditions and any others as required by the City Council:



         (a)   Outdoor displays shall be permitted directly in
front of an establishment, provided that at least five feet of clearance is
maintained at the storefront entrance, and shall not interfere with
pedestrian or vehicular access;



         (b)   Display items shall be placed on professionally
constructed and commercially available shelving and/or platforms only. 
Pallets and cardboard boxes shall not be used to display goods;



         (c)  Outdoor displays shall be clean, litter-free, and
well-maintained at all times and shall be compatible with the colors and
character of the storefront from which the business operates;



         (d)   Outdoor displays shall be permitted only during
business hours and shall be removed at the end of business day.



(‘81 Code, § A18-4)  (Ord. 507, passed 4-25-91; Am. Ord. 853, passed
12-23-08)



§ A18-5  MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following requirements and minimum area standards shall be
met.  No improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be
so used or improved shall meet the following minimum area and dimensional
requirements.  Densities are predicated upon the availability of public
water, storm sewer, and sanitary sewer service; without the service,
densities shall be limited to one dwelling unit or structure per ten acres. 
The following table shall be used to compute the minimum lot area exclusive
of street rights-of-way, in square feet, and such computation shall be
subject to the following; ponding area or similar unbuildable areas shall not
comprise more than 10% of the total site area.



      (1)   Table of minimum area requirements and standards.  The
dimensions shall be measured in feet unless otherwise specified.



MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR DESIGNATION NO. 507



 



Requirements
 
Zone 1
 
Zone 2
 
Zone 3
 
Zone 4
 
Zone 5
 
Zone 6
 
Zone 7a
 
Zone 7b


Minimum Lot Dimensions
 
 
 
 


Lot area (square feet)
 

25,000

 

25,000

 

25,000

 

25,000

 

—

 

—

 

260,000

 

170,000



Lot width
 

150

 

150

 

150

 

150

 

—

 

—

 

680

 

450



Minimum Lot Areas for Multi-Family Dwelling Unit Density


Minimum units per acre
 

—

 

—

 

6

 

6

 

6

 

6

 

—

 

25



One-story:
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 





  Minimum square footage of
  land per unit, (plus bonus)
 

—

 

—

 

7,260



(5,125)

 

7,260



(5,125)

 

7,260



(5,125)

 

7,260



(5,125)

 



 





  Maximum units per acre,
  (plus bonus)
 

—

 

—

 

6



(8.5)

 

6



(8.5)

 

6



(8.5)

 

6



(8.5)

 



 





Two-story:
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 





  Minimum square footage of
  land per unit, (plus bonus)
 

—

 

—

 

3,630



(3,110)

 

5,810



(3,960)

 

5,810*



(3,960)*

 

5,810



(3,960)

 



 





  Maximum units per acre,
  (plus bonus)
 

—

 

—

 

12



(14)

 

7.5



(11)

 

7.5*



(11)*

 

7.5



(11)

 



 





Three-story:
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 





  Minimum square footage of  land per unit, (plus bonus)
 

—

 

2,760



(2,180)

 



 

—

 

*

 

—

 



 





  Maximum units per acre,
(plus bonus)
 

—

 

16(20)

 



 

—

 

*

 

—

 

—

 

60



Minimum Building Setbacks


Along principal or minor arterial streets
 

40

 

50

 

50

 

50

 

50

 

50

 

0

 

50



Along community or neighborhood collector streets
 

40

 

40

 

25

 

40

 

40

 

40

 

25

 

25



Along other streets
 

301

 

30

 

20

 

30

 

30

 

30

 



 





Along side lot line
 

15

 

15

 

15

 

15

 

15

 

15

 

15

 

15



Along rear lot line
 

151

 

15

 

15

 

15

 

15

 

15

 

15

 

15



Commercial use abutting a residential use
 

—

 

30

 

30

 

30

 

—

 

—

 

—

 

30





 



 



Requirements
 
Zone 1
 
Zone 2
 
Zone 3
 
Zone 4
 
Zone 5
 
Zone 6
 
Zone 7a
 
Zone 7b


From a multiple-residential building on same lot
 

—

 

—

 

**

 

**

 

**

 

**

 

—

 

25



Minimum Parking Setbacks


Along public street
 

10

 

10

 

15

 

15

 

15

 

15

 

20

 

20



Along collector streets
 



 



 



 



 



 



 

15

 

15



Side or rear lot line
 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5



Commercial use abutting a residential use
 

—

 

5

 

20

 

20

 

—

 

—

 



 





From a multiple-residential building on same lot
 

—

 

—

 

20

 

20

 

20

 

20

 



 





Maximum Building Coverage


Coverage of lot (percentage)
 

20

 

20

 

25

 

25

 

35

 

30

 

70

 

70



Maximum Building Height


Maximum number of stories
 

2

 

3

 

2

 

2

 

2*

 

2

 

5

 

6



Maximum height
 

45

 

45

 

30

 

30

 

30*

 

30

 

75

 

80



NOTES TO TABLE


1 - May be reduced to ten feet, as long as the average of the setback
distance along a side meets the minimum setback.


* - Additional density and/or height allowed as a conditional use.  See §
A18-3(E).


** - See § A18-5(B).


Note:  Structures and uses in Zone 7b shall be configured in a multi-story,
mixed use fashion.




 



      (2)   Landscaped islands within parking lots shall be provided
for all parking lots in the neighborhood center.  The total area of the
islands shall be at least 2% of the parking lot area, except that no island
shall be less than the size of a standard parking stall.  In addition to the
required tree planting in landscape islands, ground cover within the island
shall also be installed.



      (3)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



      (4)   Screening, see § 155.348.



      (5)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.



      (6)   Parking, see §§ 155.370 through 155.379.



      (7)   Building materials, see § 155.346.



      (8)   Off-street loading areas, see § 155.354.



      (9)   Where private balconies for individual dwelling units in
multiple-residential buildings are included, they shall be incorporated into
the overall building design so as to provide architectural relief through the
use of privacy walls beneath protruding dormers or some similar treatment.



      (10)   Roofs in multiple-residential buildings shall have a
minimum pitch of one to three.



      (11)   Building elevations along public streets. In
multiple-residential buildings, no more than 50% of the length of a building
elevation which faces a public street can be used for garage doors.



   (B)   The following requirements are in addition to those in
division (A).  Where there may be a conflict, those requirements under this
division shall prevail:



      (1)   Front setbacks prevailing.  Where adjoining structures
existing at the time of adoption of this article have a greater setback than
that required by this article, the front setback of a new structure shall
conform to the prevailing setback in the immediate vicinity.  The Building
Inspector shall determine the necessary front yard setback in such cases. 
In no case shall a building be required to be set back more than 50 feet.



      (2)   Side and rear setbacks, party walls.  Buildings may be
excluded from side and rear setback requirements if party walls are used and
if the adjacent buildings are constructed as an integral structure.  This
shall not permit structures closer to residential districts, however, than
required under division (A).



      (3)   Density bonus.  Certain design and construction
features serve to reduce the real and perceived impacts of crowding,
prevalent in multiple- residential dwelling units and building complexes.
These features enhance individual unit privacy, offer an improved outdoor
environment, and foster a sense of pride and commitment to its residents. 
These traits contribute to neighborhood stability and positive social
relationships which are found to be beneficial to the community as a whole. 
To the extent that these features are incorporated, the maximum density
permitted in each of the zoning districts shall be increased in accordance
with the following, except that the increased density shall not exceed that
listed under “with bonus” as stipulated in subsection (1) above.  Where
only a portion of the dwellings or buildings are provided with these
features, the increase in density shall be prorated.



         (a)   Common open space.  This equals 1.0 units/acre. 
This bonus shall be granted when multiple-residential buildings in a complex
are arranged in a manner which creates significant open space between them. 
In order to be eligible, the open space so created must have a minimum area
of two times the lot coverage of the buildings which face the space, be
configured in a regular shape, be recognized as a defined common or sheltered
area, and be designed or contain features which encourage social interaction
among the residents of the complex.



         (b)   Private outdoor space.  This equals 0.50
units/acre.  This bonus shall be granted when multiple-residential buildings
are designed so that each dwelling unit is provided with a contiguous private
outdoor space.  In order to be eligible, the private spaces must be designed
to be screened or sheltered such that its occupants are not visible from any
other dwelling unit, other private open space, or any passer- by on adjacent
private or public property.



         (c)   Sound suppression.  This equals 1.50
units/acre.  This bonus shall be granted when multiple-residential buildings
are constructed with upgraded sound suppression materials in the walls,
ceilings and floors which separate individual dwelling units. In order to be
eligible, the STC rating must be increased by ten from that specified as the
minimum in the Minnesota State Building Code.



         (d)   Basements.  This equals 0.25 units/acre.  This
bonus shall be granted when multiple-residential buildings are constructed
with a full basement under each dwelling unit rather than a crawl space or
slab-on-grade.  In order to be eligible, the basement must exist under the
entire ground floor area, excepting therefrom any garage area.



         (e)   Oversize garages.  This equals 0.50 unit/acre. 
This bonus shall be granted when multiple-residential buildings are
constructed with oversize garage areas for storage purposes.  In order to be
eligible, townhouse garages must each be a minimum of 550 square feet. 
Apartment garages must each be a minimum of 250 square feet or, in the
alternative, each apartment dwelling unit must be provided with a locking
storage locker of at least 50 square feet.



         (f)   Private amenities.  This equals 1.0 units/acre. 
This bonus shall be granted when multiple-residential buildings are
constructed with upgraded living amenities within each dwelling unit.  In
order to be eligible, each dwelling unit must be provided with a functional
fireplace (0.50 units/acre) or 1¾ bathrooms (0.50 units/acre).



(‘81 Code, § A18-5)  (Ord. 507, passed 4-25-91; Am. Ord. 628, passed
6-26-97)



§ A18-6  SPECIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   In order to ensure quality building and site design within
this mixed use planned development, special standards are necessary.  These
include regulations governing landscaping, building materials, signage,
lighting, noise, storage, ratios of impervious materials coverage, and access
point for pedestrians and vehicles.



   (B)   Site design.  The following design elements shall be
incorporated into all site plans for commercial buildings in any subzone. 
The goal of these regulations is to assure that commercial uses are laid out
in a manner which makes them compatible with adjacent residential areas and
complementary to the image of the community as a whole.



      (1)   Traffic circulation patterns and ingress and egress to
the site shall be designed so as to minimize the impact on adjacent
residential uses.



      (2)   The site shall be organized so that there can be a
smooth flow of vehicles in and out of the site as well as easy access to the
various activity areas.



      (3)   Entrances and exits shall be placed in accordance with
city requirements so as to minimize interference with off-site circulation
patterns.



      (4)   Circulation at gas pumps shall not conflict with access
to parking, interior vehicular circulation or access to and from public
streets.



      (5)   Provision shall be made for emergency vehicle access and
fire lanes adjacent to the building.



      (6)   Parking shall be provided in the quantities recommended
by the city parking guidelines.  Parking for convenience shopping centers
shall be provided at a minimum of one space per 200 square feet of gross
floor area.  All parking areas and stalls shall be designed to city
standards.



      (7)   Parking lots having 15 or more spaces shall provide
parking for the physically disabled.  In addition, bicycle racks and
motorcycle parking shall be provided.



      (8)   Bicycle parking should be provided near building
entries, but shall not encroach into pedestrian walkways.



      (9)   Parking areas shall be screened from views of adjacent
streets and residential areas through a combination of planting and
berming.  Walls of masonry material similar to and compatible with the
primary building material may be used for screening parking and circulation
areas.



      (10)   Loading/service areas shall be designed to include
space for vehicle ingress and maneuvering. Service to underground tanks shall
not conflict with the site access and shall be placed at least 100 feet from
any residential property line.  Loading and service shall only be done
during normal business hours.



      (11)   Service and loading to the fronts of buildings may be
permitted, provided the rear of the building abuts a residential zoning
district.



      (12)   Loading/service areas, refuse containers and storage
containers, located on the side or rear of buildings, shall be screened from
view from adjacent streets and residential areas through the use of extensive
six-foot high planting and/or opaque masonry screening walls.  Masonry shall
be the same material used on the exterior of the main structure.



      (13)   Outdoor storage and display shall be prohibited.  All
utility meters and services to the building shall be screened from view or
contained within the building.



      (14)   Screening walls or fences shall be at least six feet in
height, but not more than eight feet in height.  Lower walls may be used to
help screen parking and circulation areas.



      (15)   Fences or walls shall be constructed of a masonry
material similar to and complimentary to the primary building material and
architecture.  (Chain link type fence with or without wood slats or other
inserts shall not be an acceptable screening device.)  Fencing shall not
impair traffic safety by obscuring views of entering or exiting motorists.



      (16)   Decorative or protective wrought iron type fences may
be allowed when incorporated properly within a site plan.



   (C)   Landscaping.  The following design standards shall be
incorporated into all sites plans for commercial building in any subzone. 
The goal of these regulations is to assure that commercial uses present a
landscaped appearance that is visually compatible with adjacent residential
areas, and complementary to the image of the community as a whole.



      (1)   Plant materials, fences and walls shall be utilized to:



         (a)   Provide screening of undesirable views;



         (b)   Compliment the architectural form of the building;



         (c)   Define walkways, traffic circulation, special use
areas and building entries;



         (d)   Provide a pleasant street appearance;



         (e)   Soften the visual impact of large paved areas;



         (f)   Soften the edge between a parking lot or street
and the building; and



         (g)   Mitigate the impacts of lighting or other negative
influences.



      (2)   Landscaped islands within parking lots shall be provided
for all parking lots in the neighborhood center.  The total area of the
islands shall be at least 5% of the parking lot area, except that no island
shall be less than the size of a standard parking stall.  In addition to the
required tree planting in landscape islands, ground cover within the island
shall also be installed.



      (3)   The landscape treatment of the space abutting the public
right-of-way shall include deciduous canopy trees in concert with berming or
other screening devices to conceal parking and circulation areas.



      (4)   Planting beds, conifers and ornamental trees shall be
used to accent entries and freestanding signage.



      (5)   Signage and identity structures shall be incorporated
into the landscape design and shown on landscape or site plans.



      (6)   At least 75% of the “landscape area” shall be live
plant material as opposed to walks, patios, and the like.  Plant materials
used in planting beds shall be sized to achieve a minimum of 50% bed coverage
within two years of installation.



      (7)   Installation of trees and evergreens at larger than
minimum city standards may be required by the city to achieve buffering or
streetscape effect in some circumstances.



      (8)   The architectural design shall include plaza, patios and
outdoor seating adjacent to building entries.



      (9)   Special paving materials (brick pavers, stamped
concrete, paving stones, and the like) may be used to define pedestrian
circulation through parking and vehicular circulation areas.



      (10)   Paths and sidewalks (a minimum five feet in width)
shall be provided to assure that pedestrians can move safely and conveniently
on the site and between the site and the neighborhood.



      (11)   In all turf and landscape areas, an in- ground
landscape irrigation system shall be installed. The systems shall be
considered a portion of the cost of the building (not the landscaping) and
shall be inspected as part of the building construction.



   (D)   Outdoor lighting.  The following lighting standards elements
shall be incorporated into all site plans for commercial buildings in any
subzone.  The goal of these regulations is to allow outside lighting for the
functional and security needs of the neighborhood convenience center, without
adversely impacting adjacent properties.



      (1)   Lighting shall enhance the overall aesthetics of the
site.



      (2)   Security lighting shall be provided, particularly at
pedestrian walkways and all entries.



      (3)   Lighting standards and canopies shall be integrated with
the architectural design of the buildings and shall be no more than 20 feet
above finished grade.  Detached canopies for gasoline sales shall be no more
than 20 feet from finished grade to top of canopy.  All exterior canopy
materials shall match the color of the main building.  Canopy support posts
shall be enclosed in the same masonry materials utilized on the main entry
face of the building.  Light sources (other than signs) attached to canopies
shall be concealed on the underside of the canopy, either built into the
canopy ceiling or contained within concave lens illumination boxes which cast
light vertically to the surface of the pavement.



      (4)   Exterior speakers may be used for required fire and
safety purposes only.  No advertising or entertainment broadcasting shall be
permitted through exterior speakers mounted on the exterior of neighborhood
convenience center building or auxiliary structures.



      (5)   Light sources (light bulbs) shall not be visible from
adjacent properties and shall not project a glare onto adjacent properties. 
They shall be shielded to reflect light down onto the ground and not out onto
the streets or neighboring property.



   (E)   Architectural form, scale, and materials.  The following
design elements shall be incorporated into all plans for commercial buildings
in any subzone.  The goal of these regulations is to assure that commercial
uses present an architectural appearance that is visually compatible with
adjacent residential areas and complementary to the image of the community as
a whole.



      (1)   The scale of buildings or canopies shall be at an
appropriate scale in relationship to the residential neighborhood to prevent
domination that may overpower the surrounding area in height or building
mass.  A building massing model may be required as per § 155.402.



      (2)   Forms and finish masonry or wood materials of buildings,
signage, gasoline pump canopies and other accessories structures shall be
made compatible with and relate to the architectural character of the
adjacent area.  The design shall adhere to the commercial building
requirements of § 155.346, except that natural wood products may be used on
up to 50% of the building’s vertical walls.



      (3)   Sloped roofs shall be utilized on the main structure,
unless the size of the building and total roof area make a sloped roof
infeasable.



      (4)   Mechanical equipment on building exteriors, roofs or
parking areas shall be screened from view from all public streets and
adjoining properties.



      (5)   Trash shall be screened and enclosed in masonry faced
enclosures or shall be stored completely within the main structure.



      (6)   Vending machines shall be architecturally designed into
the exterior face of the building.  Vending machines and other exterior
equipment shall not be stored or installed on the sides or rear of the
building, parking or landscaped area abutting residentially zoned or
developed property. No equipment or vending devices shall be placed or
installed on any landscaped area, nor forward of the front building face.



   (F)   Hours of operation.  The following restriction on hours of
operation shall apply to commercial uses in any subzone.  For commercial
uses which are immediately adjacent to a residential use, operation shall be
prohibited between 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. each day.  All deliveries and
loading shall be done during normal hours of operation.



   (G)   Special parking standards for Zone 7b.



      (1)   Apartment dwellings shall provide 1.8 spaces per unit. 



      (2)   Commercial uses shall provide one off-street parking
space for each 400 square feet of floor area.



      (3)   Restaurants shall provide one off-street parking space
for each 2.5 seats based on capacity. One off-street parking space per five
outdoor seats, excluding the first ten outdoor seats shall be required for
any outdoor seating area.



      (4)   A shared parking plan may be approved by the city if:



         (a)   A convenient pedestrian connection between the
properties exists;



         (b)   The properties are within 1,000 feet of each other;



         (c)   Where the uses to be served by shared parking do
not overlap their hours of operation, the property owner or owners shall
provide parking stalls equal to the greater of the applicable individual
parking requirements.



(‘81 Code, § A18-6)  (Ord. 507, passed 4-25-91; Am. Ord. 628, passed
6-26-97; Am. Ord. 853, passed 12-23-08)



ARTICLE 19.  DESIGNATION NO. 532



§ A19-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish specific performance
standards in compliance with §§ 155.260 through 155.267 for property
designated by Ordinance No. 532.1 on the official zoning map. The purpose of
this zone is to provide for an integrated mix of certain types of
neighborhood convenience retail, office, medical and restaurant uses.



(‘81 Code, § A19-1)  (Ord. 532.1, passed 4-23-92)



§ A19-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council; no outdoor sales or storage shall be permitted:



      (1)   Offices for doctors, dentists, lawyers, realtors,
veterinarians (no outdoor animal pens allowed), insurance agents, banks or
savings and loans (no drive-thrus permitted), and similar uses;



      (2)   Retail operations selling personal services or goods
over-the-counter as limited to the following uses unless otherwise
specifically approved by the City Council:  antiques, art and school
supplies, automobiles parts and service supplies, bakeries, barbershop,
beauty parlor, bicycles, books and stationery, candy, cameras and
photographic supplies, catering establishments, china and glassware, custom
dressmaking, drugs, dry goods, florists, garden supplies, gifts, hardware,
hats, hobby shops, household appliance repair, interior decorating studio (no
retail furniture sales), jewelry and watch repair, laundry and dry cleaning,
clothes pressing, locksmith shops, musical instruments, musical recording and
playback equipment, paint and wallpaper, pets (no outdoor animal pens
allowed), photography studio, shoes, sporting goods, tailoring, tanning
salon, tobacco, toys, variety stores, video tape and equipment sales or
rental and wearing apparel;



      (3)   Auto service uses and minor automobile repair, including
but not limited to tire sales, brakes and suspension service, muffler and
exhaust service, oil change and lubrication, tune-ups, and the like.  Motor
fuel sales is specifically prohibited.  Hours of operation shall be limited
to 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Monday through Sunday.  Overnight outdoor storage
of vehicles not permitted.  The total number of auto service bays is limited
to two and the doors to the bays must face north;



      (4)   Public utility buildings and structures; and



      (5)   Class I restaurants, provided no drive- thru services
shall be permitted.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council contained within either a free-standing or multi-tenant
building, with no more than two buildings permitted within the zone.  No
outdoor sales, storage or overnight parking shall be permitted.



      (1)   Dairy, grocery or convenience store not to exceed 5,000
square feet of floor area;



      (2)   Offices for doctors, dentists, lawyers, realtors,
veterinarians (no outdoor animal pens allowed), insurance agents, banks or
savings and loans (no drive-thrus permitted) and similar uses;



      (3)   Retail operations selling personal services or goods
over-the-counter as limited to the following uses unless otherwise
specifically approved by the City Council:  antiques, art and school
supplies, automobiles parts and service supplies, bakeries, barbershop,
beauty parlor, bicycles, books and stationery, candy, cameras and
photographic supplies, catering establishments, china and glassware, custom
dressmaking, drugs, dry goods, florists, garden supplies, gifts, hardware,
hats, hobby shops, household appliance repair, interior decorating studio (no
retail furniture sales), jewelry and watch repair, laundry and dry cleaning,
clothes pressing, locksmith shops, musical instruments, musical recording and
playback equipment, paint and wallpaper, pets (no outdoor animal pens
allowed), photography studio, shoes, sporting goods, tailoring, tanning
salon, tobacco, toys, variety stores, video tape and equipment sales or
rental and wearing apparel;



      (4)   Auto service uses and minor automobile repair, including
but not limited to tire sales, brakes and suspension service, muffler and
exhaust service, oil change and lubrication, tune-ups, and the like.  Motor
fuel sales is specifically prohibited.  The maximum square footage devoted
to such auto service uses shall not exceed 12,750 square feet.  Hours of
operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Monday through Sunday. 
Overnight outdoor storage of vehicles not permitted.  If located within a
free- standing building, auto service bay doors may not face a public street;
and



      (5)   Public utility buildings and structures.



   (C)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Public streets or shared private access drives; and



      (2)   Landscaping and screening walls.



(‘81 Code, § A19-2)  (Ord. 532.1, passed 4-23-92; Am. Ord. 614, passed
4-25-96)



§ A19-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except by
conditional use permit:



      (1)   Hours of operation in excess of those listed in §
A19-2(A)(3).



      (2)   Buildings constructed with exposed vertical exterior
finish materials other than those provided under § 155.346 when:



         (a)   The proposed materials represent the same or
similar materials used on at least 66.7% of the existing buildings adjacent
to the site.



         (b)   The proposed materials are demonstrated to be of
comparable grade and quality as those otherwise required.



         (c)   Under no circumstance shall sheet or corrugated
iron, aluminum, steel, asbestos, sheet plywood, plain or painted plain
concrete block or similar materials be used.  Any decorative concrete block
shall be colored only by means of a pigment impregnated throughout the entire
block.



      (3)   Class II restaurants, provided the following
requirements are met:



         (a)   No drive-thru service shall be permitted.



         (b)   The applicant shall demonstrate that the use’s
generated traffic will not adversely affect any surrounding residential use
or create any safety hazards associated with the adjacent elementary school,
and shall submit, upon the city’s request, a traffic study.



         (c)   The restaurant shall not serve deep-fried,
grilled, or oven-roasted food items, including but not limited to,
hamburgers, tacos, chicken, or fish.



         (d)   All conditional use permit standards set forth in
§ A1-72 herein are met.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except by
conditional use permit:



      (1)   Hours of operation in excess of those listed; and



      (2)   Buildings constructed with exposed vertical exterior
finish materials other than those provided under § 155.346 when:



         (a)   The proposed materials represent the same or
similar materials used on at least 66.7% of the existing buildings adjacent
to the site.



         (b)   The proposed materials are demonstrated to be of
comparable grade and quality as those otherwise required.



         (c)   Under no circumstances shall sheet or corrugated
aluminum, iron, steel, asbestos, sheet plywood, plain or painted plain
concrete blocks or similar materials be used.  Any decorative concrete block
shall be colored only by means of a pigment impregnated throughout the entire
block.



   (C)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
as a conditional use, nor shall uses deemed similar by the City Council.



(‘81 Code, § A19-3)  (Ord. 532.1, passed 4-23-92; Am. Ord. 614, passed
4-25-96)



§ A19-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading spaces,
as regulated by this article;



      (2)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary to
complete the construction; and



      (3)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading spaces,
as regulated by this article;



      (2)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary to
complete the construction; and



      (3)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met.



   (C)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, no accessory uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses.



(‘81 Code, § A19-4)  (Ord. 532.1, passed 4-23-92)



§ A19-5  MINIMUM AREA STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following requirements and minimum area standards shall be
met.  No improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be
so used or improved shall meet the following minimum area and dimensional
requirements.  The following table shall be used to compute the minimum lot
area exclusive of street rights-of-way, in square feet, and such computation
shall be subject to the following; ponding area or similar unbuildable areas
shall not comprise more than 10% of the total site area.



      (1)   Table of minimum area requirements and standards.  The
dimensions shall be measured in feet unless otherwise specified.



 



Requirements
 
Zone 1
 
Zone 2
 
Zone 3


Minimum Lot Dimensions for Commercial Uses


Lot area (square feet)
 
30,000
 
30,000*
 
7,500


Lot width
 
125
 
125*
 
30


Minimum Building Setbacks


Along principal or minor arterial streets
 
50
 
50
 
—


Along community or neighborhood collector streets
 
40
 
40
 
—


Along other streets
 
30
 
30
 
—


Along side lot line
 
15
 
15
 
—


Along rear lot line
 
15
 
15
 
—


Commercial use abutting a residential use
 
75
 
75
 
—


Minimum Parking Setbacks


Along an east-west public street
 
20
 
5
 
5


Along a north-south public street
 
15
 
15
 
15


Side or rear lot line
 
10
 
5
 
5


Commercial use abutting a residential use
 
20
 
20
 
—

 

 


Maximum Building Coverage


Coverage of lot (percentage)
 
23
 
20
 
—


Maximum Building Height


Maximum number of stories
 
1
 
1
 
—


Requirements
 
Zone 1
 
Zone 2
 
Zone 3


Maximum Building Height


Maximum height
 
20
 
25**
 
—


NOTES TO TABLE

* - Total area and width of adjacent lots may be used to satisfy the minimum
dimensional requirements when zero lot line, common-wall building(s) are
constructed.

** - Unoccupied architectural details or features comprising less than 20% of
the lineal elevation of any side may exceed the maximum height by 50%.




 



      (2)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



      (3)   Screening, see § 155.348.



      (4)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.



      (5)   Parking, see §§ 155.370 through 155.379.



      (6)   Building materials, see § 155.346.



      (7)   Off-street loading areas, see § 155.354.



      (8)   Roofs shall have a minimum pitch of one to three or have
a parapet wall.



      (9)   Building elevations along public streets. No more than
50% of the length of a building elevation which faces a public street can be
used for garage or bay doors.



   (B)   Additional area standards and requirements.  The following
requirements are in addition to those in division (A) above.  Where there
may be a conflict, those requirements under this division shall prevail:



      (1)   Front setbacks prevailing.  Where adjoining structures
existing at the time of adoption of this article have a greater setback than
that required by this article, the front setback of a new structure shall
conform to the prevailing setback in the immediate vicinity.  The Building
Inspector shall determine the necessary front yard setback in such cases. 
In no case shall a building be required to set back more than 50 feet under
this provision.



      (2)   Side and rear setbacks, party walls. Buildings may be
excluded from side and rear setback requirements if party walls are used and
if the adjacent buildings are constructed as an integral structure.  This
shall not permit structures closer to residential districts, however, than
required under division (A).



      (3)   Side and rear parking setbacks.  Parking lots and
driveway aisles may be excluded from side and rear setbacks along common lot
lines when they are constructed under a shared parking and access arrangement
and suitable cross easements are recorded against the subject lots.



      (4)   Floor area restrictions.  The total floor area of any
restaurant permitted herein shall comprise of no more than 33% of the total
floor area of the building in which it is located.



(‘81 Code, § A19-5)  (Ord. 532.1, passed 4-23-92; Am. Ord. 614, passed
4-25-96)



§ A19-6  SPECIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   In order to ensure quality building and site design within
this mixed use planned development, special standards are necessary. These
include regulations governing landscaping, building materials, signage,
lighting, noise, storage, ratios of impervious materials coverage, and access
point for pedestrians and vehicles.



   (B)   Site design.  The following design elements shall be
incorporated into all site plans for commercial buildings in any subzone. 
The goal of these regulations is to assure that commercial uses are laid out
in a manner which makes them compatible with adjacent residential areas, and
complementary to the image of the community as a whole.



      (1)   Traffic circulation patterns and ingress and egress to
the site shall be designed so as to minimize the impact on adjacent
residential uses.



      (2)   The site shall be organized so that there can be a
smooth flow of vehicles in and out of the site as well as easy access to the
various activity areas.



      (3)   Entrances and exits shall be placed in accordance with
city requirements so as to minimize interference with off-site circulation
patterns.



      (4)   Provision shall be made for emergency vehicle access and
fire lanes adjacent to the building.



      (5)   Parking shall be provided in the quantities recommended
by the city parking guidelines.



      (6)   Parking lots having 15 or more spaces shall provide
parking for the physically disabled.  In addition, bicycle racks and
motorcycle parking shall be provided.



      (7)   Bicycle parking should be provided near building
entries, but shall not encroach into pedestrian walkways.



      (8)   Parking areas shall be screened from views of adjacent
residential areas through a combination of planting and berming.  Walls of
masonry material similar to and compatible with the primary building material
shall be used for screening parking and circulation areas.  The combination
of walls and berms shall provide for a screen at least six feet in height.



      (9)   Loading/service areas shall be designed to include space
for vehicle ingress and maneuvering. Service to underground tanks shall not
conflict with the site access and shall be placed at least 100 feet from any
residential property line.  Loading and service shall only be done during
normal business hours.



      (10)   Service and loading must be provided to the rear of
buildings.



      (11)   Loading/service areas, refuse containers, and storage
containers, located on the side or rear of buildings, shall be screened from
view from adjacent streets and residential areas through the use of extensive
six-foot high plantings and opaque masonry screening walls.  Masonry shall
be the same material used on the exterior of the main structure. The
combination of walls and berms shall provide for at least a six-foot high
screen.



      (12)   Outdoor storage and display shall be prohibited.  All
utility meters and services to the building shall be screened from view or
contained within the building.



      (13)   Screening walls or fences constructed without berms
shall be at least six feet in height, but not more than eight feet in height.



      (14)   Fences or walls shall be constructed of a masonry
material similar to and complimentary to the primary building material and
architecture.  (Chain link type fences with or without wood slats or other
inserts shall not be an acceptable screen device.)  Fencing shall not impair
traffic safety by obscuring views of entering or exiting motorists.



      (15)   Decorative or “ring route” wrought iron type fences
may be allowed when incorporated properly within a site plan.



      (16)   Exterior speaker may be used for required fire and
safety purposes only.  No advertising or entertainment broadcasting shall be
permitted through exterior speakers mounted on the exterior of buildings or
auxiliary structures.



   (C)   Landscaping.  The following design standards shall be
incorporated into all site plans for commercial buildings in any subzone. 
The goal of these regulations is to assure that commercial uses present a
landscaped appearance that is visually compatible with adjacent residential
areas, and complementary to the image of the community as a whole.



      (1)   Plant materials, fences and walls shall be utilized to:



         (a)   Provide screening of undesirable views;



         (b)   Compliment the architectural form of the building;



         (c)   Define walkways, traffic circulation, special use
areas and building entries;



         (d)   Provide a pleasant street appearance;



         (e)   Soften the visual impact of large paved areas;



         (f)   Soften the edge between a parking lot or street
and the building; and



         (g)   Mitigate the impacts of lighting or other negative
influences.



      (2)   Landscaped islands within parking lots shall be provided
for all parking lots in the center. The total area of the islands shall be at
least 5% of the parking lot area, except that no island shall be less than
the size of a standard parking stall.  In addition to the required tree
planting in landscape islands, see § 155.349.  Ground cover within the
island shall also be installed.



      (3)   The landscape treatment of the space abutting the public
right-of-way shall include deciduous canopy trees in concert with berming or
other screening devices to conceal parking and circulation areas.



      (4)   Planting beds, conifers and ornamental trees shall be
used to accent entries and freestanding signage.



      (5)   Signage and identity structures shall be incorporated
into the landscape design and shown on landscape or site plans.



      (6)   At least 75% of the “landscape area” shall be live
plant material as opposed to walks, patios, and the like.  Plant materials
used in planting beds shall be sized to achieve a minimum of 50% bed coverage
within two years of installation.



      (7)   Installation of trees and evergreens at larger than
minimum city standards may be required by the city to achieve buffering or
streetscape effect in some circumstances.



      (8)   The architectural design shall include plaza, patios and
outdoor seating adjacent to building entries.



      (9)   Special paving materials (brick pavers, stamped
concrete, paving stones, and the like) may be used to define pedestrian
circulation through parking and vehicular circulation areas.



      (10)   Paths and sidewalks (a minimum five feet in width)
shall be provided to assure that pedestrians can move safely and conveniently
on the site and between the site and the neighborhood.



      (11)   In all turf and landscape areas, an in- ground
landscape irrigation system shall be installed. The systems shall be
considered a portion of the cost of the building (not the landscaping) and
shall be inspected as part of the building construction.



   (D)   Outdoor lighting.  The following lighting standards elements
shall be incorporated into all site plans for commercial buildings in any
subzone.  The goal of these regulations is to allow outside lighting for the
functional and security needs of the commercial uses, without adversely
impacting adjacent properties.



      (1)   Lighting shall enhance the overall aesthetics of the
site.



      (2)   Downcast security lighting shall be provided,
particularly at pedestrian walkways and all entries.  The “foot candle”
measurement of the light intervals shall not exceed 20 at main entry doors or
within 75 feet of the doors, and shall not exceed five in the parking areas.



      (3)   Lighting standards shall be integrated with the
architectural design of the buildings and shall be no more than 20 feet above
finished grade.  Light sources (other than signs) shall utilize downcast
shoe box fixtures which cast light vertically to the surface of the pavement.



      (4)    Light sources (light bulbs) shall not be visible from
adjacent properties and shall not project a glare onto adjacent properties. 
They shall be shielded to reflect light down onto the ground and not out onto
the streets or neighboring property.



   (E)   Architectural for, scale, and materials.  The following
design elements shall be incorporated into all plans for commercial buildings
in any subzone. The goal of these regulations is to assure that commercial
uses present an architectural appearance that is visually compatible with
adjacent residential areas and complementary to the image of the community as
a whole.



      (1)   The scale of buildings shall be at an appropriate scale
in relationship to the residential neighborhood to prevent domination that
may overpower the surrounding area in height or building mass.  Buildings
shall not be greater than 25 feet in height.



      (2)   Forms and finish masonry materials of buildings, signage
and other accessory structures shall be made compatible with and relate to
the architectural character of the adjacent area.



      (3)   Sloped roofs or parapet walls shall be utilized on the
main structures.



      (4)   Mechanical equipment on building exteriors, roofs,
parking areas shall be screened from view from all public streets and
adjoining properties.



      (5)   Trash shall be screened and enclosed in masonry faced
enclosures attached to the main structure or shall be stored completely
within the main structure.



      (6)   Vending machines or other equipment shall not be
installed or stored outside of the main building.



   (F)   Signage.  Permitted signage shall be as allowed under the
city’s sign regulations, except that the following criteria for
freestanding signs shall apply:



      (1)   Sign height.  The maximum height of a freestanding sign
shall be 20 feet.



      (2)   Setbacks.  The minimum setback of a freestanding sign
from a street right-of-way shall be 15 feet.  The minimum setback from an
interior lot line shall be ten feet.



      (3)   Materials.  The sign base and any surround of a
freestanding sign must utilize brick materials identical or similar to the
main building facade.



      (4)   Master sign.  A master sign for building signs shall be
submitted.



(‘81 Code, § A19-6)  (Ord. 532.1, passed 4-23-92)



ARTICLE 20.  DESIGNATION NO. 541



§ A20-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish specific performance
standards in compliance with §§ 155.260 through 155.267 for property
designated by Ordinance No. 541 on the official zoning map.  The purpose of
this zone is to provide for an integrated mix of a variety of motor vehicle
sales, repair, and service uses.



(‘81 Code, § A20-1)  (Ord. 541, passed 7-23-92)



§ A20-2  PERMITTED USES.



   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used, except
for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City
Council:



   (A)   Motor vehicle sales when conducted entirely within a building
(outdoor sales or storage subject to conditional use); no accessory sales or
service buildings can be erected on the same or contiguous lot which is owned
by the same franchise holder;



   (B)   Retail operations selling over-the-counter automobile parts,
accessories and service supplies;



   (C)   Automobile rental facility (outdoor display or storage subject
to conditional use);



   (D)   Minor and major motor vehicle repair and auto body shop
(outdoor storage subject to conditional use).  Auto service bay doors may
not face a public street which is designated as either a principal or minor
arterial, or community collector, within the transportation chapter of the
city’s comprehensive plan;



   (E)   Car wash (motor fuel sales subject to conditional use);



   (F)   Offices as accessory use to the principle use. Medical,
professional, real estate offices and general office buildings are not
permitted; and



   (G)   Bicycle, boat and snowmobile sales and service (outdoor
display or storage subject to conditional use).



(‘81 Code, § A20-2)  (Ord. 541, passed 7-23-92)



§ A20-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except by
conditional use permit:



      (1)   Motor fuel sales either as principle use or accessory
use;



      (2)   Outdoor display or sales of motorized vehicles, or
outdoor storage of such vehicles which are offered for sale, when associated
with a related structure that occupies at least 5% of the total lot area and
which contains sales offices, service facilities, or administrative support
offices.  All display/sales/ storage areas shall be covered with a paved
surface, have a concrete perimeter curb, and have a setback of at least five
feet from an interior lot line and a setback of at least 20 feet from a
street right-of-way or easement line, except that this may be reduced to five
feet where it is adjacent to the bulb portion of a cul- de-sac.  Lighting
plans for outdoor display/sales/ storage must be specifically reviewed and
approved by the City Council to ensure compatibility with adjacent properties
and the downtown commercial area as a whole regarding the color of the poles
and fixtures, the luminary color temperature and the light intensity;



      (3)   Outdoor storage of damaged vehicles, when adequately
screened as determined by the City Council;



      (4)   Major anchor/center sign subject to the requirements of
Chapter 154;



      (5)   Building elevations facing a public street having garage
bay doors along more than 50% of its length, when the City Council determines
that special architectural treatment of the bay doors or elevation containing
said doors has occurred which softens, camouflages or minimizes the
appearance of the doors from the affected public street.  Appropriate
architectural treatment shall include, but not be limited to:  projections
which incorporate the doors into special architectural elements that disguise
their use; pergola or overhanging canopies, deeply recessed bay doors,
special color or surface textures or similar treatments; or



      (6)   Buildings constructed with exposed vertical exterior
finish materials other than those provided in § 155.346 when:



         (a)   The proposed materials represent the same or
similar materials used on at least 66.7% of the existing buildings adjacent
to the site;



         (b)   The proposed materials are demonstrated to be of
comparable grade and quality as those otherwise required; and



         (c)   Under no circumstance shall sheet or corrugated
iron, aluminum, steel, asbestos, sheet plywood, plain or painted plain
concrete block or similar materials be used.  Any decorative concrete block
shall be colored only by means of a pigment impregnated throughout the entire
block.



(‘81 Code, § A20-3)  (Ord. 541, passed 7-23-92)



§ A20-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   Zone 1.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed similar
by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



   (A)   Off-street customer and employee parking, refuse storage and
loading spaces, as regulated by this article;



   (B)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on
the premises for a period of not to exceed the time necessary to complete the
construction; and



   (C)   Public telephone booths and other essential public service
facilities provided all yard requirements are met.



(‘81 Code, § A20-4)  (Ord. 541, passed 7-23-92)



§ A20-5  MINIMUM AREA STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following requirements and minimum area standards shall be
met. No improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be so
used or improved shall meet the following minimum area and dimensional
requirements. The following table shall be used to compute the minimum lot
area exclusive of street right-of-ways, in square feet, and such computation
shall be subject to the following: ponding area or similar unbuildable areas
shall not comprise more than 10% of the total site area:



      (1)    Table of minimum area requirements and standards.



 

District
 
Zone 1




Minimum lot dimension for commercial uses:
 
 


   Lot area (square feet)
 
50,000


   Lot width (feet)
 
200


Minimum building setbacks
 
 


   Along principal or minor arterial street (feet)
 
50


   Along community or neighborhood collector streets (feet)
 
40


   Along other streets (feet)
 
30


   Along side lot line (feet)
 
20


   Along rear lot line (feet)
 
20


Minimum parking setbacks:
 
 


   Along a public street (feet)
 
20*


   Side or rear lot line (feet)
 
5


Maximum building coverage:
 
 


   Coverage of lot (percentage)
 
20


Maximum building height:
 
 


   Maximum number of stories
 
2


   Maximum height (feet)
 
30**




 



*  This may be reduced to five feet where adjacent to the bulb portion of a
cul-de-sac right-of way or easement line.



* *  Unoccupied architectural details or features comprising less than 20%
of the lineal elevation of any side may exceed the maximum height by 50%.



      (2)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



      (3)   Screening, see § 155.348.



      (4)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.



      (5)   Parking, see sections §§ 155.370 through 155.379.



      (6)   Building materials, see § 155.346



      (7)   Off-street loading areas, see § 155.354



      (8)   Building elevations along public streets. No more than
50% of the length of a building elevation which faces a public street can be
used for garage or bay doors. A conditional use permit in accordance with §
A20-3(A)(5) shall be required for any elevation containing garage bay doors
which, in total, exceed this 50% standard.



   (B)   Additional area standards and requirements. The following
requirements are in addition to those in division (A) of this section. Where
there may be a conflict, those requirements under this paragraph shall
prevail:



      (1)   Front setbacks prevailing. Where adjoining structures
existing at the time of adoption of this chapter have a greater setback than
that required by this chapter, the front setback of a new structure shall
conform to the prevailing setback in the immediate vicinity. The building
inspector shall determine the necessary front yard setback in such cases. In
no case shall a building be required to be set back more than 50 feet under
this provision.



      (2)   Side and rear setbacks, party walls. Buildings may be
excluded from side and rear setback requirements if party walls are used and
if the adjacent buildings are constructed as an integral structure; or ifthe
adjacent lot is under common ownership and a "no-build" easement is
established which ensures separation of free-standing buildings in accordance
with the standards of the Minnesota State Building Code. This shall not
permit structures closer to residential districts, however, than required
under division (A) of this section.



      (3)   Side and rear parking setbacks. Parking lots and
driveway aisles may be excluded from side and rear setbacks along common lot
lines when they are constructed under a shared parking and access arrangement
and suitable cross easements are recorded against the subject lots.



(‘81 Code, § A20-5)  (Ord. No. 541, § 2, 7-23-92)



§ A20-6  SPECIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   In order to ensure quality building and site design within this motor
vehicle sales and service use planned development, special standards are
necessary. These include regulations governing landscaping, building
materials, signage, display areas, lighting, storage, ratios of impervious
materials coverage, and access point for pedestrians and vehicles.



   (A)   Site design. The following design elements shall be
incorporated into all site plans for commercial buildings in any subzone. The
goal of these regulations is to assure that commercial uses are laid out in a
manner which creates a cohesive motor vehicles sales and service commercial
neighborhood and to make all uses compatible and complementary with one
another and with the image of the community as a whole.



      (1)   Traffic circulation patterns and ingress and egress to
the site shall be designed so as to minimize the impact on adjacent
residential uses.



      (2)   The site shall be organized so that there can be a
smooth flow of vehicles in and out of the site as well as easy access to the
various activity areas.



      (3)   Entrances and exits shall be placed in accordance with
city requirements so as to minimize interference with off-site circulation
patterns.



      (4)   Provision shall be made for emergency vehicle access and
fire lanes adjacent to the building.



      (5)   Parking shall be provided in the quantities recommended
by the city parking guidelines.



      (6)   Parking lots having 15 or more spaces shall provide
parking for the physically disabled.



      (7)   Loading/service areas shall be designed to include space
for vehicle ingress and maneuvering. Service to underground tanks for motor
fuel storage shall not conflict with the site access. Loading and service
shall only be done during normal business hours.



      (8)   Service and loading must be provided to the rear of
buildings.



      (9)   Loading/service areas, refuse con-tainers and storage
containers located on the side or rear of building, and if located closer
than 125 feet from adjacent streets, shall be screened from view through the
use of extensive six-foot high plantings and opaque masonry screening walls.
Masonry shall be the same materials used on the exterior of the main
structure.



      (10)   All utility meters and services to the building shall
be screened from view or contained within the building.



      (11)   Screening walls or fences shall be at least six feet in
height, but not more than eight feet in height.



      (12)   Decorative or "ring route" wrought iron type fences may
be allowed for non-screening purposes when incorporated properly within a
site plan.



      (13)   Fences or walls shall be constructed of a material
similar to and complimentary to the primary building material and
architecture. (Chain link type fences with or without wood slats or other
inserts shall not be an acceptable screening device.) Fencing shall not
impair traffic safety by obscuring views of entering or exiting motorists.



      (14)   Exterior speakers may be used for paging or required
fire and safety purposes only. No advertising or entertainment broadcasting
shall be permitted through exterior speakers mounted on the exterior of
buildings or auxiliary structures.



   (B)   Landscaping. The following design standards shall be
incorporated into all site plans for commercial buildings. The goal of these
regulations is to assure that commercial uses present a landscaped appearance
that is visually compatible and complementary to the image of the community
as a whole.



      (1)    Plant materials, fences and walls shall be utilised to:



         (a)   Provide screening of undesirable views;



         (b)   Compliment the architectural form of the building;



         (c)   Define walkways, traffic circulation, special use
areas, and building entries;



         (d)   Provide a pleasant street appearance;



         (e)   Soften the visual impact of large paved areas;



         (f)   Soften the edge between a parking lot or street
and the building; and



         (g)   Mitigate the impacts of lighting or other negative
influences.



      (2)   Landscaped islands within parking or
display/sales/storage lots shall be provided for all parking lots in the
center. The total area of the islands shall be at least 5% of the parking lot
area. For an island to count toward satisfying this 5% standard, it shall not
be less than the size of a standard parking stall. In addition to the
required tree planting in landscape islands (see § 155.349(D)), ground cover
within the island shall also be installed.



      (3)   The landscape treatment of the space abutting the public
right-of-way shall include deciduous canopy trees in concert with berming or
other screening devices to conceal parking and circulation areas, except that
lots intended for motor vehicle display shall not be required to be concealed
with berms or screening.



      (4)   Planting beds, conifers and ornamental trees shall be
used to accent entries and freestanding signage.



      (5)   Signage and identity structures shall be incorporated
into the landscape design and shown on landscape or site plans.



      (6)   At least 75% of the "landscape area" shall be live plant
material as opposed to walks, patios, etc. Plant materials used in planting
beds shall be sized to achieve a minimum of 50% bed coverage within two years
of installation.



      (7)   Installation of trees and evergreens at larger than
minimum city standards may be required by the city to achieve buffering or
streetscape effect in some circumstances.



      (8)   The architectural design shall include plaza, patios and
outdoor seating adjacent to building entries.



      (9)   Special paving materials (brick pavers, stamped
concrete, paving stones, etc.) may be used to define pedestrian circulation
through parking and vehicular circulation areas.



      (10)   Paths and sidewalks (a minimum five feet in width)
shall be provided to assure that pedestrians can move safely and conveniently
on the site and between the site and the neighborhood.



      (11)   In all turf and landscape areas, an in-ground landscape
irrigation system shall be installed. Such systems shall be considered a
portion of the cost of the building (not the landscaping) and shall be
inspected as part of the building construction.



   (C) Outdoor lighting. The following lighting standards elements shall
be incorporated into all site plans for commercial buildings in any subzone.
The goal of these regulations is to allow outside lighting for the functional
and security needs of the  commercial uses, without adversely impacting
adjacent properties.



      (1)   Downcast security lighting shall be provided,
particularly at pedestrian walkways and all entries. The "foot candle"
measurement of the light levels shall not exceed 20 at main entry doors or
within 75 feet of said doors, and shall not exceed five  in the parking
areas. This standard shall not apply to lighting erected in conjunction with
an outdoor sales/display area conditional use permit pursuant to §
A20-3(A)(2).



      (2)   Lighting standards shall be integrated with the
architectural design of the buildings and shall be no more than 30 feet above
finished grade. Light sources (other than signs) shall utilize downcast
shoebox fixtures which cast light vertically to the surface of the pavement
and shall utilize metal halide luxninaires.



      (3)   Light sources (light bulbs) shall not be visible from
adjacent properties and shall not project a glare onto adjacent properties.
They shall be shielded to reflect light down onto the ground and not out onto
the streets or neighboring property.



      (4)   Lighting shall be designed to enhance the overall
aesthetics of the site.



   (D)    Architectural form, scale and materials. The following design
elements shall be incorporated into all plans for commercial buildings an any
subzone. The goal of these regulations is to assure that commercial uses
present an architectural appearance that is visually compatible with adjacent
residential areas, and complimentary to the image of the community as a whole.



      (1)   Forms and finish masonry materials of buildings, signage
and other accessory structures shall be made compatible with and relate to
the architectural character of the adjacent area.



      (2)   Architectural features (such as towers) or parapet walls
shall be utilized on the main structure to screen any rooftop mechanical
equipment.



      (3)   Mechanical equipment on building exteriors, roofs or
parking areas shall be screened from view from all public streets and
adjoining properties.



      (4)   Trash shall be screened and enclosed in masonry-faced
enclosures attached to the main structure or shall be stored completely
within the main structure.



      (5)   Vending machines or other equipment shall not be
installed or stored outside of the main building.



   (E)   Signage. Permitted signage shall be as allowed under the
city's sign regulations, except that additional monument entry signs at each
driveway access to a public street shall be permitted when in conformance
with the following criteria:



      (1)   Materials and appearance. The entry monument shall be
constructed to appear as a brick wall with sign copy mounted upon its face.
The entry monument must utilize brick materials identical or similar to the
Apple Valley "Ring Route Streetscape" entry monuments and fence bollards. The
structure shall have a capstone of uncolored precast concrete or cut stone.



      (2)   Location. An entry monument may be placed adjacent to
each entry drive in the vicinity of its intersection with a public street.



      (3)   Setbacks. The minimum setback of an entry monument from
a street right-of-way or easement shall be ten feet. The minimum setback from
an interior lot line or private driveway curbline shall be ten feet.



      (4)   Entry monument dimensions. The maximum and minimum
height of an entry monument sign shall be four feet. The maximum centerline
length shall not exceed 20 feet.



      (5)   Landscaping. The base of the entry monument shall be
landscaped with a combination of deciduous and coniferous shrubs.



      (6)   Sign copy. Identifying signage to be placed on the entry
monument shall be limited to an area at least six inches below the capstone
and 12 inches from the sides of the structure.  Sign copy shall consist
either of individual letters or one-piece franchise manufacturer's logo.



      (7)   Lighting. Signage shall be lit only from an internal
light source contained within each letter or logo. Uplights may be installed
within the landscaped area, provided that the surface of the luminaire lens
is parallel to and flush with the surface of the ground.



(‘81 Code, § A20-6) (Ord. No. 541, § 2, 7-23-92)



ARTICLE 21.  DESIGNATION NO. 580



§ A21-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish specific performance
standards in compliance with §§ 155.260 through 155.267 for property
designated by Ordinance No. 580 on the official zoning map.  The purpose of
this zone is to provide for low density townhome uses on a modified public
street system.



(Ord. 580, passed 7-14-94)



§ A21-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1. Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



      (1)   Townhouse dwellings, provided they are serviced by
public sanitary sewer and water systems and provided that no single structure
contains in excess of two dwelling units;



      (2)   Home occupation as defined in § 155.003 hereof; 



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures; and



      (4)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home
licensed under M.S. § 245.812, or such home for the care of the mentally or
physically handicapped licensed by the state.



   (B)   Zone 2. Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used,
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by City
Council:



      (1)   Single-family dwelling unit meeting the standards of the
Uniform Building Code, placed on permanent foundations and having no
horizontal axis less than 18 feet in length;



      (2)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures; and



      (4)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state.



(Ord. 580, passed 7-14-94; Am. Ord. 638, passed 11-25-97)



§ A21-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zone 1 and 2.  Within these zones, no structure or land shall
be used for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council,
except by conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812, or community based residential
care facility when:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes; and



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between such
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities.  Such
conditional use permits shall be reviewed at one-year intervals.



      (2)   Townhouse dwelling units constructed with exposed
vertical exterior finish materials other than those provided under § 155.346
when:



         (a)   The proposed materials represent the same or
similar materials used on at least 66  of the existing buildings within 350
feet of the site;



         (b)   The proposed materials are demonstrated to be of
comparable grade and quality as those otherwise required; and



         (c)   Any materials used must have the appearance of
wood siding having a maximum plank width of 12 inches.  Under no
circumstance shall sheet or corrugated aluminum, iron, steel, asbestos, sheet
plywood or similar materials be used which have no three dimensional relief,
nor shall plain or painted concrete block be used.  Any decorative concrete
block shall be colored only by means of a pigment impregnated throughout the
entire block.



(Ord. 580, passed 7-14-94; Am. Ord. 638, passed 11-25-97)



§ A21-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Zone 1 and 2.  Within these zones, the following uses or uses
deemed similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Any accessory use permitted in the R districts;



      (2)   Accessory uses customarily associated with and
incidental to the conditional uses permitted in the multiple dwelling
districts; and



      (3)   Putting greens, shuffleboard courts, picnic areas,
community buildings and similar recreational or service areas for use by the
residents of the premises.



(Ord. 580, passed 7-14-94; Am. Ord. 638, passed 11-25-97)



§ A21-5  MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following requirements and minimum area standards shall be
met.  No improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be
so used or improved shall meet the following minimum area and dimensional
requirements.  Densities are predicated upon the availability of public
water, storm sewer, and sanitary sewer service; without the service,
densities shall be limited to one dwelling unit or structure per ten acres. 
The following table shall be used to compute the minimum lot area exclusive
of street rights-of-way, in square feet, and such computation shall be
subject to the following; ponding area or similar unbuildable areas shall not
comprise more than 10% of the total site area.



      (1)   Table of minimum area requirements and standards.  The
dimensions shall be measured in feet unless otherwise specified.



 

Requirements
 
Zone 1
 
Zone 2




Minimum Lot Areas for Multi-Family Dwelling Unit Density


Minimum units per acre
 
4
 
—


One- or two-story
 

 



  Minimum square footage of land per unit, (plus bonus)
 
10,980 (7,260)
 
—


  Maximum units per acre, (plus bonus)
 
4 (6)
 
—


Minimum Lot Dimensions


Minimum lot area (square feet)
 
—
 
6,000*


Minimum lot width
 
—
 
50


Minimum Building Setback**


Along principal or minor arterial streets
 
50
 
50


Along community or neighborhood collector streets
 
40
 
40


Along all other streets
 
30
 
30


Corner side lot
 
20
 
20


Along side lot line
 

 



  Lot line
 
15
 
10


  Dwelling unit
 
—
 
10


  Garage
 
—
 
5


Along rear lot line
 
15
 
30


From multiple-residential building on the same lot
 
***
 
—


Minimum Parking Setbacks


Along public streets
 
15
 
—


Side or rear lot line
 
5
 
—


From a multiple-residential building on the same lot
 
20
 
—


Maximum Building Coverage


Coverage of lot (percentage)
 
30
 
30


Maximum Building Height


Maximum number of stories
 
2
 
2


Maximum height
 
30
 
30


NOTES TO TABLE

  * - Average area of all lots must equal or exceed 7,260 square feet.

** - See § 155.333 for permitted setback encroachments for accessory
structures and decks.

*** - See § A21-5(A)(2).




 



      (2)   Setback between multiple-residential buildings. 



         (a)   For the purposes of this section, the term
“side” shall refer to the short sides of a structure and the terms
“front” or “rear” shall refer to the long sides of the structure.



         (b)   Minimum setbacks between sides of
multiple-residential buildings shall be 15 feet or a distance equal to
one-half the combined height of the adjacent building faces, whichever is
greater.



         (c)   Minimum setbacks between the front or rear of
multiple-residential buildings shall be 50 feet or a distance equal to the
combined height of the adjacent building faces, whichever is greater.  This
requirement also applies to situations where a front or rear faces a side.



      (3)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



      (4)   Screening, see § 155.348.



      (5)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.



      (6)   Parking, see §§ 155.370 through 155.379.



      (7)   Building materials, see § 155.346.



      (8)   Off-street loading areas, see § 155.354.



      (9)   Balconies. Where private balconies for individual
dwelling units in multiple-residential buildings are included, they shall be
incorporated into the overall building design so as to provide architectural
relief through the use of privacy walls beneath protruding dormers, or some
similar treatment.



      (10)   Rooflines.  Roofs in multiple-residential buildings
shall have a minimum pitch of 1:3.



   (B)   Additional area standards and requirements. The following
requirements are in addition to those in § A21-5(A).  Where there may be a
conflict, those requirements under this paragraph shall prevail.



      (1)   Front setbacks prevailing. Where adjoining structures
existing at the time of adoption of this article have a greater setback than
that required by this article, the front setback of a new structure shall
conform to the prevailing setback in the immediate vicinity.  The Building
Inspector shall determine the necessary front yard setback in such cases. 
In no case shall a building be required to be set back more than 50 feet.



      (2)   Side or rear setbacks, party walls. Buildings may be
excluded from side and rear setback requirements if party walls are used and
if the adjacent buildings are constructed as an integral structure.  This
shall not permit structures closer to residential districts, however, than
required under § A21-5(A).



      (3)   Density bonus. Certain design and construction features
serve to reduce the real and perceived impacts of crowding, prevalent in
multiple- residential dwelling units and building complexes.  These feature
enhance individual unit privacy, offer an improved outdoor environment, and
foster a sense of pride and commitment to its residents.  These traits
contribute to neighborhood stability and positive social relationships which
are found to be beneficial to the community as a whole.  To the extent that
these features are incorporated, the maximum density permitted in zoning
subdistrict number 1 shall be increased in accordance with the following,
except that the increased density shall not exceed that listed under “with
bonus” as stipulated in subsection (A)(1) above.  Where only a portion of
the dwellings or buildings are provided with these features, the increase in
density shall be prorated.



         (a)   Common open space: 1.0 units/acre.  This bonus
shall be granted when multiple-residential buildings in a complex are
arranged in a manner which creates significant open space between them.  In
order to be eligible, the open space so created must have a minimum area of
two times the lot coverage of the buildings which face the space, be
configured in a regular shape, be recognizable as a defined common or
sheltered area, and be designed or contain features which encourage social
interaction among the residents of the complex.



         (b)   Private outdoor space: 0.50 units/acre.  This
bonus shall be granted when multiple-residential buildings are designed so
that each dwelling unit is provided with a contiguous private outdoor
space.  In order to be eligible, the private spaces must be designed to be
screened or sheltered such that its occupants are not visible from any other
dwelling unit, other private open space, or any passer- by on adjacent
private or public property.



         (c)   Sound suppression: 1.50 units/acre. This bonus
shall be granted when multiple-residential buildings are constructed with
upgraded sound suppression materials in the walls, ceilings and floors which
separate individual dwelling units.  In order to be eligible, the STC rating
must be increased by ten from that specified as the minimum in the Minnesota
State Building Code.



         (d)   Basements: 0.25 units/acre. This bonus shall be
granted when multiple-residential buildings are constructed with a full
basement under each dwelling unit rather than a crawl space or slab-
on-grade.  In order to be eligible, the basement must exist under the entire
ground floor area, excepting therefrom any garage area.



         (e)   Oversize garages: 0.50 units/acre. This bonus
shall be granted when multiple-residential buildings are constructed with
oversize garage areas for storage purposes.  In order to be eligible,
townhouse garages must each be a minimum of 550 square feet.  Apartment
garages must each be a minimum of 250 square feet or, in the alternative,
each apartment dwelling unit must be provided with a locking storage locker
of a least 50 square feet.



         (f)   Private amenities: 1.0 units/acre. This bonus
shall be granted when multiple-residential buildings are constructed with
upgraded living amenities within each dwelling unit.  In order to be
eligible, each dwelling unit must be provided with a functional fireplace
(0.50 units/acre) or 1¾ bathrooms (0.50 units/acre).



(Ord. 580, passed 7-14-94; Am. Ord. 638, passed 11-25-97)



ARTICLE 22.  DESIGNATION NO. 629



§ A22-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish specific performance
standards, in compliance with §§ 155.260 through 155.267, for property
designated by Ordinance No. 629 on the official zoning map.  The purpose of
this zone is to provide for an integrated mix of low and moderate density
residential uses as well as neighborhood convenience retail.



(Ord. 629, passed 8-21-97)



§ A22-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   One-family detached dwellings meeting the standards of
the Uniform Building Code, placed on permanent foundations and having no
horizontal axis less than 18 feet in length;



      (2)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures; and



      (4)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



      (1)   One-family detached townhouse dwellings meeting the
standards of the Uniform Building Code, placed on permanent foundations and
having no horizontal axis less than 18 feet in length;



      (2)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures; and



      (4)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state.



   (C)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Townhouse multiple dwellings provided no single
structure contains more than 12 dwelling units;



      (2)   Home occupation, as defined in § 155.003;



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures; and



      (4)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state.



   (D)   Zone 4.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Dairy, grocery or convenience store not to exceed 5,000
square feet of floor area;



      (2)   Neighborhood restaurant. A drive-through window is
permissible (but shall not be deemed a fast food restaurant as defined in
this code), subject to the drive-through window provisions in division (D)(7);



      (3)   Offices for doctors, dentists, lawyers, realtors,
veterinarians (no outdoor animal pens allowed), insurance agents, and similar
uses to serve the adjoining residential area.  Individual professional
office buildings within the neighborhood center project shall not exceed
3,000 square feet in gross building area.  The aggregate total of all
professional office space within the project shall not exceed 25% of the
gross building floor area within the project;



      (4)   Day-care centers;



      (5)   Retail operations selling personal services or goods
over-the-counter as limited to the following uses unless otherwise
specifically approved by the City Council:  antiques, art and school
supplies, bakeries, barbershop, beauty parlor, bicycles, books and
stationery, candy, cameras and photographic supplies, catering
establishments, china and glassware, clothes pressing, custom dressmaking,
drugs, dry goods, florists, garden supplies, gifts, hardware, hats, hobby
shops, household appliance repair, interior decorating studio (no retail
furniture sales), jewelry and watch repair, laundry and dry cleaning,
locksmith shops, musical instruments, off-sale liquor, paint and wallpaper,
phonograph records and equipment, photography studio, shoes, sporting goods,
tailoring, tanning salon, tobacco, toys, variety stores, video tape and
equipment sales or rental and wearing apparel; and



      (6)   Banks and savings and loan in a freestanding building,
not to exceed 3,000 square feet in gross building area.  Drive-up tellers
shall be screened and oriented as required by the City Council.



      (7)   One drive-through window per lot, provided all of the
following conditions are met:



         (a)   The drive-through window shall be screened and
oriented to minimize any adverse affect to the neighboring residential
properties as required by the City Council,



         (b)   The hours of operation shall be limited to between
6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. daily, and



         (c)   A business installing any outdoor speakers in
conjunction with a drive-through window shall demonstrate to the city's
satisfaction that they will not negatively impact the adjacent residential
properties.



(Ord. 629, passed 8-21-97; Am. Ord. 671, passed 4-27-00; Am. Ord. 807, passed
4-26-07)



§ A22-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zones 1, 2 and 3.  Within this zone, no structure or land
shall be used for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City
Council, except through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812 or a community-based
residential-care facility or day-care facility only when located in a
multiple dwelling, when:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes;



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between such
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities. 



      (2)   A conditional use permit shall be reviewed at one-year
intervals.



   (B)   Zone 4.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Motor fuel sales as an accessory use to a dairy/grocery
store operation.  No motor vehicle repair facilities allowed.  The total
number of gasoline pumping stations shall be limited to 12;



      (2)   Hours of operation in excess of those listed in §
A22-6(C)(5) of this article;



      (3)   Offices in excess of 3,000 square feet in gross building
floor area or which exceed more than 25% of the gross building floor area
within the project; and



      (4)   Car washes as an accessory use to an approved
convenience/dairy store with motor fuel sales.



(Ord. 629, passed 8-21-97; Am. Ord. 671, passed 4-27-00)



§ A22-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary
for the construction;



      (2)   Decorative landscape features;



      (3)   Gardening or other horticultural uses where no sale of
products is conducted on the premises;



      (4)   Keeping of domestic animals commonly referred to as
“house pets” for noncommercial purposes;



      (5)   Private parking space and garage, one attached and one
detached;



      (6)   One accessory storage building in addition to any
garages, except that it shall not exceed 144 square feet in area if a
detached garage exists on the same lot;



      (7)   Repair and maintenance of motor vehicles owned by the
occupant.  See screening requirements, § 155.248;



      (8)   Garage sales not to exceed three per calendar year; and



      (9)   Private swimming pool, tennis court, and play apparatus
for use by occupants of the premises.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary
for the construction;



      (2)   Decorative landscape features;



      (3)   Gardening or other horticultural uses where no sale of
products is conducted on the premises;



      (4)   Keeping of domestic animals commonly referred to as
“house pets” for noncommercial purposes;



      (5)   Private parking space and garage;



      (6)   One accessory storage building not exceeding 144 square
feet in area;



      (7)   Repair and maintenance of motor vehicles owned by the
occupant.  See screening requirements, § 155.348;



      (8)   Garage sales not to exceed three per calendar year; and



      (9)   Private swimming pool, tennis court, and play apparatus
for use by occupants of the premises.



   (C)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary
for the construction;



      (2)   Decorative landscape features;



      (3)   Gardening or other horticultural uses where no sale of
products is conducted on the premises;



      (4)   Keeping of domestic animals commonly referred to as
“house pets” for noncommercial purposes;



      (5)   Private parking space and garage;



      (6)   Repair and maintenance of motor vehicles owned by the
occupant.  See screening requirements, § 155.348;



      (7)   Garage sales not to exceed three per calendar year;



      (8)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading space as
regulated in the zoning chapter;



      (9)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met; and



      (10)   Putting greens, shuffleboard courts, picnic area,
community building, swimming pool, tennis court, play apparatus and similar
recreational or service areas, when accessory to a multiple-dwelling use, for
use by occupants of the premises.



   (D)   Zone 4.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading space as
regulated in the zoning chapter;



      (2)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met;



      (3)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary
for the construction;



      (4)   Outdoor dining area, subject to the regulations set
forth in this chapter.



      (4)   Outdoor sidewalk cafes in conjunction with a Class I or
Class II restaurant meeting the requirements of § A22-2(D).  Sidewalk cafes
shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and City Council pursuant to §
155.402(B).  Notwithstanding § 155.346, decorative structures not exceeding
12 feet in height and not designed to be occupied more than six months per
year may be set back a distance of five feet from any property line.



(Ord. 629, passed  8-21-97; Am. Ord. 794, passed 8-24-06)



§ A22-5  MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be
met.  No improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be
so used or improved shall meet the following area and dimensional
requirements.



      (1)   Table of minimum area requirements and standards.  The
dimensions shall be measured in feet unless otherwise specified.



 

Requirements
 
Zone 1
 
Zone 2
 
Zone 3
 
Zone 4




Minimum Lot Dimensions
 
 
 
 


Lot area (square feet)
 

 

 

 



  Interior
 
5,000
 

 

 
15,000


  Corner
 
7,500
 

 

 
—


Lot width
 

 

 

 



  Interior
 
55
 

 

 
100


  Corner
 
75
 

 

 
—


Dwelling Unit Density
 
—
 
6,2231(7)2
 
4,3561(10)2
 
—


Minimum Building Setback (feet)


Along principal or minor arterial streets
 
—
 
30
 
503
 
50


Along community or neighborhood collector streets
 
20
 
30
 
303
 
25


Along all other public streets
 

 

 

 



  Structure
 
20
 
18
 
30
 
5


  Garage
 
25
 
24
 
—
 
—


  Side (street yard side)
 
20
 
20
 
—
 



Along private streets or drives
 

 

 

 
5


  Structure
 
—
 
20
 
20
 
—


  Garage
 
—
 
25
 
—
 
5


  Side
 
—
 
20
 
15
 
—


Side setback
 

 

 

 



  Individual lot lines
 
7.54
 
75
 
—
 
—


  Perimeter lot lines6
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
15


  Between buildings
 
15
 
14
 
*
 
15


Rear setback
 

 

 

 



  Individual lot lines
 
20
 
—
 
—
 
—


  Perimeter lot lines6
 
20
 
10
 
25
 
15


  Between buildings
 
—
 
20
 
*
 
15


  Abutting a residential lot
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
20


Minimum Detached Garage or Accessory Building Setback


Along principal or minor arterial streets
 
—
 
10
 
50
 
—


Along community or neighborhood collector streets
 
10
 
10
 
40
 
—


Along all other public streets
 
30
 
30
 
35
 
—


Along any private street or drive
 
—
 
20
 
20
 
—


  Side lot line
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
—


  Rear lot line
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
—


  Between multiple dwellings
 
—
 
15
 
15
 
—


  Abutting a one-family lot
 
—
 
10
 
20
 
—


Minimum Parking Setback (feet)


Along community or neighborhood collector streets
 
—
 
—
 
15
 
5


Along principal or arterial streets
 
—
 
—
 
20
 
15


Along all other public streets
 
—
 
—
 
15
 
5


Along any private street or drive
 
—
 
—
 
0
 
0


Side or rear lot line
 
—
 
—
 
5
 
0


From a multiple dwelling
 
—
 
—
 
10
 
50


Abutting a one-family lot
 
—
 
—
 
10
 
10


Driveway setback from principal or arterial street intersections
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—


Driveway setback from all other street intersections
 
30
 
30
 
50
 
100


Maximum Building Coverage


Coverage of lot (percentage)
 
—
 
—
 
32
 
25


Maximum building footprint (square foot)
 
2,700
 
2,700
 
—
 
—


Maximum Building Height


Maximum height
 
35
 
35
 
35
 
297


Right-of-way width, internal lane
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
40


NOTES TO TABLE

1 - Square feet of land per unit.  Ponding or unbuildable area shall not
exceed 20% of required lot area per unit.

2 - Units per acre.

3 - See § A22-5(A)(3).

4 - May be reduced to five feet provided a minimum distance of 15 feet is
maintained between structures.

5 - May be reduced to three feet provided a minimum of 14 feet is maintained
between structures.

6 - “Perimeter lot line” shall mean the property line around the
perimeter of the development along with the lot lines around all common
ownership lots excluding private streets.

  7 - Maximum building height may be increased to 34 feet for top of roof of
tower element on Lot 2, Block 1, Prairie Crossing Commercial 2nd Addition.




 



      (2)   Setbacks between multiple dwellings.



         (a)   The front and rear sides of a multiple dwelling
shall have a minimum setback of 50 feet from any side of an adjacent multiple
dwelling or a setback equal to the combined height of the adjacent multiple
dwellings, whichever is greater, except that in no case shall a setback
greater than 75 feet be required.



         (b)   Minimum setbacks between adjacent multiple
dwellings on sides which are not a front or rear side of either building
shall be 20 feet or a distance equal to half the combined height of the
adjacent buildings, whichever is greater, except that in no case shall a
setback greater than 50 feet be required.



      (3)   The following shall not be considered as encroachments
on yard or setback requirement:



         (a)   Encroachments as listed in § 155.333.



         (b)   In Zone 3, decks and porches may encroach up to
ten feet into the required setback area from the following types of public
street rights-of-way: principal arterial, minor arterial, community collector
and neighborhood collector.



         (c)   All of the preceding permitted setback
encroachments shall not be construed to allow encroachment into an easement
of record.



      (4)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



      (5)   Screening, see § 155.348.



      (6)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.



      (7)   Parking, see §§ 155.370 through 155.379.



      (8)   Lighting, see § 155.353.



      (9)   Off-street loading, see § 155.354.



   (B)   (1)   The following requirements are in addition to those
in division (A). 



      (2)   Where there may be a conflict, the requirements herein
shall prevail:  side and rear setbacks, party walls. Buildings may be
excluded from side and rear setback requirements if party walls are used and
if the adjacent buildings are constructed as an integral structure.  This
shall not permit structures closer to one-family lots, however, than required
under division (A)(1) above.



(Ord. 629, passed 8-21-97; Am. Ord. 671, passed 4-27-00; Am. Ord. 807, passed
4-26-07)



§ A22-6  SPECIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   In order to ensure a properly integrated design within the
planned development, special performance standards shall be established in
certain zones pursuant to this section.



   (B)   Zones 1 and 2.



      (1)   Garage location.  The front of garages may not extend
past the front of either the front of the house, or the front yard deck,
whichever is closer to the street.



      (2)   Front yard use.  Architectural emphasis shall be given
to the front yard use of the residential zones by installing either front
yard porches or front stoops.



      (3)   Porches.  In Zones 1 and 2, a minimum of 50% of the
homes shall be constructed with front porches.



   (C)   Zone 4.



      (1)   Site design standards.  The goal of design standards is
to create a quality building and site design in the neighborhood commercial
area, making it compatible with surrounding residential developments.  To do
this, the city will regulate landscaping, building materials, signage,
lighting, noise, storage, ratios of impervious materials coverage and access
points for pedestrians and vehicles.



         (a)   Traffic circulation patterns and ingress and
egress to the site shall be designed so as to minimize the impact on the
adjacent neighborhood.



         (b)   The site shall be organized so that there can be a
smooth flow of vehicles in and out of the site as well as easy access to the
various activity areas.  Acceleration and deceleration lanes and/or traffic
medians shall be required where existing or anticipated heavy flows indicate
need.



         (c)   Entrances and exits shall be placed in accordance
with city requirements so as to minimize interference with off-site
circulation patterns.



         (d)   Circulation at gas pumps shall not conflict with
access to parking, interior vehicular circulation or access to and from
public streets.



         (e)   Provision shall be made for emergency vehicle
access and fire lanes adjacent to the building.



         (f)   Parking shall be provided in the quantities
recommended by the city parking guidelines.  Parking for convenience
shopping centers shall be provided at a minimum of one space per 200 square
feet of gross floor area.  All parking areas and stalls shall be designed to
city standards.



         (g)   Parking lots having 15 or more spaces shall
provide parking for the physically disabled.  In addition, bicycle racks and
motorcycle parking shall be provided.



         (h)   Bicycle parking should be provided near building
entries, but shall not encroach into pedestrian walkways.



         (i)   Parking areas shall be screened from views of
adjacent streets and residential areas through a combination of planting and
berming.  Walls of masonry material similar to and compatible with the
primary building material may be used for screening parking and circulation
areas.



         (j)   Loading/service areas shall be designed to include
space for vehicle ingress and maneuvering.  Service to underground tanks
shall not conflict with the site access and shall be placed at least 100 feet
from any residential property line. Loading and service shall only be done
during normal business hours.



         (k)   Service and loading to the fronts of buildings may
be permitted, provided the rear of the building abuts a residential zoning
district.



         (l)   Loading/service areas, refuse containers and
storage containers, located on the side or rear of buildings, shall be
screened from view from adjacent streets and residential areas through the
use of extensive six-foot high planting and/or opaque masonry screening
walls.  Masonry shall be the same material used on the exterior of the main
structure.



         (m)   Outdoor storage and display shall be a prohibited
use. All utility meters and services to the building shall be screened from
view or contained within the building.



         (n)   Screening walls or fences shall be at least six
feet in height, but not more than eight feet in height.  Lower walls may be
used to help screen parking and circulation areas.



         (o)   Fences or walls shall be constructed of a masonry
material similar to and complimentary to the primary building material and
architecture.  (Chain link type fences with or without wood slats or other
inserts shall not be an acceptable screening device.)  Fencing shall not
impair traffic safety by obscuring views of entering or exiting motorists.



         (p)   Decorative or protective wrought iron type fences
may be allowed when incorporated properly within a site plan.



      (2)   Landscaping.  The goal of these standards is to assure
that neighborhood convenience centers present a landscaped appearance that is
compatible with adjacent residential areas, and complimentary to the image of
the community as a whole.  The minimum cost of landscaping materials for the
project shall be 5% of the estimated building construction cost based on the
current Means Construction Data.  For projects with a construction cost in
excess of $500,000, the landscape plans (as required in § 155.349) shall be
prepared by a landscape architect registered and licensed in the State of
Minnesota.



         (a)   Plant materials, fences and walls shall be
utilized to:



            1.   Provide screening of undesirable views;



            2.   Compliment the architectural form of the
building;



            3.   Define walkways, traffic circulation, special
use areas and building entries;



            4.   Provide a pleasant street appearance;



            5.   Soften the visual impact of large paved areas;



            6.   Soften the edge between a parking lot or
street and the building; and



            7.   Mitigate the impacts of lighting or other
negative influences.



         (b)   Landscaped islands within parking lots shall be
provided for all parking lots in the neighborhood center.  The total area of
the islands shall be at least 5% of the parking lot area, except that no
island shall be less than the size of a standard parking stall.  In addition
to the required tree planting in landscape islands (see § 155.349(D)),
ground cover within the island shall also be installed.



         (c)   The landscape treatment of the space abutting the
public right-of-way shall include deciduous canopy trees in concert with
berming or other screening devices to conceal parking and circulation areas.



         (d)   Planting beds, conifers and ornamental trees shall
be used to accent entries and freestanding signage.



         (e)   Signage and identity structures shall be
incorporated into the landscape design and shown on landscape or site plans.



         (f)   At least 75% of the “landscape area” shall be
live plant material as opposed to walks, patios, and the like.  Plant
materials used in planting beds shall be sized to achieve a minimum of 50%
bed coverage within two years of installation.



         (g)   Installation of trees and evergreens at larger
than minimum city standards may be required by the city to achieve buffering
or streetscape effect in some circumstances.



         (h)   The architectural design shall include plaza,
patios and outdoor seating adjacent to building entries.



         (i)   Special paving materials (brick pavers, stamped
concrete, paving stones, and the like) may be used to define pedestrian
circulation through parking and vehicular circulation areas.



         (j)   Paths and sidewalks (a minimum five feet in width)
shall be provided to assure that pedestrians can move safely and conveniently
on the site, between the site and the neighborhood, and between the site and
adjacent streets.



         (k)   In all turf and landscape areas, an in-ground
landscape irrigation system shall be installed.  The systems shall be
considered a portion of the cost of the building (not the landscaping) and
shall be inspected as part of the building construction.



      (3)   Outdoor lighting.  The goal of these guidelines is to
allow outside lighting for the functional and security needs of the
neighborhood convenience center, without adversely impacting adjacent
properties.



         (a)   Lighting shall enhance the overall aesthetics of
the site.



         (b)   Security lighting shall be provided, particularly
at pedestrian walkways and all entries.



         (c)   Lighting standards and canopies shall be
integrated with the architectural design of the buildings and shall be no
more than 20 feet above finished grade.  Detached canopies for gasoline
sales shall be no more than 20 feet from finished grade to top of canopy. 
All exterior canopy materials shall match the color of the main building. 
Canopy support posts shall be enclosed in the same masonry materials utilized
on the main entry face of the building.  Light sources (other than signs)
attached to canopies shall be concealed on the underside of the canopy,
either built into the canopy ceiling or contained within concave lens
illumination boxes which cast light vertically to the surface of the pavement.



         (d)   Exterior speakers shall be used for the purpose of
communication between the gasoline pump area and the neighborhood convenience
center building in accordance with fire and safety requirements.  Speakers
shall be individual eye level speakers only.  No advertising or
entertainment broadcasting shall be permitted through exterior speakers
mounted on the canopy, the exterior of the convenience center building, or
any other auxiliary structures.



         (e)   Light sources (light bulbs) shall not be visible
from adjacent properties and shall not project a glare onto adjacent
properties.  They shall be shielded to reflect light down onto the ground
and not out onto the streets or neighboring property.



      (4)   Architectural form, scale and materials.  The goal of
these guidelines is to assure that neighborhood convenience centers present
an architectural appearance that is visually compatible with adjacent
residential areas, and complementary to the image of the community as a whole.



         (a)   The scale of buildings or canopies shall be at an
appropriate scale in relationship to the residential neighborhood to prevent
domination that may overpower the surrounding area in height or building
mass.  Buildings shall not be greater than 25 feet in height.  A building
massing model may be required as per § 155.402.



         (b)   Forms and finish masonry or wood materials of
buildings, signage, gasoline pump canopies and other accessory structures
shall be made compatible with and relate to the architectural character of
the adjacent area.  The design shall adhere to the commercial building
requirements of § 155.346, except that natural wood products may be used on
up to 50% of the building’s vertical walls.



         (c)   Sloped roofs shall be utilized on the main
structure as well as on any gas canopy.



         (d)   Mechanical equipment on building exteriors, roofs
or parking areas shall be screened from view from all public streets and
adjoining properties.



         (e)   Trash shall be screened and enclosed in masonry
faced enclosures or shall be stored completely within the main structure.



         (f)   Vending machines shall be architecturally designed
into the exterior face of the building.  Vending machines and other exterior
equipment shall not be stored or installed on the sides or rear of the
building, parking or landscaped area abutting residentially zoned or
developed property. No equipment or vending devices shall be placed or
installed on any landscaped area, nor forward of the front building face.



      (5)   Hours of operation.  For projects which are within
1,000 feet of a residentially-zoned area, operation shall be prohibited
between 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. each day.  All deliveries and loading shall
be done during normal hours of operation.



      (6)   Phasing of improvements. If a center is to be built in
phases, each phase shall include an appropriate share of the proposed
streets, landscaping, circulation system, parking, screening and other site
and architectural amenities of the entire project.  The extent of these
improvements shall be determined for each phase of a specific project at the
time of preliminary approval, and may not be based solely upon a proportional
or equal share of the entire site.  Requirements for a phased project may
include off-site improvements.



(Ord. 629, passed 8-21-97)



ARTICLE 23.  DESIGNATION NO. 632



§ A23-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish specific performance
standards in compliance with §§ 155.260 through 155.267 for property
designated by Ordinance No. 632 on the official zoning map.  The purpose of
this zone is to provide an integrated mix of single- family, low, moderate,
and high density multiple- residential uses as well as neighborhood
commercial uses and public parks.



(Ord. 632, passed 9-25-97; Am. Ord. 672, passed 5-11-00)



§ A23-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following use or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state;



      (2)   Home occupations, as defined by § 155.003;



      (3)   One-family detached dwellings meeting the standards of
the Uniform Building Code, placed on permanent foundations and having no
horizontal axis less than 18 feet in length; and



      (4)   Public utility buildings and structures.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state;



      (2)   Home occupations, as defined by § 155.003;



      (3)   Two-family dwelling; and



      (4)   Public utility buildings and structures.



   (C)   Zone 3. Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used,
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state;



      (2)   Home occupations, as defined by § 155.003;



      (3)   Townhouse multiple dwellings provided no single
structure contains in excess of four dwelling units; and



      (4)   Public utility buildings and structures.



   (D)   Zone 4.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or a home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state;



      (2)   Home occupations, as defined by § 155.003;



      (3)   Townhouse/condominium multiple dwellings provided no
single structure contains in excess of eight dwelling units; and



      (4)   Public utility buildings and structures.



   (E)   Zone 5.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following use or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Parks and playgrounds;



      (2)   Public utility buildings and structures; and



      (3)   Recreational buildings, community centers and swimming
pools.



   (F)   Zone 6.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812, or such home for the care of the mentally or
physically handicapped licensed by the state;



      (2)   Home occupations as defined in § 155.003 hereof;



      (3)   Townhouse multiple dwellings provided they are serviced
by public sanitary sewer and water systems, and that no single structure
contains more than 12 dwelling units; and



      (4)   Public utility buildings and structures.



   (G)   Zone 7.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812, or such home for the care of the mentally or
physically handicapped licensed by the state;



      (2)   Home occupations as defined in § 155.003  hereof;



      (3)   Apartment multiple dwellings provided they are serviced
by public sanitary sewer and water systems, and the density does not exceed
20 units per acre;



      (4)   Public utility buildings and structures; and



      (5)   The following neighborhood commercial uses when located
on the first floor of a multi-floor multiple-residential building:



         (a)   Dairy, grocery or convenience store not to exceed
5,000 square feet of floor area;



         (b)   Class I restaurant which does not exceed 3,000
square feet of gross building floor area, or Class III restaurant.  No
drive-thru window service shall be provided;



         (c)   Offices for doctors, dentists, lawyers, realtors,
insurance agents and similar uses to serve the adjoining residential area. 
Individual professional offices within the neighborhood center project shall
not exceed 3,000 square feet in gross building area.  The aggregate total of
all professional office space within the project shall not exceed 25% of the
gross building floor area within the project;



         (d)   Daycare centers; and



         (e)   Retail operations selling personal services or
goods over-the-counter are limited to the following uses unless otherwise
specifically approved by the City Council:  antiques; art and school
supplies; bakeries; barbershop; beauty parlor; bicycles; books and
stationery; candy; cameras and photographic supplies; catering
establishments; china and glassware; clothes pressing; custom dressmaking;
drugs; dry goods; florists; garden supplies; gifts; hardware; hats; hobby
shops; household appliance repair; interior decorating studio (no retail
furniture sales); jewelry and watch repair; laundry and dry cleaning;
locksmith shops; musical instruments; paint and wallpaper; phonograph records
and equipment; photography studio; shoes; sporting goods; tailoring; tanning
salon; tobacco; toys; variety stores; video tape and equipment sales or
rental; wearing apparel.



(Ord. 632, passed 9-25-97; Am. Ord. 672, passed 5-11-00)



§ A23-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812 where:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes; and



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council shall grant an exception to the one-quarter
mile rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness
is closely tied to particular cultural resource in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities.



      (2)   A conditional use permit shall be reviewed at one-year
intervals.



   (B)   Zones 2, 3 and 4.  Within these zones, no structure or land
shall be used for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City
Council, except through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812 or community-based
residential-care facility where:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire,
building, and housing codes; and



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between the
facilities.  The City Council shall grant an exception to the one-quarter
mile rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness
is closely tied to particular cultural resource in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities.



      (2)   A conditional use permit shall be reviewed at one-year
intervals.



   (C)   Zone 5.  There are no conditional uses provided.



   (D)   Zone 6. Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the estate under M.S. § 245.812 or community-based
residential-care facility where:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire,
building, and housing codes; and



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between such
facilities.  The City Council may grant an exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities;



      (2)   Such conditional use permit shall be reviewed at
one-year intervals.



   (E)   Zone 7.  There are no conditional uses provided.



(Ord. 632, passed 9-25-97; Am. Ord. 672, passed 5-11-00)



§ A23-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Zones 1 and 2.  Within these zones, the following uses or
uses deemed similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for the purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary
for the construction;



      (2)   Decorative landscape features;



      (3)   Gardening or other horticultural uses where no sale of
products is conducted on the premises;



      (4)   Keeping of domestic animals commonly referred to as
“house pets” for noncommercial purposes;



      (5)   Private parking space and garage, one attached and one
detached;



      (6)   One accessory storage building in addition to any
garage(s), except that it shall not exceed 144 square feet in area if a
detached garage exists on the same lot;



      (7)   Repair and maintenance of motor vehicles owned by the
occupant.  See screening requirements, § 155.348;



      (8)   Garage sales not to exceed three per calendar year; and



      (9)   Private swimming pool, tennis court and play apparatus
for use by the occupants of the premises.



   (B)   Zones 3, 4 and 5.  Within these zones, the following uses or
uses deemed similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Any accessory uses permitted in division (A);



      (2)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading space as
regulated in the zoning chapter;



      (3)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met; and



      (4)   Putting greens, shuffleboard courts, picnic area,
community building and similar recreational or service areas, when accessory
to a multiple-dwelling use, for use by occupants of the premises.



   (C)   Zone 6.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Any accessory use permitted in the R districts;



      (2)   Accessory uses customarily associated with and
incidental to the conditional uses permitted in the multiple-dwelling
districts; and



      (3)   Putting greens, shuffleboard courts, picnic areas,
community buildings and similar recreational or service areas for use by the
residents of the premises.



   (D)   Zone 7.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Accessory uses permitted in the LB district; and



      (2)   Uses within a typical M-7 or M-8 district.



(Ord. 632, passed 9-25-97; Am. Ord. 672, passed 5-11-00)



§ A23-5  MINIMUM AREA STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be
met and no improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be
used or improved shall meet the following area and dimensional requirements:



      (1)   Table of minimum area requirements and standards.  The
dimensions shall be measured in feet unless otherwise specified.



 

Requirements
 
Zone 1
 
Zone 2
 
Zone 3
 
Zone 4
 
Zone 5
 
Zone 6
 
Zone 7




Minimum Lot Dimensions
 
 
 
 
 
 


Lot area (square feet)
 

 

 
—
 
—
 

 

 



  Interior
 
11,000
 
15,000

(7,500)
 

 

 
10,000
 
—
 
—


  Corner
 
12,500
 

 

 

 
—
 
—
 
—


Lot width
 

 

 

 

 

 
—
 



  Interior
 
80
 
100

(50/unit)
 
—
 
—
 
80
 
—
 
—


  Corner
 
90
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—


Dwelling Unit Density
 
 
 
 
 
 


One-story building
 
—
 
—
 
7,260(6)
 
3,960(11)
 
—
 
3,068 (14)
 
—


Two-story building
 
—
 
—
 
7,260(6)
 
3,960(11)
 
—
 
3,068 (14)
 
—


Three-story building
 

 

 

 

 

 
—
 
2,178 (20)


Minimum Building Setback
 
 
 
 
 
 


Along principal or arterial streets
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
40
 
50
 
50
 
50


Along community collector streets
 
—
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
40


Along neighborhood collector streets
 
—
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
40
 
40


Along all other streets
 
30*
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
35
 
35


Along private streets
 
—
 
—
 
25
 
25
 
—
 
25
 
20


Side lot line
 
—
 
—
 
25
 
25
 
20
 
25
 



  Dwelling
 
10
 
10
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—


  Garage
 
5
 
5
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—


Rear lot line
 
30
 
30
 
25
 
25
 
—
 
25
 
25


Between multiple dwellings
 
—
 
—
 
**
 
**
 
—
 
**
 
**


Minimum Detached Garage and Accessory Building Setback
 
 
 
 
 
 


Along principal or arterial streets
 
—
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
—
 
50
 
50


Along community collector streets
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
—
 
40
 
40


Along neighborhood collector streets
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
—
 
40
 
40


Along all other streets
 
30*
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
—
 
35
 
30


Along private streets
 
—
 
—
 
10
 
10
 
—
 
20
 
20


Side lot line
 
5
 
5
 
10
 
10
 
—
 
10
 
10


Rear lot line
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
—
 
10
 
10


From multiple dwelling
 
—
 
—
 
15
 
15
 
—
 
15
 
15


From one-family dwelling
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
10
 
—


Abutting one-family detached lot
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
10
 
—


Minimum Parking Setback
 
 
 
 
 
 


Along all streets
 
—
 
—
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20


Side or rear lot line
 
—
 
—
 
5
 
5
 
5
 
5
 
5


From multiple dwelling
 
—
 
—
 
10
 
10
 
—
 
10
 
10


Abutting one-family detached lot
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—


Maximum Building Coverage
 
 
 
 
 
 


Coverage of lot (percentage)
 
30
 
30
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
30
 
35


Maximum Building Height
 
 
 
 
 
 


Maximum height
 
35
 
35
 
35
 
35
 
40
 
35
 
35


NOTES TO TABLE

* - Corner lot sideyard setbacks abutting a local street shall be 20 feet.

** - See § A23-5(B).




 



   (B)   Setbacks between multiple dwellings.  For the purposes of
this subsection, the term “side” shall refer to the short sides of a
structure and the terms “front” or “rear” shall refer to the long
sides of the structure.



      (1)   The front and rear sides of the multiple dwelling shall
have a minimum setback of 50 feet from any side of an adjacent multiple
dwelling or a setback equal to the combined height of the adjacent multiple
dwellings, whichever is greater, except that in no case shall a setback
greater than 75 feet be required.  The minimum setback shall be reduced to
40 feet where a horizontal extension the lines created by the nearest
exterior vertical surfaces of adjacent buildings would create an angle of not
less than 45 degrees.



      (2)   Minimum setbacks between adjacent multiple buildings on
sides of multiple- residential buildings shall be 15 feet or a distance equal
to half the combined height of the adjacent building faces, whichever is
greater.



   (C)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



   (D)   Screening, see § 155.348.



   (E)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.



   (F)   Parking, see §§ 155.370 through 155.379.



(Ord. 632, passed 9-25-97; Am. Ord. 672, passed 5-11-00; Am. Ord. 674, passed
7-13-00; Am. Ord. 700, passed 9-25-01)



§ A23-6  SPECIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   In order to ensure a properly integrated design within the planned
development, special performance standards shall be established for Zone 7 at
a later date.



(Ord. 672, passed 5-11-00)



ARTICLE 24.  DESIGNATION NO. 646



§ A24-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish specific performance
standards in compliance with §§ 155.260 through 155.267 for property
designated by Ordinance No. 626 on the official zoning map.  The purpose of
this zone is to provide for an integrated mix of shopping center, retail
business, limited business, general business, limited industrial uses.



(Ord. 646, passed 5-28-98)



§ A24-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses deemed similar by the City
Council:



      (1)   Multi-tenant retail shopping or single- retail use, all
having an initial minimum floor area of  50,000 square feet. Permitted uses
shall include: antique or gift shops; appliance store (sales and/or repair);
art and school supply store; auto accessory store (installation facilities
subject to conditional use); bakery; bank; savings and loan; barbershop;
beauty salon; bicycle sales; books; stationary and office supplies; candy;
camera and photographic supplies; carpet and rug sales; catering services;
china and glassware sales; clothing and costume sales and rental;
coin-operated amusement devices and similar facilities; department store;
drugstore; dry cleaning; dry goods; electronic sales and/or service; florist;
furniture store; garden supplies; grocery; hardware store; health or athletic
club and facilities; hobby store; home improvement; interior decorating;
jewelry and watch repair; laundromat; leather goods and luggage; locksmith;
musical instruments; off-sale liquor store; on-sale wine or 3.2% liquor in
conjunction with a restaurant facility; paint and wallpaper sales;
photography studio; pipe and tobacco shop; recorded music sales; restaurant
(Class I or II, no drive-through facilities allowed); shoe sales or repair;
sporting goods; tailoring; theater (except open air drive-in); toy store;
video rental and sales.



      (2)   Peripheral, freestanding uses not a part of the shopping
center building shall be permitted after construction of the initial 50,000
square foot minimum center as follows: bank or savings and loan, club lodge
or convention center, furniture store, office building/on-sale wine or
3.2%liquor in conjunction with a restaurant facility, restaurant (Class I
only), sports and health club, theater (except open air drive-in), toy store
and video rental and sales.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses deemed similar by the City
Council:



      (1)   Multi-tenant retail shopping center;



      (2)   Freestanding retail building;



      (3)   Permitted uses within the shopping center or
freestanding buildings shall be limited to the following unless similar uses
are specifically approved by the City Council:  stores and shops selling the
personal service or goods over a counter. These include antique or gift
shops, appliance store (sales and/or repair), art and school supply store,
auto accessory store (installation and/or service facilities subject to
conditional use), bakery, bank, savings and loan, barbershop, beauty salon,
bicycle sales, books, stationary and office supplies, candy, camera and
photographic supplies, carpet and rug sales, catering services, china and
glassware sales, clothing and costume sales and rental, coin-operated
amusement devices and similar facilities, copy sales and service, department
store, drugstore, dry cleaning, dry goods, electronic sales and/or service,
florist, furniture store, garden supplies, hardware store, health or athletic
club and facilities, hobby/crafts store, interior decorating, jewelry and
watch repair, laundromat, leather goods and luggage, locksmith, motel,
musical instruments, off-sale liquor store, on-sale wine or 3.2% liquor in
conjunction with a restaurant facility, paint and wallpaper sales,
photography studio, pipe and tobacco shop, recorded music sales, shoe sales
or repair, sporting goods, tailoring, theater (except open air drive-in), toy
store and video rental and sales;



      (4)   Dairy, grocery or convenience store not to exceed 5,000
square feet of floor area and when in compliance with § 155.346;



      (5)   Offices for doctors, dentists, lawyers, realtors,
insurance agents, banks and savings and loans and similar uses;



      (6)   Offices of a general nature where the operations do not
include over-the-counter retail sales or warehousing from the site; and



      (7)   Restaurant facilities subject to the following
restrictions:



         (a)   No drive-through window service allowed;



         (b)   Use of non-reusable food utensils, plates, cups
and glasses shall not be permitted; and



         (c)   No self-service busing shall be permitted.



      (8)   An eating facility, including bagel shop, coffee house,
lunch counter, delicatessen, ice cream shop, where all of the following exist:



         (a)   No drive-through window service is provided.



         (b)   Restaurant does not exceed 3,000 square feet in
size.



         (c)   No more than four neighborhood- type restaurants
shall be allowed in this zone.



         (d)   No more than two of the neighborhood-type
restaurants shall be allowed within any one block.



   (C)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used, except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Animal hospital or clinic when contained within a
building;



      (2)   Auto, marine, truck, storage completely within a
building;



      (3)   Bicycle, boat or snowmobile sales and service;



      (4)   Contractor’s office;



      (5)   Garden store when conducted within a building;



      (6)   Light fabrication, manufacturing and assembly, including
the fact that some or all goods produced are retailed on-site;



      (7)   Office as accessory to the principal use;



      (8)   Rental shop;



      (9)   Research or testing laboratory conducted entirely within
a building;



      (10)   Small engine or appliance repair conducted entirely
within a building;



      (11)   Stone or monument sales;



      (12)   Storage facilities contained within a building;



      (13)   Television or radio studio (no broadcast towers
permitted);



      (14)   Training facilities;



      (15)   Warehouse/outlet store;



      (16)   Office warehouse, warehousing or wholesale business
when conducted within a building;



      (17)   Retail, sales and service uses in a multi-tenant
building subject to the following restrictions:



         (a)   The uses shall not occupy more than 25% of the
total floor area; and



         (b)   High traffic or high volume uses are specifically
prohibited.  These uses include, but are not limited to personal services;



      (18)   Limited business office uses in a multi- tenant
building subject to the following restrictions:



         (a)   The uses shall not occupy more than 25% of the
total floor area;



         (b)   High traffic or high volume uses are specifically
prohibited.  These uses include, but are not limited to, grocery or food
sales, drug stores, restaurants, convenience photo finishing, motor fuel
sales and personal services; and



      (19)   Theater (except open air drive-in); playhouse, museum,
galleries or performing arts center.



(Ord. 646, passed 5-28-98; Am. Ord. 676, passed 7-13-00; Am. Ord. 699, passed
9-13-01)



§ A24-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   A bowling alley or similar commercial recreation
facility or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except through the
granting of a conditional use permit; and



      (2)   Service bays for the installation of auto accessories,
in conjunction with auto accessories store, provided there are no more than
two bay doors which shall be screened and oriented as required by the City
Council.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council, except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Motor fuel sales only when in conjunction to a
dairy/grocery store operation.  No motor vehicle repair facilities allowed;



      (2)   Car wash in conjunction with and accessory to a motor
fuel sales operation.  The car wash shall be restricted to one bay and must
be incorporated into the primary structure;



      (3)   Service bays for the installation of auto accessories,
in conjunction with auto accessories store, provided there are no more than
two bay doors which shall be screened and oriented as required by the City
Council; and



      (4)   Bowling alley or similar commercial recreation facility.



(Ord. 646, passed 5-28-98; Am. Ord. 676, passed 7-13-00)



§ A24-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Zones 1 and 2.  Within these zones, the following uses or
uses deemed similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for the purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary to
complete the construction;



      (2)   Delivery bays provided the bays are screened and
oriented as required by the City Council;



      (3)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading space as
regulated in the zoning chapter;



      (4)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met;



      (5)   On-sale liquor in conjunction with a Class I restaurant
facility;



      (6)   Outdoor sidewalk cafes in conjunction with a
freestanding restaurant facility.  The use shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission and City Council pursuant to § 155.402 and shall provide adequate
visual screening and physical barriers if intoxicating or non-intoxicating
alcoholic beverages are to be served;



      (7)   Outdoor display, sales or storage in conjunction with a
permitted use.  Outdoor area to be screened and maintained in a manner to be
approved by the City Council;



      (8)   Drive-up teller service and outdoor ATM in conjunction
with a bank or savings and loan; and



      (9)   Drive-up window in conjunction with a drug
store/pharmacy retail operation (Zone 2 only).



      (10)  Drive-up window in conjunction with a bakery operation
(Zone 2 only) subject to the following:



         (a)   No more than one bakery with a drive-up window
shall be allowed.



         (b)   Drive-up window signage shall be subject to §
154.04(J).



   (B)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for the purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary to
complete the  construction;



      (2)   Delivery bays provided the bays are screened and
oriented as required by the City Council;



      (3)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading space as
regulated in the zoning chapter;



      (4)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met; and



      (5)   Outdoor display sales or storage of materials or
vehicles in conjunction with a permitted use.  Outdoor storage areas shall
not be permitted along the particular side of the building which faces an
abutting a residential or multiple-residential zone and shall be screened and
maintained in a manner to be approved by the City Council.



(Ord. 646, passed 5-28-98; Am. Ord. 680, passed 7-27-00; Am. Ord. 727, passed
6-12-03)



§ A24-5  MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be
met.  No improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be
used or improved shall meet the following area and dimensional requirements:



      (1)   Table of minimum area requirements and standards.  The
dimensions shall be measured in feet unless otherwise specified.



 



Requirements
 
Zone 1
 
Zone 2
 
Zone 3


Shopping Center
 
Free- Standing Peripheral
 
Shopping Center
 
Free- Standing Peripheral


Minimum Lot Dimensions


Lot area
 
175,000
 

 

 

 



  Interior
 
15,000
 
15,000
 
100,000
 
15,000
 
15,000


  Corner
 
250,000
 
15,000
 
15,000
 
15,000
 
15,000


Lot width fronting principal, arterial or community collector streets
 

 

 

 

 



  Interior
 
300
 
100
 
100
 
100
 
100


  Corner
 
400
 
100
 
300
 
100
 
100


Minimum Building Setback


Along principal or arterial streets
 
50 (100)
 
50
 
50 (100)
 
50
 
50


Along community collector streets
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
40
 
40


Along all other streets
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
30


Side lot line
 
15
 
15
 
15
 
15
 
15


Rear lot line
 
15
 
15
 
15
 
15
 
15


Maximum Building Coverage


Maximum coverage of lot (percentage)
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
30


Maximum Building Height
 
50
 
45
 
45
 
45
 
45


Minimum Floor Area


Initial building
 
50,000
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—


Minimum Parking Setback


Along arterial and collector streets
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
15


Along all other streets
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
10


Side lot line
 
5
 
5
 
5
 
5
 
5


Rear lot line
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
10
 
5


Driveway setback from principal or arterial street
 
300
 
300
 
300
 
300
 
300




 



      (2)   Building materials, see § 155.346.



      (3)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



      (4)   Screening, see § 155.348.



      (5)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.



      (6)   Parking, see §§ 155.370 through 155.379.



      (7)   Signage shall be in accordance with Chapter 154, except
that the foundation or support structure of a freestanding sign must be
completely enclosed, and the enclosure shall match the exterior construction
materials of the primary building with which it is associated and serves to
identify.



   (B)   The following requirements are in addition to those listed in
division (A).  Where there may be a conflict, the requirements herein shall
prevail:



      (1)   Side and rear setbacks, party walls. Buildings may be
excluded from side and rear setback requirements if party walls are used and
if adjacent buildings are constructed as an integral structure.  This shall
not permit structures closer to single-family detached or duplex lots than
required under division (A) above.



      (2)   Exterior speakers may be used for required fire and
safety purposes only.  No advertising or entertainment broadcasting shall be
permitted.



      (3)   The building setback from 147th Street West shall be
reduced 20 feet for an accessory structure when constructed in conjunction
with a building material sales operation



(Ord. 646, passed 5-28-98; Am. Ord. 890, passed 7-8-10)



§ A24-6  SPECIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   In order to ensure quality building and site design within
this mixed use planned development, special standards are necessary.  These
include regulations governing streetscape design, building materials,
landscaping, screening and parking.



   (B)   Streetscape design.  The following design elements shall be
incorporated into all site plans in any subzone.  The goal of these
regulations is to assure an overall harmonious theme will be created for all
projects within this planned development.



      (1)   Sidewalks shall be installed on all streets to width of
eight feet with a six- to ten-foot wide street planting area between the
sidewalk and curb.



      (2)   Trees and “ring route” decorative street lights
painted “Apple Valley Red” shall be installed along all streets.



      (3)   Streetscape treatments shall include deciduous canopy
trees in concert with berming or the screening devices to soften or conceal
parking and circulation areas from public view as needed.



      (4)   The existing storm water detention pond shall be
regarded as a water feature and open space amenity.



   (C)   Building design and materials.  The following design elements
shall be incorporated into all site plans for buildings in any subzone.



      (1)   A building or group of buildings shall maintain a
compatible relationship with the surrounding context of an area in regard to:



         (a)   Rhythm of spaces between buildings;



         (b)   Rhythm of facade details and relationships, such
as relationship to horizontal or vertical lines and facade openings;



         (c)   Building scale and mass and setbacks;



         (d)   Building forms and roof shapes; and



         (e)   Creating appropriate transitions, such as height,
facade details and landscape buffers.



      (2)   All masonry exterior facades of plain concrete, either
pre-cast or cast in place, shall not be permitted, except as a small design
element.



      (3)   Metal skin materials, such as baked enamel, stainless
steel, aluminum sandwich panels and the like as primary field materials for
buildings shall not be permitted.  This type of material may be used as a
minor design element.



   (D)   Landscape design.  The following design elements shall be
incorporated into all site plans in any subzone.  The goal of these
regulations is to assure an overall harmonious theme will be created for all
projects within this planned development.



      (1)   A master landscape plan for this planned development
shall be submitted to the city and the following design elements shall be
incorporated:



         (a)   All plant materials to be utilized shall be
identified on the plan and a landscape plant list provided;



         (b)   Provide screening of undesirable views;



         (c)   Compliment the architectural form of the building;



         (d)   Define walkways, internal traffic circulation
areas, special use areas and building entries through the use of special
paving materials such as brick pavers, stamped concrete, paving stones, and
the like, or a combination thereof;



         (e)   Provide a pleasant street experience;



         (f)   Soften the visual impact of large paved areas;



         (g)   Soften the edge between a parking lot or street
and building;



         (h)   Mitigate the impacts of lighting or other negative
influences;



         (i)   The landscaping for each individual lot within the
planned development shall be consistent with the master landscape plan; and



         (j)   Signage and identity structures shall be
incorporated in the master landscape plan. Planting beds, conifers and
ornamental trees shall be used to accent entries and signage.



      (2)   All commercial buildings that have grassed areas shall
have underground automatic sprinkler systems to maintain the landscaped area.



      (3)   An undulated sodded landscaped berm or berms shall be
installed adjacent to any principal or minor arterial and collector streets
at a maximum 3:1 slope.  The berms shall be subject to the traffic
visibility requirements of § 155.335.  Trees shall have a caliper of two
inches, balled and burlapped, and shall be planted at intervals of not more
than 40 feet apart.  Plantings shall be alternated such that no more than
two of the same species will be located adjacent to one another and shall be
made only in the toe area of any berm’s slope.  There shall be a minimum
of two shrubs per tree planted and the plantings shall be a minimum size of
24 inches, balled and burlapped.



   (E)   Screening.  The following design elements shall be
incorporated into all site plan for buildings in any subzone.



      (1)   Mechanical and electrical equipment shall be screened
from view.  Screening materials shall be compatible with the architecture of
the building.  Ground-mounted mechanical equipment shall be fully screened
from view with an architectural treatment consistent with the building
architecture.  All rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened from view
from adjacent property lines. Screening may be achieved with parapet walls
and/or penthouse structures.  Rooftop mechanical parapet walls and/or
penthouse structures shall be treated architecturally in a manner consistent
with the building architecture.



      (2)   Service yards, trash enclosures, delivery areas and
loading docks shall be screened from view or located entirely within the
building. Screening materials shall be consistent with the architecture of
the building and shall use similar materials, finishes and colors.



      (3)   Service areas shall be located away from and not visible
from public open space systems, public parks and the external street system.



      (4)   Service areas shall be concentrated and aggregated into
a centralized location for major projects.  These service areas shall be off
the street, accessed from a dedicated service court.  Access to these courts
should be wherever possible from interior, private streets rather than from
the main circulation routes.



      (5)   Fences or walls shall be constructed of a material
similar to, compatible with, and complimentary to the primary building
material and architecture.



   (F)   Parking.  The following design elements shall be incorporated
into all site plans for buildings in any subzone.



      (1)   Landscaped islands in parking lots shall be at least 18
feet long and nine feet wide, and include at least one ornamental or shade
tree.  The interior of all parking areas shall be landscaped.



      (2)   Large surface parking lots exposed to view from a public
right-of-way shall utilize a combination of berms, buffers and/or landscaping
to break-up open expanses of parking and pavement in order to minimize their
visual impact.  Design features shall include the following:



         (a)   Raised landscape islands between parking rows;



         (b)   Paved and landscape walkways between parking rows;



         (c)   Landscape turning islands;



         (d)   Landscape parking lot perimeters; and



         (e)   Bermed parking lot perimeters.



      (3)   Parking lots having 15 or more spaces shall provide
parking for bicycles and motorcycles.  Bicycle parking shall be provided
near building entries, but must not encroach into pedestrian walkways.



      (4)   Parking areas shall be screened visually, physically
depressed or softened from views of adjacent streets and residential areas
through planting and berming.  Walls or fences of a material similar to and
compatible with the primary building material shall be used for screening,
parking and circulation.



      (5)   When buildings face directly onto County Road 42, there
shall be no more than two rows of parking created on the County Road 42 side
of the building.



      (6)   All cart storage corrals in the parking areas shall be
incorporated within a landscaped island. Cart storage corrals shall be paved
with concrete with concrete curb edging.



      (7)   Loading and service areas shall be designed to include
space for ingress and maneuvering.  Service to underground tanks shall not
conflict with the site access.  Service to the fronts of buildings shall not
be permitted.



      (8)   Decorative street lighting and sidewalks shall be
installed along main parking lot drive aisles in a manner that will mimic
adjacent public streets,



   (G)   Signage.  The following design elements shall be incorporated
into all site plans in any subzone.  The goal of these regulations is to
assure an overall harmonious theme will be created for all projects within
this planned development.



      (1)   A master signage plan shall be submitted for approval by
the city and shall contain the following:



         (a)   Identification of all sign locations (including
building signs), dimensions, finishes, materials, range of colors and method
of lighting; and



         (b)   Signage shall be limited to individual back lit
channel block letters.  No can or panel wall signs or neon signs shall be
permitted.



      (2)   Only three freestanding pylon signs for the purposes of
area identification shall be permitted within the confines of this planned
development.



      (3)   The foundation or support structure of a freestanding
sign must be completely enclosed, and the enclosure shall have exterior
facing consisting of materials which shall match the exterior construction
materials of the primary building with which it is associated and serve to
identify.



      (4)   Eighty additional square feet of signage shall be
allowed on the pylon sign locaged at the intersection of County Road No. 42
and Flagstaff Avenue, subject to the following:



         (a)   The height of the signage shall be no greater than
ten feet in height as measured from the base of the pylon sign.



         (b)   Materials used for the sign construction shall be
similar to those used for the existing pylon sign.



(Ord. 646, passed 5-28-98; Am. Ord. 727, passed 6-12-03)



ARTICLE 25.  DESIGNATION NO. 679



§ A25-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish specific performance
standards in compliance with § A1-46 (§§ 155.260 - 155.267) for property
designated by Ordinance No. 679, and amended by Ordinance  No. 707, on the
official zoning map.  The purpose of this zone is to provide an integrated
mix of moderate density multiple residential uses and commercial/retail uses.



(Ord. 679, passed 7-27-00; Am. Ord. 707, passed 2-14-02)



§ A25-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following use or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home, day- care home
licensed under M.S. § 245.812 or such home for the care of the mentally or
physically handicapped licensed by the state;



      (2)   Home occupations as defined in § 155.003;



      (3)   Townhouse/condominium multiple dwellings provided no
single structure contains in excess of eight  dwelling units;



      (4)   Public utility buildings and structures;



      (5)   Parks and playgrounds; and



      (6)   Recreational buildings, community centers and swimming
pools.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following use or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



      (1)   Multi-tenant retail shopping or single retail use, all
having an initial minimum floor area of 50,000 square feet. Permitted uses
shall include: Antique or gift shops; appliance store (sales and/or repair);
art and school supply store; bakery; bank; savings and loan; barbershop;
beauty salon; bicycle sales; books; stationery and office supplies; candy;
camera and photographic supplies; carpet and rug sales; catering services;
china and glassware sales; clothing and costume sales and rental;
coin-operated amusement devices and similar facilities; department store;
drugstore; dry cleaning; dry goods; electronic sales and/or service; florist;
furniture store; garden supplies; grocery (no motor fuel sales allowed);
hardware store; health or athletic club and facilities; hobby store; home
improvement; interior decorating; jewelry and watch repair; laundromat;
leather goods and luggage; locksmith; musical instruments; off-sale liquor
store; on-sale wine or 3.2 percent malt liquor in conjunction with a
restaurant facility; paint and wallpaper sales; photography studio; pipe and
tobacco shop; recorded music sales; restaurant (Class I or II, no
drive-through facilities allowed); shoe sales or repair; sporting goods;
tailoring; theater (except open air drive-in); toy store; video rental and
sales.



   (C)   Zone 3.   Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used except for one or more of the following use or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Multi-tenant retail shopping center.  Permitted uses
within the shopping center shall be limited to the following unless similar
uses are specifically approved by the City Council: Stores and shops selling
the personal service or goods over a counter. These include antique or gift
shops; appliance store (sales and/or repair); art and school supply store;
auto accessory store (installation and/or service facilities subject to
conditional use); bakery; bank; savings and loan; barbershop; beauty salon;
bicycle sales; books; stationery and office supplies; candy; camera and
photographic supplies; carpet and rug sales; catering services; china and
glassware sales; clothing and costume sales and rental; coin-operated
amusement devices and similar facilities; copy sales and service; department
store; drugstore; dry cleaning; dry goods; electronic sales and/or service;
florist; furniture store; garden supplies; hardware store; health or athletic
club and facilities; hobby/crafts store; interior decorating; jewelry and
watch repair; laundromat; leather goods and luggage; locksmith; motel;
musical instruments; off-sale liquor store; on-sale wine or 3.2 beer in
conjunction with a restaurant facility; paint and wallpaper sales;
photography studio; pipe and tobacco shop; recorded music sales; restaurant
(Class I or II, no drive-through facilities allowed); shoe sales or repair;
sporting goods; tailoring; theater (except open air drive-in); toy store;
video rental and sales.



      (2)   Freestanding retail building.  Permitted uses within
the freestanding buildings shall be limited to the following unless similar
uses are specifically approved by the City Council: Stores and shops selling
the personal service or goods over a counter. These include antique or gift
shops; appliance store (sales and/or repair); art and school supply store;
auto accessory store (installation and/or service facilities subject to
conditional use); bakery; bank; savings and loan; barbershop; beauty salon;
bicycle sales; books; stationery and office supplies; candy; camera and
photographic supplies; carpet and rug sales; catering services; china and
glassware sales; clothing and costume sales and rental; coin-operated
amusement devices and similar facilities; copy sales and service; department
store; drugstore; dry cleaning; dry goods; electronic sales and/or service;
florist; furniture store; garden supplies; hardware store; health or athletic
club and facilities; hobby/crafts store; interior decorating; jewelry and
watch repair; laundromat; leather goods and luggage; locksmith; motel;
musical instruments; off-sale liquor store; on-sale wine or 3.2 percent malt
liquor in conjunction with a restaurant facility; paint and wallpaper sales;
photography studio; pipe and tobacco shop; recorded music sales; shoe sales
or repair; sporting goods; tailoring; theater (except open air drive-in); toy
store; video rental and sales.



      (3)   Offices for doctors, dentists, lawyers, realtors,
insurance agents, banks and savings and loans and similar uses.



      (4)   Offices of a general nature where the operations do not
include over-the-counter retail sales or warehousing from the site.



      (5)   Freestanding Class I restaurants.



      (6)   Class II restaurants with drive-through facilities, both
freestanding and within a multi-tenant retail building, subject to the
following restrictions:



         (a)   No more than two restaurants of this type shall be
allowed in this zone.



         (b)   Orientation and screening of the restaurant
drive-through shall be approved by City Council.



         (c)   No more than one drive-through facility shall be
allowed per lot.



      (7)   Dairy, grocery or convenience store not to exceed 6,000
square feet of floor area and when in compliance with § A1-35 (f)(g)(h)(i)
(§§ 155.105 - 155.115) subject to the following restrictions:



         (a)   No more than one dairy, grocery or convenience
store shall be allowed in this zone.



(Ord. 679, passed 7-27-00; Am. Ord. 707, passed 2-14-02; Am. Ord. 750, passed
5-27-04)



§ A25-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812 where:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire,
building, and housing codes; and



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between such
facilities.  The City Council may grant an exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities.



      (2)   Such conditional use permit shall be reviewed at
one-year intervals.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Outdoor display or sales of retail goods conducted by an
occupant of the shopping center or freestanding building.



      (2)   Outdoor storage of goods and merchandise provided said
storage is oriented and screened as required by the City Council.



      (3)   Sales yards for building materials.



      (4)   On-sale liquor in conjunction with a Class I restaurant.



   (C)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Motor fuel sales only when in conjunction to a dairy,
grocery or convenience store operation. No motor vehicle repair facilities
allowed.



      (2)   Car wash in conjunction with and accessory to a motor
fuel sales operation. Said car wash shall be restricted to one bay and must
be incorporated into the primary structure.



      (3)   Service bays for the installation of auto accessories,
in conjunction with auto accessories store, provided there are no more than
two bay doors, which shall be screened and oriented as required by the City
Council.



      (4)   Outdoor display or sales of retail goods conducted by an
occupant of the shopping center or freestanding building.



      (5)   On-sale liquor in conjunction with a Class I restaurant.



(Ord. 679, passed 7-27-00; Am. Ord. 707, passed 2-14-02)



§ A25-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for the purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary
for such construction;



      (2)   Decorative landscape features;



      (3)   Gardening or other horticultural uses where no sale of
products is conducted on the premises;



      (4)   Keeping of domestic animals commonly referred to as
"housepets" for noncommercial purposes;



      (5)   Repair and maintenance of motor vehicles owned by the
occupant.  See screening requirements, § 155.348;



      (6)   Garage sales not to exceed three per calendar year;



      (7)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading space as
regulated in the zoning chapter;



      (8)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met;



      (9)   Putting greens, shuffleboard courts, picnic area,
community building and similar recreational or service areas, when accessory
to a multiple-dwelling use, for use by occupants of the premises; and



      (10)   Private swimming pool, tennis court, and play apparatus
for use by the occupants of the premises.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, the following use or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Delivery bays provided said bays are screened and
oriented as required by the City Council.



      (2)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading spaces,
as regulated by § A1 (§§ 50.02 and 155.378) of the city code.



      (3)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary to
complete said construction.



      (4)   Bicycle racks, public telephone booths, and other
essential public service facilities provided all yard requirements are met.



   (C)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Delivery bays provided said bays are screened and
oriented as required by the City Council.



      (2)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading spaces,
as regulated by § A1 (§§ 50.02 and 155.378) of this code.



      (3)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary to
complete said construction.



      (4)   Bicycle racks, public telephone booths, and other
essential public service facilities provided all yard requirements are met.



      (5)   Outdoor sidewalk cafes in conjunction with a
freestanding restaurant facility.  Said use shall be reviewed by the
Planning Commission and City Council pursuant to § A1-75 (§ 155.402) and
shall provide adequate visual screening and physical barriers if intoxicating
or non-intoxicating alcoholic beverages are to be served.



      (6)   Drive-up teller service and outdoor ATM in conjunction
with a bank or savings and loan.



      (7)   Drive-through facilities when in conjunction with a
retail use. Said use shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and City
Council and shall be subject to the following standards:



         (a)   Traffic circulation patterns and ingress/egress to
the facility shall be designed so as to minimize the impact to adjacent
properties.



         (b)   The applicant shall demonstrate the facility will
not adversely affect any surrounding uses and shall submit, upon the city's
request, a traffic study.



         (c)   Orientation of the drive-through window and
queuing aisle shall not conflict with pedestrian traffic and deliveries.



         (d)   The city may require additional landscaping and/or
screening to protect neighboring residential uses.



(Ord. 679, passed 7-27-00; Am. Ord. 707, passed 2-14-02)



§ A25-5  MINIMUM AREA STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be
met and no improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be
used or improved shall meet the following area and dimensional requirements:



      (1)   Table of minimum area requirements and standards.



 


Requirements

 

Zone 1

 

Zone 2

 

Zone 3





Lot Dimensions
 



 



 





  Lot area (square feet)
 

—

 

300,000

 

40,000



  Lot width (feet)
 

—

 

—

 

—



Dwelling Unit Density
 



 



 





  One-story building
 

3,960 (11)

 

—

 

—



  Two-story building
 

3,960 (11)

 

—

 

—



Building Setbacks (feet)
 



 



 





  Along principal or arterial streets
 

40

 

50

 

50



  Along community collector streets
 

40

 

40

 

40



  Along neighborhood collector streets
 

30

 

40

 

40



  Along all other streets
 

30

 

30

 

30



  Along private streets
 

20

 

25**

 

25**



  Side lot line
 

25*

 

15*

 

15*



  Rear lot line
 

25

 

15

 

15



  Between multiple dwellings
 

20

 

—

 

—



Parking Setbacks (feet)
 



 



 





  Along all streets
 

20

 

20

 

20



  Along all private streets
 

—

 

10**

 

20**



  Side or rear lot line
 

5

 

5

 

5



  From multiple dwelling
 

10

 

—

 

—



  Abutting one-family detached lot
 

—

 

—

 

—



  Driveway setback from principal or arterial street
 

—

 

300

 

300



Maximum Building Coverage
 



 



 





  Coverage of lot (percent)
 

20

 

30

 

30



Maximum Building Height (feet)
 

35

 

45

 

45



*    Corner lot side yard setbacks abutting a local street shall be 20 feet.

**  Setback shall be measured from the face of the curb along the private
street




 



      (2)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



      (3)   Screening, see § 155.349.



      (4)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.



      (5)   Parking, see §§ 155.370 through 155.379.



      (6)   Signage shall be in accordance with Chapter 6 of the
City Code of Ordinances, except that the foundation or support structure of a
freestanding sign must be completely enclosed, and such enclosureshall match
the exterior construction materials of the primary building with which it is
associated and serves to identify.



      (7)   The following requirements are in addition to those
listed in division (A)(1)  of this section.  Where there may be a conflict,
the requirements herein shall prevail:



         (a)   Side and rear setbacks, party walls:  Buildings
may be excluded from side and rear setback requirements if party walls are
used and if adjacent buildings are constructed as an integral structure. This
shall not permit structures closer to single family detached or duplex lots
than allowed under division (A)(1) of this section.



         (b)   Exterior speakers may be used for required fire
and safety purposes only. No advertising or entertainment broadcasting shall
be permitted.



   (B)   Setbacks between multiple dwellings.  For the purposes of
this subsection, the term "side" shall refer to the short sides of a
structure and the terms "front" or "rear" shall refer to the long sides of
the structure.



      (1)   The front and rear sides of the multiple dwelling shall
have a minimum setback of 50 feet from any side of an adjacent multiple
dwelling or a setback equal to the combined height of the adjacent multiple
dwellings, whichever is greater, except that in no case shall a setback
greater than 75 feet be required.  This minimum setback shall be reduced to
40 feet where a horizontal extension of the lines created by the nearest
exterior vertical surfaces of adjacent buildings would create an angle of not
less than 45 degrees.



      (2)   Minimum setbacks between adjacent multiple buildings on
sides of multiple-residential buildings shall be 15 feet or a distance equal
to one-half the combined height of the adjacent building faces, whichever is
greater.



   (C)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



   (D)   Screening, see § 155.348.



   (E)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.



   (F)   Parking, see §§ 155.370 through 155.379.



(Ord. 679, passed 7-27-00; Am. Ord. 707, passed 2-14-02)



§ A25-6  SPECIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   In order to ensure quality building and site design within
this mixed use planned development, special standards are necessary. These
includeregulations governing streetscape design, building materials,
landscaping, screening, and parking.



      (1)    Streetscape design.  The following design elements
shall be incorporated into all site plans in any sub-zone. The goal of these
regulations is to assure an overall harmonious theme will be created for all
projects within this planned development:



         (a)   Sidewalks shall be installed on all public streets
to a width of eight feet with a six- to ten-foot wide street planting area
between the sidewalk and the curb.



         (b)   Streetscape treatment shall include deciduous
canopy trees in concert with berming or the screening devices to soften or
conceal parking and circulation areas from public view as needed.



         (c)   The constructed storm water detention pond shall
be regarded as a water feature and open space amenity.



   (B)   Building design and materials.  The following design elements
shall be incorporated into all site plans for buildings in any sub-zone:



      (1)   A building or group of buildings shall maintain a
compatible relationship with the surrounding context of an area in regard to:



         (a)   Rhythm of spaces between buildings.



         (b)   Rhythm of façade details and relationships, such
as relationship to horizontal or vertical lines and façade openings.



         (c)   Building scale and mass and setbacks.



         (d)   Building forms and roof shapes.



         (e)   Creating appropriate transitions, such as height,
façade details, and landscape buffers.



      (2)   All masonry exterior façades of plan concrete, either
precast or cast in place, shall not be permitted, except as a small design
element.



      (3)   Metal skin materials, such as baked enamel, stainless
steel, aluminum sandwich panels and the like as primary field materials for
buildings shall not be permitted. This type of material may be used as a
minor design element.



   (C)   Landscape design.  The following design elements shall be
incorporated into all site plans in any sub-zone. The goal of these
regulations is to assure that an overall harmonious theme will be created for
all projects within this planned development:



      (1)   The following design elements shall be incorporated into
all submitted landscape plans for this planned development:



         (a)   All plant materials to be used shall be identified
on the plan and a landscape plant list provided.



         (b)   Provide screening of undesirable views.



         (c)   Complement the architectural form of the building.



         (d)   Provide a pleasant street experience.



         (e)   Soften the visual impact of large paved areas.



         (f)   Soften the edge between a parking lot or street
and building.



         (g)   Mitigate the impacts of lighting or other negative
influences.



         (h)   Signage and identity structures shall be
incorporated into the landscape plan. Planting beds, conifers, and ornamental
trees shall be used to accent entries and signage.



      (2)   All commercial buildings that have grassed areas shall
have underground automatic sprinkler systems to maintain the landscaped area.



      (3)   The city may require additional landscaping and/or
screening to protect neighboring residential uses in the form of an undulated
sodded landscaped berm or berms for property located adjacent to any
principal or minor arterials and collector streets at a maximum 3:1 slope.
The berms shall be subject to the traffic visibility requirements of § 
A1-1 (§ 155.335).



   (D)   Screening.  The following design elements shall be
incorporated into all site plans for buildings in any subzone:



      (1)   Mechanical and electrical equipment shall be screened
from view. Screening materials shall be compatible with the architecture of
the building. Ground-mounted mechanical equipment shall be fully screened
from view with an architectural treatment consistent with the building
architecture. All rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened from view
from adjacent property lines. Screening may be achieved with parapet walls
and/or penthouse structures. Rooftop mechanical parapet walls and/or
penthouse structures shall be treated architecturally in a manner consistent
with the building architecture.



      (2)   Service yards, trash enclosures, delivery areas, and
loading docks shall be screened from view or located entirely within the
building.Screening materials shall be consistent with the architecture of the
building and shall use similar materials, finishes and colors.



      (3)   Service areas shall be located away from and not visible
from public open space systems, public parks, and the external street system.



         (4)   Service areas shall be concentrated and aggregated
into a centralized location for majorprojects. These service areas shall be
off the street, accessed from a dedicated service court. Access to these
courts should be wherever possible from the interior, private streets rather
than from the main circulation routes.



      (5)   Fences or walls shall be constructed of a material
similar to, compatible with, and complimentary to the primary building
material and architecture.



   (E)   Parking.  The following design elements shall be incorporated
into all site plans for buildings in any subzone:



      (1)   Landscaped islands in parking lots shall be at least 18
feet long and nine feet wide, and include at least one ornamental or shade
tree. The interior of all parking areas shall be landscaped.



      (2)   Large surface parking lots exposed to view from a public
right-of-way shall utilize a combination of berms, buffers and/or landscaping
to break-up open expanses of parking and pavement in order to minimize their
visual impact.  Design features shall include the following:



         (a)   Raised landscaped islands between parking rows.



         (b)   Paved and landscaped walkways between parking rows.



         (c)   Landscaped turning islands.



         (d)   Landscaped parking lot perimeters.



         (e)   Bermed parking lot perimeters.



      (3)   Parking lots having 15 or more spaces shall provide
parking for bicycles and motorcycles. Bicycle parking shall be provided near
building entries, but must not encroach into pedestrian walkways.



      (4)   Parking areas shall be screened visually; physically
depressed, or softened, from views of adjacent streets and residential areas
through planting and berming or other forms of screening as deemed necessary
by City Council.



      (5)   When buildings face directly onto County Road 42, there
shall be no more than two rows of parking created on the County Road 42 side
of the building.



      (6)   All cart storage corrals in the parking areas shall be
incorporated within a landscaped island. Cart storage corrals shall be paved
with concrete with concrete curb edging.



      (7)   Loading and service areas shall be designed to include
space for ingress and maneuvering.  Service to underground tanks shall not
conflict with the site access. Service to the fronts of buildings shall not
be permitted.



      (8)   Decorative street lighting and sidewalks shall be
installed along main parking lot drive aisles in a manner that will mimic
adjacent public streets.



   (F)   Signage.  The following design elements shall be incorporated
into all site plans in any subzone. The goal of these regulations is to
assure that an overall harmonious theme will be created for all projects
within this planned development:



      (1)   A master signage plan shall be submitted for approval by
the city and shall contain identification of all sign locations (including
building signs), dimensions, finishes, materials, range of colors, and method
of lighting.



      (2)   Only two freestanding pylon signs for the purpose of
area identification shall be permitted within the confines of this planned
development.



      (3)   The foundation or support structure of a freestanding
sign must be completely enclosed, and such enclosure shall have exterior
facing consisting of materials which shall match the exterior construction
materials of the primary building with which it is associated and serve to
identify.



      (4)   The total combined building signage sign area for any
use within Zone 2 shall not exceed 500 square feet.



   (G)   Building signage. Illuminated building signage on the side of
buildings in Zone 3 facing an adjacent public street that abuts residentially
zoned property or directly abuts residentially zoned property shall be
allowed, subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   The illuminated signs shall be white channel lettering
on a raceway only.



      (2)   The illuminated signs shall not exceed 125 nits in
intensity as measured at the sign face.



      (3)   The illuminated signs shall remain unlit from the hours
of 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.



      (4)   A light distribution plan shall be submitted to ensure
compliance with applicable city ordinances.



      (5)   All other applicable sign regulations set forth in
Chapter 154 of this code shall be strictly adhered to.



(Ord. 707, passed 2-14-02; Am. Ord. 1040, passed 2-22-18)



ARTICLE 26.  DESIGNATION NO. 681



§ A26-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish  specific performance
standards in compliance with §§ 155.260 through 155.267 for property
designated by Ordinance No. 681 on the official zoning map.  The purpose of
this zone is to provide an integrated mix of moderate density
multiple-residential uses.



(Ord. 681, passed 8-24-00)



§ A26-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following use or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home, day-care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or such home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state;



      (2)   Home occupations as defined in § 155.003;



      (3)   One-family detached dwellings meeting the standards of
the Uniform Building Code, placed on permanent foundations and having no
horizontal axis less than 18 feet in length;



      (4)   Townhouse/condominium multiple- dwellings provided no
single structure contains in excess of three dwelling units; and



      (5)   Public utility buildings and structures.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following use or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



      (1)   Decorative landscape features;



      (2)   Gardening or other horticultural uses where no sale of
products is conducted on the premises;



      (3)   Putting greens, shuffleboard courts, picnic area,
community building and similar recreational or service areas, when accessory
to a multiple-dwelling use, for use by occupants of the premises; and



      (4)   Play apparatus, picnic area, and similar recreational or
service areas, for use by the occupants of the premises.



(Ord. 681, passed 8-24-00)



§ A26-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City
Council except through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family-care home or day-care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812 where:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire,
building, and housing codes.



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between such
facilities.  The City Council may grant an exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or man-made barrier exists between facilities.



      (2)   Such conditional use permit shall be reviewed at
one-year intervals.



   (B)   Zone 2.  There are no conditional uses provided.



(Ord. 681, passed 8-24-00)



§ A26-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for the purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary
for such construction;



      (2)   Decorative landscape features;



      (3)   Gardening or other horticultural uses where no sale of
products is conducted on the premises;



      (4)   Keeping of domestic animals commonly referred to as
“housepets” for noncommercial purposes;



      (5)   Repair and maintenance of motor vehicles owned by the
occupant.  See screening requirements, § 155.348;



      (6)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading space as
regulated in the zoning chapter;



      (7)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met;



      (8)   Putting greens, shuffleboard courts, picnic area,
community building and similar recreational or service areas, when accessory
to a multiple-dwelling use, for use by occupants of the premises;



      (9)   Private swimming pool, tennis court and play apparatus
for use by the occupants of the premises; and



      (10)   Garage sales not to exceed three per calendar year.



   (B)   Zone 2.  There are no permitted accessory uses provided.



(Ord. 681, passed 8-24-00)



§ A26-5  MINIMUM AREA STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be met and
no improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be used or
improved shall meet the following area and dimensional requirements:



   (A)   Table of minimum area requirements and standards.



 



Requirements
 
Zone 1
 
Zone 2


Lot Dimensions
 

 



Lot area (square feet)
 
3,500
 
—


Lot width (feet)
 
35
 
—


Maximum Dwelling Unit Density (units per acre)
 
14,250 (3)
 
—


Building Setbacks (feet)
 

 



Along minor arterial streets
 
50
 
—


Along all other public streets
 
30
 
—


Along private streets
 
20
 
—


Side lot line
 
20
 
—


Rear lot line
 
25
 
—


Between multiple dwellings
 
15
 



Parking Setback
 

 



Along all streets
 
20
 



Side or rear lot line
 
5
 



From multiple dwelling
 
10
 



Maximum Building Coverage of Lot (percent)
 
20
 
—


Maximum Building Height (feet)
 

 





 



   (B)   Building materials, see § 155.346.



   (C)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



   (D)   Screening, see § 155.348.



   (E)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.



   (F)   Parking, see §§ 155.370 through 155.379.



(Ord. 681, passed 8-24-00)



ARTICLE A27.  [RESERVED]



ARTICLE A28.  DESIGNATION NO. 703




§ A28-1  PURPOSE.




    The purpose of this article is to establish specific performance
standards for Zone 6 in compliance with § A1-46  (§§ 155.260 - 155.267)
for property designated by Ordinance No. 804 on the official zoning map. 
The purpose of this zone is to provide for an integrated mix of shopping
center and retail business uses.




(Ord. 703, passed 11-8-01; Am. Ord. 804, passed 2-22-07 )





§ A28-2  PERMITTED USES.





   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council.





      (1)   One-family detached dwellings meeting the standards of
the Uniform Building Code, placed on permanent foundations and having no
horizontal axis less than 18 feet in length.





      (2)   Two-family dwellings on corner lots.





      (3)   Community-based family care home, day care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or such home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state.





      (4)   Public utility buildings and structures.





      (5)   Home occupation as defined in § A1-3 (§ 155.003) .





      (6)   Parks and playgrounds.





      (7)   Public libraries.





      (8)   Public recreation buildings, community centers and
swimming pools.





      (9)   Municipal government administrative buildings.





   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for the one or more of the following uses deemed similar by the City
Council:





      (1)   One-family detached dwellings meeting the standards of
the Uniform Building Code, placed on permanent foundations.





      (2)   Two-family dwellings.





      (3)    Townhouse dwellings, provided they are serviced by
public sanitary sewer and water systems and provided no single structure
contains in excess of six dwelling units.





      (4)   Community based family care home, day care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or such home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state.





      (5)   Public utility buildings and structures.





      (6)   Home occupation as defined in § 155.003 .





      (7)   Parks and playgrounds.





      (8)   Public libraries.





      (9)   Public recreation buildings, community centers and
swimming pools.





      (10) Private recreation buildings, facilities community centers
and swimming pools.





      (11)  Municipal government administrative buildings.




   (C)   Zone 2A.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used except for one or more of the following uses deemed similar by the City
Council:



      (1)   One-family detached dwellings meeting the standards of
the Uniform Building Code, placed on permanent foundations.



      (2)   Community-based family care home, day care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or such home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state.



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures.



      (4)   Home occupation as defined in § A1-3.



      (5)   Parks and playgrounds.



      (6)   Public recreation buildings, community centers and
swimming pools.



      (7)   Private recreation buildings and facilities, community
centers and swimming pools.




      (8)   Municipal government administrative buildings.





   (D)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for the one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:





      (1)   Townhouse dwellings, provided they are serviced by
public sanitary sewer and water systems and provided no single structure
contains in excess of 14 dwelling units.





      (2)   Community based family care, day care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or such home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state.





      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures.





      (4)   Home occupation as defined in A1-3.





      (5)   Parks and playgrounds.





      (6)   Public libraries.





      (7)   Public recreation buildings, community centers and
swimming pools.





      (8)   Private recreation buildings, facilities community
centers and swimming pools.





      (9)   Municipal government administrative buildings.





   (E)   Zone 4.  (Reserved)





   (F)   Zone 5.  This zone is reserved and intended for areas within
the Cobblestone Lake development where high density townhouses and apartment
dwelling units are expected at an overall maximum density of 24 units per
acre.




   (G)   Zoned 6.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Multi-tenant retail shopping center.



      (2)   Freestanding retail building.



      (3)   Permitted uses within the shopping center or
freestanding buildings shall be limited to the following, unless similar uses
are specifically approved by the City Council:  stores and shops selling the
personal service or goods over a counter.  These include antique or gift
shops; appliance store (sales and/or repair); art and school supply store;
auto accessory store (installation and/or service facilities subject to
conditional use); bakery; bank; savings and loan; barbershop; beauty salon;
bicycle sales; books; stationary and office supplies; candy; camera and
photographic supplies; carpet and rug sales; catering services; china and
glassware sales; clothing and costume sales and rental; coin-operated
amusement devices and similar facilities; copy sales and service; day spa;
department store; drugstore; dry cleaning; dry goods; electronic sales and/or
service; florist; furniture store; garden supplies; hardware store; health or
athletic club and facilities; hobby/crafts store; interior decorating;
jewelry and watch repair; laundromat; leather goods and luggage; locksmith;
musical instruments; off-sale liquor store; on-sale wine or 3.2 beer in
conjunction with a restaurant facility; nail salon; paint and wallpaper
sales; pet store; photography studio; pipe and tobacco shop; recorded music
sales; Class I, and III restaurant (no drive-through window service allowed),
Class II restaurant, shoe sales or repair; sporting goods; tailoring; theater
(except open air drive-in); toy store; video rental and sales.



      (4)   Offices for doctors, dentists, lawyers, realtors,
insurance agents, and similar uses.



      (5)   Offices of a general nature where the operations do not
include over-the-counter retail sales or warehousing from the site.



      (6)   Offices for educational tutoring services where the
operations do not include over-the-counter retail sales.



      (7)   Convenience store located in a multi-tenant building,
with a maximum building area not to exceed 2,500 square feet, and where the
operation do not include motor fuel sales.



      (8)   Apartment in which exclusively persons 55 years of age
or older reside provided the building is serviced by public sanitary sewer
and water systems.  The maximum density shall not exceed 28 units per acre.



      (9)   Continuum of care retirement community, provided it is
serviced by public sanitary sewer and water systems and the following
requirements are met:



         (a)   If more than one structure is used for a continuum
of care retirement community, all structures shall be located on a single
parcel or lot under single ownership;



         (b)   No more than 15% of the total units provided shall
be for assisted living;



         (c)   No more than 15% of the total units provided shall
be for comprehensive, intensive or full care living; and



         (d)   The density of the total units shall not exceed 32
units per acre.



      (10)   Daycare centers and preschools.



      (11)   Class II restaurant with drive-through window service,
subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   The restaurant shall be located within a
multi-tenant building and shall not occupy more than 50% of the building and
shall not exceed 3,000 square feet of floor area.



         (b)   Only two restaurants with a drive-through window
shall be allowed in Zone 6.



         (c)   Landscaping, screen wall, or a combination thereof
shall be installed between the drive-through window lane and any private and
public street, and open gathering spaces.



         (d)   Hours of drive-through window operation shall be
confined to the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. daily.



         (e)   Only one drive-through lane and menu board shall
be allowed.



   (H)   Zone 7.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



      (1)   Parks and playgrounds.



      (2)   Recreational buildings, community centers and structures.



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures.



   (I)   Zone 8.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



      (1)   Any use as permitted under § 155.288.



   (J)   Zone 9. Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



      (1)   Townhouse dwelling units provided that they are serviced
by public sanitary sewer and water systems provided that they are expected at
an overall maximum density of ten units per acre.



      (2)   Public utility buildings and structures.



      (3)   Home occupation as defined in § 155.003.



      (4)   Private recreation buildings, facilities, community
centers and swimming pools.



      (5)   Municipal government administrative buildings.




(Ord. 703, passed 11-8-01; Am. Ord. 723, passed 4-24-03; Am. Ord. 763, passed
12-9-04; Am. Ord. 804, passed 2-22-07; Am. Ord. 838, passed 6-5-08; Am. Ord.
855, passed 3-26-09; Am. Ord. 967, passed 6-12-14; Am. Ord. 1006, passed
3-24-16; Am. Ord. 1017, passed 8-25-16; Am. Ord. 1023, passed 12-8-16; Am.
Ord. 1035, passed 11-9-17)




§ A28-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zone 1. Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following use or uses deemed similar by the City Council except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family care home, day care home not
licensed under M.S. § 245.812 or a community-based residential care facility
or day care facility in a multiple dwelling unit when:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes.



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between such
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when strong community support exists, program effectiveness is closely
tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an effective
natural or manmade barrier exists between facilities.



         (c)   Such conditional use permit shall be reviewed at
one-year intervals.



      (2)   Home occupation as defined in §A1-3 (§ 155.003 ) when
conducted within the accessory structure or a secondary entrance exists.



   (B)   Zones 2, 2A and 3. Within these zones, no structure or land
shall be used except for the one or more of the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council except through the granting of a conditional use
permit:



      (1)   Community-based family care home, day care home not
licensed under M.S. § 245.812 or a community-based residential care facility
or day care facility in a multiple dwelling unit when:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes.



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between such
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when strong community support exists, program effectiveness is closely
tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an effective
natural or manmade barrier exists between facilities.



         (c)   Such conditional use permit shall be reviewed at
one-year intervals.



   (C)   (Reserved)



   (D)   Zone 4.  (Reserved)



   (E)   Zone 5.  (Reserved)



   (F)   Zone 6.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or use deemed similar by the
City Council, without a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Bowling alley or similar commercial recreation facility.



      (2)   On-sale liquor in conjunction with a restaurant facility.



      (3)   Outdoor display or sales conducted by an occupant of a
shopping center or freestanding facility.  Outdoor area to be screened and
maintained in a manner approved by the City Council.



      (4)   Service bays for the installation of auto accessories,
in conjunction with an auto accessories store; provided there are no more
than three bays, which shall be screened and oriented as required by the City
Council.



   (G)   Zone 7.  There are no conditional uses provided.



   (H)   Zone 8.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following use or uses deemed similar by the City Council except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   The excavation, hauling, mining, and stockpiling of sand
and gravel and such buildings and equipment as are customarily incidental
thereto, subject to all applicable conditions set forth in § 155.285 through
§ 155.293 and § 155.999.



      (2)   Asphalt plant, subject to all applicable conditions set
forth in § 155.285 through § 155.293 and § 155.999.



   (I)   Zone 9. Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council except through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community based family care home, day care home not
licensed under M.S. § 245.812 or a community based residential care facility
or day care facility in a multiple dwelling unit when:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes.



         (b)   Separation of 1/4 mile exists between such
facilities. The City Council may grant exception to the 1/4 mile rule when
strong community support exists, program effectiveness is closely tied to
particular cultural resources in the community, or an effective natural or
manmade barrier exists between facilities.



      (c)   Such conditional use permit shall be reviewed at
one-year intervals.




(Ord. 703, passed 11-8-01; Am. Ord. 723, passed 4-24-03; Am. Ord. 804, passed
2-22-07; Am. Ord. 838, passed 6-5-08; Am. Ord. 1023, passed 12-8-16)




§ A28-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Accessory dwelling unit with cooking facilities,
sanitary facilities and an independent means of access, attached to the
single family dwelling unit/garage (attached or detached) subject to the
following:



         (a)   No more than one occupant per unit shall be
allowed. The number of occupants may be increased by one if the property
owner can display to the city that one extra off-street surface parking space
exists on the lot in addition to the necessary parking spaces to serve the
primary structure.



         (b)   No accessory dwelling unit shall exceed 900 square
feet.



         (c)   The exterior finish of the accessory dwelling unit
shall be of the same materials of the primary structure.



      (2)   Buildings temporarily located for the purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary to
complete said construction.



      (3)   Temporary sales office.



      (4)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met.



      (5)   Detached garages that shall have the same exterior
finish as the primary structure.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for the one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for the purposes of
construction of the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary to
complete said construction.



      (2)   Temporary sales office.



      (3)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all requirements are met.



      (4)   Detached garages/accessory buildings that shall have the
same exterior finish as the primary structure.



   (C)   Zone 2A.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be
used except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for the purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary to
complete said construction.



      (2)   Temporary sales office.



      (3)   Essential public service facilities provided all
requirements are met.



      (4)   Detached garages/accessory buildings that shall have the
same exterior finish as the primary structure.



   (D)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for the one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for the purposes of
construction of the premises for a period of time not to exceed the time
necessary to complete said construction.



      (2)   Temporary sales office.



      (3)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all requirements are met.



   (E)   Zone 4.  (Reserved)



   (F)   Zone 5.  (Reserved)



   (G)   Zone 6.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or use deemed similar by the
City Council.



      (1)   Outdoor sales accessory to primary business, when
conducted as an organized sidewalk sale or seasonal sale such as a temporary
garden center.



      (2)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary
for construction.



      (3)   Delivery bays, provided the bays are screened and
oriented as required by the City Council.



      (4)   Off-street parking, refuse storage and loading space as
regulated in the zoning chapter.



      (5)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities, provided all yard requirements are met.



      (6)   Outdoor dining areas in conjunction with a freestanding
restaurant pursuant to § 155.383.



      (7)   Drive-up teller service and outdoor ATM in conjunction
with a freestanding bank or savings and loan.



   (H)   Zone 7.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for the purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary to
complete said construction.



      (2)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met.



   (I)   Zone 8.  There are no permitted accessory uses provided.



   (J)   Zone 9. Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council as shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for the purposes of
construction of the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary to
complete said construction.



      (2)   Temporary sales office.



      (3)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all requirements are met.



(Ord. 703, passed 11-8-01; Am. Ord. 723, passed 4-24-03; Am. Ord. 804, passed
2-22-07; Am. Ord. 838, passed 6-5-08; Am. Ord. 1023, passed 12-8-16)



§ A28-5  MINIMUM AREA STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be
met and no improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be
used or improved shall meet the following area and dimensional requirements.



      (1)   The maximum number of dwelling units shall not exceed
3,000 units.



      (2)   The maximum square footage of retail, limited business,
and institutional uses shall not exceed 300,000 square feet.



   (B)   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be
met and no improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be
used or improved shall meet the following area and dimensional requirements.



      (1)   Table of Minimum Area Standards and Requirements.



 


Specification

 

Zone 1

 

Zone 2

 

Zone 3

 

Zone 6

 

Zone 9






Minimum lot dimensions

 






  Lot area (square feet):

 



 



 



 



 

1,300




   Interior lot   

 

   6,000

 

   4,800

 



 

20,000

 






   Corner lot

 

   9,000

 

   7,500

 



 

40,000

 






  Lot width (feet)

 



 



 



 



 

-




   Interior lot

 

   50

 

   40

 



 

100

 






   Corner lot**

 

   65

 

   40

 



 

100

 






Minimum square feet of land per unit

 

3,500




  Single-loaded building

 



 

   2,800

 

   5,200

 



 






  Double-loaded building

 



 



 

   9,900

 



 






Minimum units per acre

 

13




  Single-loaded building

 



 

   6

 



 



 






  Double-loaded building

 



 



 

   13

 



 






Minimum building setbacks (feet)

 






  Along principal or arterial streets

 



 



 



 

50

 

-




   Primary and accessory dwelling units

 

   50

 



 



 



 






   All garages

 

   25

 



 



 



 






  Along collector streets

 



 



 



 

40

 

30




   Primary and accessory dwelling units

 

   30

 



 



 



 






   All garages

 

   15

 



 



 



 






  Along Pilot Knob Road, north of 157th Street



  West, as measured from a line located 85 feet



  east of the west line of section 36, township



  115, range 20

 

50

 



 



 



 






  Along Pilot Knob Road, south of 157th Street



  West, as measured from a line located 110 feet



  east of the west line of section 36, township



  115, range 20

 

25

 



 



 



 






  Along all other streets



  (including 157th Street West)

 



 



 



 

15

 






   Primary and accessory dwelling unit



(AUD Zone 1 only)

 

   15

 

   15

 



 



 






   Front-loaded garage (attached or detached)

 

   25

 

   15

 



 



 






   Side-loaded garage (attached or detached)

 

   15

 

   10

 



 



 






  Along any private drive (distance in feet from



    the curbline of the private drive)

 



 



 



 

20

 






  Side lot line

 



 



 



 

15

 






   Single-family dwellings

 

   5

 

   5

 



 



 






   Two-unit dwellings

 

   5

 

   5

 



 



 






   Multiple dwellings

 



 

   15

 



 



 






   Between structures:

 



 



 



 



 






      Two-unit dwellings

 



 

   20

 



 



 






      Multiple dwellings

 



 

   20

 

   25

 



 






Corner lot

 



 



 



 



 






   Primary and accessory unit dwelling

 

   15

 

   15

 



 



 






   Front-loaded garage

 

   15

 



 



 



 






   Side-loaded garage

 

   25

 

   20

 



 



 






   Interior side

 

   5

 

   5

 



 



 






   Two-unit dwellings

 



 

   15

 



 



 






   Multiple dwellings

 



 

   15

 

   15

 



 






Rear lot line

 



 



 



 

15

 






   Principal dwelling unit

 

   15

 

   20

 



 



 






   Accessory unit dwelling

 

   15

 



 



 



 






   Garage

 

   10

 

   20

 



 



 






   Two-unit dwelling     

 



 

   10

 



 



 






   Multiple dwellings

 



 

   5

 



 



 






Along any private street or drive

 



 



 

   

 



 






   Front

 



 



 

   20

 



 

20




   Side

 



 



 

   10

 



 

25




   Rear

 



 

   20

 

   20

 



 

20




Side lot line

 



 



 



 



 

20




Between Structures

 



 



 



 



 

25




Rear lot line

 



 



 



 



 

20




Maximum lot coverage

 






   Building (percent)

 

   40

 

   45

 

   45

 

30

 






   Building and impervious surface (percent)

 

   50

 

   55

 

   55

 



 

50




Maximum building height (feet)

 

   35*

 

   35*

 

   45

 

50

 

50




Maximum number of stories

 

   

 

   2

 

   3

 



 

4




Minimum parking setback (feet)

 






Along principal or arterial streets

 



 



 



 

20

 






Along all other streets/private drives

 



 



 



 

10

 






Apartments and continuum of care retirement community

 






Maximum building height (measured in feet from first elevation to highest
roof peak)

 



 



 



 

70

 






Maximum number of stories

 



 



 



 

4

 






*Building height shall be measured from elevation of the first floor to
highest point of the roof.  The exposed foundation of any structure shall
not exceed four feet.



**The width of a lot that abuts a round-about shall be calculated by adding
the following:



   a.   The lineal length of the lot adjacent to the curve.



   b.   The shortest side of the lot immediately adjacent to the curve.



Note: The table of minimum area requirements and standards for Zones 4
through 7 will be established at the time of formal approval of land use
requests for the remaining portion(s) of the Cobblestone Lake development.





 



 


Zone 8 shall comply with area requirements set forth in § A1-48.


Note: The minimum lot area, side yard setback and front (street) setback
requirements set forth above for Zone 2 shall not apply in the Cobblestone
Lake 5th and 6th Additions and shall be as set forth in Section A28-5(G)(9)
herein.

Note: The minimum lot width set forth in Zone 2 shall not apply for Blocks 12
and 13, Cobblestone Lake 3rd Addition, and Cobblestone Lake 6th and 9th
Additions and shall be as set forth in A28-5(G)(10) herein.



 



      (2)   Screening, see § 155.348.



      (3)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.



      (4)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



      (5)   Lighting, see § 155.353.



      (6)   Off-street loading, see § 155.354.



      (7)   Parking, see §§ 155.370 through 155.379.



   (C)   Residential site design:  The following design elements shall
be incorporated into Zone 1 of the planned development to assure an overall
sense of harmony.



      (1)   Residential areas shall be designed to emphasize human
scale which shall include:



         (a)   Sidewalks shall be installed along all public and
private streets. If deemed appropriate by the city council, a separate
pedestrian circulation plan may be substituted.



         (b)   Local residential streets shall be designed narrow
enough to discourage speeding, but wide enough to allow for on-street parking
along one side. Local streets shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 52
feet and a paved driving surface width of 26 feet.



         (c)   The "entry street," with access from Diamond Path,
shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 87 feet and two paved driving
surfaces 20 feet wide that will be separated by a 15-foot wide center median.



         (d)   Enhancement of the pedestrian- friendly
environment by minimizing the presence or appearance of garages whenever
possible.



      (2)   Driveways serving structures adjacent to streets with
raised center medians shall be prohibited, except the property located at
15798 Cobblestone Lake Parkway, legally described as Lot 5, Block 2,
COBBLESTONE LAKE 2ND ADDITION, may have driveway access to the property via
158th Street, subject to the following requirements:



         (a)   Only one driveway access to this property is
permitted.



         (b)   The principal dwelling structure on the property
shall front Cobblestone Lake Parkway.



         (c)   Any attached garage to the principal dwelling unit
shall be oriented on the property so the door(s) for vehicle access into the
garage are facing east or south.



         (d)   The structure existing in the southeast corner of
the property as of April 15, 2013, shall be existing on the property on the
date a building permit application for the principle dwelling unit is filed
with the city and said structure shall remain on the property thereafter and
be converted for use as a detached garage.



      (3)   The maximum driveway width within the street
right-of-way shall be 14 feet.



      (4)   No dwelling unit shall be set back more than 25 feet
from the front property line.



   (D)   Building design and materials:  The following design elements
shall be incorporated into all site plans for buildings:



      (1)   The main entrance to the primary dwelling unit shall
face the street.



      (2)   Entry features of all primary dwellings shall
incorporate a front entry porch or stoop that shall be constructed in a
manner that is harmonious with the primary dwelling.



      (3)   All accessory structures shall incorporate the
architectural design and exterior finish of the primary structure.



      (4)   A building or group of buildings shall maintain a
compatible relationship with the surrounding context of an area in regard to:



         (a)   Rhythm of spaces between buildings.



         (b)   Rhythm of facade details and relationships, such
as relationship to horizontal or vertical lines, and facade openings.



         (c)   Building scale and mass and setbacks.



         (d)   Building forms and roof shapes.



      (5)   All building elevations shall be considered a front for
the purpose of exterior building material use and appearance.



      (6)   Appropriate transitions, such as height, facade details,
and landscape buffers shall be created.



      (7)   All masonry exterior facades of plain concrete, either
precast or cast in place, shall not be permitted, except as a small design
element.



      (8)   The use of vinyl, steel, aluminum or similar materials
for the exposed finish shall not be allowed.



      (9)   All garages oriented to the front yard shall be set back
a minimum of five feet from the front elevation of the primary dwelling unit.
Covered porches or stoops that extend a minimum of 50% of the width of the
front elevation of the dwelling unit shall constitute the front elevation for
purposes of measuring setback distances.



   (E)   Landscape Design:  The following design elements shall be
incorporated into all site plans in any area. The goal of these regulations
is to assure an overall harmonious theme will be created for all projects
within this planned development. A master landscape plan for all zones shall
be submitted to the city and the following design elements shall be
incorporated:



      (1)   All plant materials to be utilized shall be identified
on the plan and a landscape plant materials list provided.



      (2)   Provide screening of undesirable views.



      (3)   Compliment the architectural form of the building.



      (4)   Define walkways, internal traffic circulation areas,
special use areas, and building entries through the use of special paving
materials such as brick pavers, stamped concrete, paving stones, etc., or a
combination thereof.



      (5)   Provide a pleasant street experience.



      (6)   Soften the visual impact of large paved areas.



      (7)   Soften the edge between a parking lot or street and
building.



      (8)   Mitigate the impacts of lighting or other negative
influences.



      (9)   The landscaping for each individual lot within the
planned development shall be consistent with the master landscape plan.



      (10)   Signage and identity structures shall be incorporated
in the master landscape plan. Planting beds, conifers, and ornamental trees
shall be used to accent entries and signage.



      (11)    An undulated sodded landscaped berm or berms shall be
installed, where feasible, adjacent to any principal or minor arterial and
collector streets at a maximum 3:1 slope. The berms shall be subject to the
traffic visibility requirements of § A1-1 (§ 155.335)



   (F)   Signage.  The following design elements shall be incorporated
into all site plans. The goal of these regulations is to assure an overall
harmonious theme will be created for all areas within this planned
development.



      (1)   Signage shall be in accordance with Chapter 6 of the
City Code of Ordinances.



      (2)   A master signage plan for each phase of development
shall be submitted for approval by the city and shall contain identification
of all sign locations, dimensions, finishes, materials, range of colors, and
method of lighting.



   (G)   Residential Site Design. The following design elements shall
be incorporated into Zones 2 and 3 of the planned development:



      (1)   All two-family dwelling unit garages shall be oriented
so that the garage door is perpendicular to the front elevation of the
dwelling unit.  Garage doors that are parallel to the front elevation of
two-unit buildings shall be allowed only if the units are part of a master
development and shall be subject to § A28-5(D)(9).



      (2)   Residential streets shall be designed to emphasize human
scale which shall include:



         (a)   Sidewalks shall be installed along all public and
private streets.  If deemed appropriate by the City Council, a separate
pedestrian circulation plan may be substituted.



         (b)   All driveways shall have a minimum length of 20
feet and the maximum driveway within the public street right-of-way shall be
14 feet.



         (c)   Private streets to serve multiple dwelling units
in Blocks 1 and 2 and Lots 1 - 6, Block 3 shall be 24 feet wide with 19-foot
paved driving surface and a 3-foot wide sidewalk located directly adjacent to
the driving surface.



         (d)   Private drives to serve single family dwelling
units in Block 3 shall have a minimum width of 20 feet.



         (e)   Private drives to serve single family dwelling
units in Blocks 9 - 11 shall have a minimum width of 20 feet.



      (3)   The minimum cost of landscaping in multiple family
projects shall be 2½% of the estimated cost of the building construction
based on current Means Construction Data.  Landscape materials all live
plant materials such as trees and shrubs. Sod, grass seed, fencing, retaining
walls, patios, irrigation systems and other physical site and grading work
shall not be included.



      (4)   All private open spaces shall be constructed and
maintained in accordance with the “Cobblestone Lake Phase II Park Greens
and Greenways” plan as prepared by Putman Planning and Design.



      (5)   The exposed foundation of any structure shall be treated
with decorative materials to match or accent the primary structure.



      (6)   Two sets of address number shall be required for all
dwelling units with rear loaded garages.  One set of address numbers shall
be placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street
fronting the property.  The second set shall be placed in a position to be
plainly legible and visible from the private drive or alley providing access
to the garage.



      (7)   Parking, see §§ 155.370 through 155.379.



      (8)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



      (9)   Lots within the Cobblestone Lake 5th and 6th Additions
shall be subject to the minimum area requirements:



         (a)   The minimum lot area shall be 2,800 sq. ft.;



         (b)   Side yard setbacks may be zero, provided there ten
feet is maintained between two single-family residential structures or
between a single-family residential structure and a two-family residential
structure and 20 feet between two-family residential structures; and



         (c)   Lot 4, Block 2, Cobblestone Lake 5th Addition
shall have a minimum front yard setback of 11 feet from the public street.



      (10)   Lots in Blocks 12 and 13, Cobblestone Lake 3rd
Addition, and Cobblestone Lake 6th and 9th Additions shall have a minimum lot
width of 34 feet.



(Ord. 703, passed 11-8-01; Am. Ord. 723, passed 4-24-03; Am. Ord. 763, passed
12-9-04; Am. Ord. 804, passed 2-22-07; Am. Ord. 833, passed 2-14-08; Am Ord.
855, passed 3-26-09; Am. Ord. 862, passed 6-11-09; Am. Ord. 945, passed
5-23-13; Am. Ord. 1023, passed 12-8-16; Am. Ord. 1029, passed 7-13-17)



§ A28-6  SPECIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Design elements.  The following design elements shall be
incorporated into Zone 6 of the planned development to assure an overall
sense of harmony.



      (1)   Define spaces with buildings with landscaping and
walkways where appropriate.



      (2)   Maintain character of the site as a whole through
building materials, landscaping, lighting, pedestrian orientation.



      (3)   Provide continuity between commercial and residential
buildings, through similar detailing, materials or other building elements.



      (4)   Enhancement of the pedestrian friendly environment by
providing access from sidewalks into and throughout the commercial areas,
between buildings and across parking areas where appropriate.



      (5)   Wherever a surface parking area faces a street frontage,
such frontage shall be screened with landscaping elements consisting of a
hedge, shrubs or hardscape elements.



      (6)   All refuse, recyclable materials, and equipment for
handling them, including compactors, shall be totally screened from eye-level
view from public streets and adjacent properties, whether in the front, side
or rear, either by being stored within the principal structure, totally
screened from view by the principal building, or stored within an accessory
structure enclosed by a roof, and readily served through single or double
doors, or an overhead door on tracks.



      (7)   Loading docks shall not be located in the front, and
shall be screened from eye-level view of public streets by means of
landscaping that is at least 80% opaque within two years, or by a screen wall
of the same materials and colors as the principal building.



      (8)   Any screening, fences or walls shall be constructed of a
landscape materials or masonry material similar to and complimentary to the
primary building material and architecture.



      (9)   Lots having parking areas with 15 or more parking spaces
shall provide parking for bicycles  near building entries, but without
encroaching into pedestrian walkways.



      (10)   On-site parking for a senior apartment and independent
living units within a continuum of care facility use permitted herein shall
be provided at a rate of 1.1 spaces per unit, of which a minimum of one space
per independent living unit shall be enclosed.



   (B)   Commercial building design and materials.  The goal of these
guidelines is to assure that commercial areas present an architectural
appearance that is visually compatible and complementary in use of building
form, design and materials.



      (1)   Design elements of commercial buildings should include:



         (a)   Well-defined entrances, with creative use of
materials in varied colors and textures.



         (b)   Columnar forms at key building corners.



         (c)   Variety in building planes, both vertically and
horizontally.



         (d)   Extended covered entrances, window canopies, and
other pedestrian-scale elements at main entries.



         (e)   Buildings situated along a local street shall
incorporate four-sided architecture.



         (f)   Mechanical equipment on building exteriors, roofs,
or parking areas shall be screened from view from all public streets and
adjoining properties.



         (g)   Design elements and material requirements shall
apply to the large anchor tenant building.



      (2)   Exterior building materials shall consist primarily of
brick, stone, or color-impregnated decorative block.  Secondary materials
may include coated or anodized, non-reflective, glare-free finished metal,
integrally colored EFIS, or color-impregnated, fiber-cement siding.  Accent
materials, such as wood, metal or fiber cement, may be used in trim, fascia
or soffit, if appropriately integrated into the overall building design, and
not situated in areas that will be subject to physical or environmental
damage.  Accent materials shall be wrapped around walls that are visible
from a public street or open space.



      (3)   Buildings containing office and retail uses shall
maintain 40% minimum window coverage on each first floor front, where the
primary entry faces a street or public open space.



   (C)   Landscaping.  The goal of these standards is to assure that
the commercial areas present a landscaped appearance that is compatible with
adjacent residential areas.  A landscape plan shall be prepared by a
landscape architect registered and incensed in the state, and shall include
the following design elements:



      (1)   Provide screening for undesirable views.



      (2)   Compliment the architectural form of the building.



      (3)   Define walkways, internal traffic circulation areas,
special use areas, and building entries through the use of special paving
materials such as brick pavers, stamped concrete, paving stone, or a
combination thereof.



      (4)   Provide a pleasant street environment.



      (5)   Soften the visual impact of large paved areas.



      (6)   Mitigate the impacts of lighting or other negative
influences.



      (7)   Landscaped islands within the parking lots shall be
provided for all parking lots in Zone 6.  The total area of the islands
shall be at least 5% of the parking lot area, and no island shall be less
then the size of a standard parking stall.



      (8)   All cart storage corrals in the parking areas shall be
incorporated within a landscaped island, paved with concrete, having a
concrete barrier curb around the edge, and concrete barrier curbs that
delineate the cart storage lanes.  Signage indicating the location of the
cart corrals may be affixed to a single pipe rail located at the halfway
point of the cart storage lanes.  No signage advertising products or stores
shall be allowed in the cart storage corral area.



   (D)   Parking.  Parking may be calculated in aggregate, if the
following exists:



      (1)   A convenient pedestrian connection between properties
exists between the lots.



      (2)   The parking areas share a property line.



      (3)   A vehicular connection between the lots exists.



   (E)   Signage.  A master signage plan shall be created to assure an
overall harmonious theme within the entire commercial area that complements
the entire Cobblestone development.



      (1)   Signage shall be in accordance with Chapter 154 and City
Council-approved common signage plan.



      (2)   Signage on buildings located directly adjacent to
residential areas shall be non-illuminated.



      (3)   Anchor/center sign area may be increased to 312 square
feet for the Cobblestone Lake Commercial addition, subject to the following:



         (a)   Only one anchor/center sign shall be allowed.



         (b)   The maximum sign area for any one business on the
anchor/center sign shall be 180 square feet.



         (c)   No other pylon, monument or ground signs that bear
business advertising shall be allowed.



   (F)   Monument signage.  A master monument signage plan shall be
reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved by City Council and shall
meet all the following standards and requirements:



      (1)   Monument signs shall be set back a minimum of one foot
from the right-of-way line of 160th Street West.



      (2)   Monument signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet
from the right-of-way line of all other public and private streets.



      (3)   No monument sign may be located in an easement of record
without approval by the City Council.



      (4)   All monuments shall be properly located in accordance
with § 155.335.



      (5)   The maximum height of any monument sign shall be 12 feet.



      (6)   All monument signs shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission and approved by City Council prior to issuance of a building
permit.



      (7)   All monument signs shall be in accordance with Chapter
154 of this code, except as otherwise provided herein.



   (G)   Apartment and continuum of care residential community building
design and materials.  The following design elements shall be incorporated
into the design for any apartment permitted herein and  continuum of care
residential community buildings to assure an overall sense of harmony.



      (1)   All building elevations shall be considered a front for
the purpose of exterior building material use and appearance.



      (2)   Appropriate transitions in the building’s fascia, such
as height façade details and landscape buffers, shall be incorporated.



      (3)   Building materials shall be those normally used in this
part of the country for permanent type of construction, which is found in
generally acceptable as good architectural design, and which are compatible
with other building designs in the planned development area.



      (4)   All exterior elevations shall have a vertical exposed
exterior finish that shall consist of a combination of non-combustible
materials such as brick, stone, stucco, and the like.  The use of cedar,
redwood, and high quality cementitous fiberboard, sometimes referred to as
“Hardi Plank/Panel” may be used when incorporated with before-mentioned
non-combustible materials. 



      (5)   Metal skins materials, such as baked enamel, stainless
steel, aluminum sandwich panels as the like as primary field materials for
buildings shall not be permitted.  This type of material may be used as a
design element.



      (6)   The use of vinyl, steel, aluminum siding for the exposed
exterior finish shall not be allowed.



   (H)   Apartment and continuum of care residential communities
landscape design and materials.  The following design elements shall be
incorporated into all site plans of apartment uses permitted herein and
continuum of care residential community buildings.



      (1)   All areas of a site not occupied by buildings, parking
lots, or other improvements shall be landscaped with vegetation including
trees, shrubs, hedges, ground cover, and/or grasses in accordance with a
landscape plan approved by the city.



      (2)   A landscape plan shall be prepared by a landscape
architect registered and licensed in the state and the following design
elements shall be incorporated:



         (a)   All plant materials to be utilized shall be
identified on the plan and a landscape plant materials list provided;



         (b)   Landscape materials shall be utilized to soften
the visual impact of large paved areas, provide screening of undesirable
views, and compliment the architectural design of the building;



         (c)   Underground irrigation systems shall be installed
and utilized in all landscaped areas; and



         (d)   Landscaping shall be integrated with other
functional and ornamental site design elements, where appropriate, such as
recreational facilities, paths and walkways, fountains, trellises, pergolas,
gazebos, patios, fences, walls, street furniture, art, sculpture, and the
like.



      (3)    A landscape plan approved by the City Council under
this provision shall be exempt from the minimum requirements set forth in §
155.349.




(Ord. 804, passed 2-22-07; Am. Ord. 816, passed 7-12-07; Am. Ord. 840, passed
6-26-08; Am. Ord. 855, passed 3-26-09)




ARTICLE A29.  DESIGNATION NO. 714



§ A29-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish specific performance
standards in compliance with §§ 155.260 through 155.271 for property
designated by Ordinance No. 714 on the official zoning map. The purpose of
this zone is to provide for an integrated mix of moderate- density multiple
residential uses.



(Ord. 714, passed 5-23-02)



§ A29-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



      (1)   Townhouse/condominium multiple dwellings provided no
single structure contains more than six dwelling units.



      (2)    Home occupation as defined in § 155.003 .



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures.



      (4)   Community-based family care home, day care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or such home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state.



(Ord. 714, passed 5-23-02)



§ A29-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council except
through the granting of a conditional use permit.



      (1)   Community-based family care home or day care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812; or a community-based residential
care facility or day care facility only when located in a multiple dwelling,
when:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes.



         (b)     Separation of one-quarter mile exists between
such facilities. The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or manmade barrier exists between facilities.



      (2)    Such conditional use permit shall be reviewed at
one-year intervals.



(Ord. 714, passed 5-23-02)



§ A29-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Any accessory use permitted in the "R" districts.



      (2)   Accessory uses customarily associated with and
incidental to the conditional uses permitted in the multiple dwelling
districts.



      (3)   Parks, playgrounds, putting greens, shuffleboard courts,
picnic area, community building, swimming pool, tennis court, play apparatus,
and similar recreational or service areas, for use by  occupants of the
premises.



(Ord. 714, passed 5-23-02)



§ A29-5  MINIMUM AREA STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be
met. No improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be so
used or improved shall meet the following area and dimensional requirements:



      (1)   Table of Minimum Area Standards and Requirements



 


Specification

 

Zone 1






Dwelling unit density

 






  Minimum square feet of land per unit

 

4,840




  Maximum units per acre

 

      9




Minimum building setback (feet)

 






  Front setback

 






Along prinicipal or minor arterial streets

 

    50




Along community or neighborhood collector streets

 

    25




Along all other public streets

 

    25




Along private streets or drives

 

    20




  Side setback

 






   Individual lot lines

 

    —




   Perimeter lot lines1

 

    25




   Between buildings2

 

    20




  Rear setback

 






   Individual lot lines

 

    —




   Perimeter lot lines1

 

    25




   Between buildings3

 

    40




Minimum parking setback (feet)

 






  Along principal or arterial streets

 

    20




  Along all other public streets

 

    15




  Along any private street or drive

 

      0




  Side or rear lot line

 

      5




  From a multiple dwelling

 

    10




  Driveway setback from principal or arterial street intersections

 

    100




  Driveway setback from all other street intersections

 

    50





 


Maximum building height (feet):

 






  Maximum height

 

    40




Notes to Table: 



1.  "Perimeter lot line" shall mean the property line around the perimeter
of the development along with the lot lines around all common ownership lots
excluding private streets.  In cases where a "perimeter lot line" abuts a
public right-of-way, the greater of the two setbacks shall apply.



2.  Minimum setbacks between adjacent multiple dwellings on sides which are
not a front or rear side of either building shall be 25 feet.



3.  The front and rear sides of a multiple dwelling shall have a minimum
setback of 40 feet from any side of an adjacent multiple dwelling.










      (2)   Encroachments. The following shall not be considered as
encroachments on yard or setback requirements:



         (a)   Encroachments as listed in § 155.333(C)(1).



         (b)   Decks and porches that extend up to ten feet into
the required rear yard setback area.



      (3)   The preceding setback encroachments shall not be
construed to allow encroachments into an easement of record.



      (4)    Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



      (5)   Screening, see § 155.348.



      (6)    Landscaping, see § A29-6.



      (7)   Parking, see § A29-6.



      (8)    Lighting, se e § 155.353 .



(Ord. 714, passed 5-23-02)



§ A29-6  SPECIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   In order to ensure a properly integrated design within the planned
development, special performance standards have been established. The site
layout; sidewalk and trail locations; on and off-street parking; exterior
building design including building type, materials, and colors; landscape
design and materials; and site amenities including community swimming pool,
gazebo, tot lot, and gathering areas shall be developed and built in
conformance with the Master Development Plan created by Land Mark Photography
and Design, dated March 15, 2002, on file at City Offices.



(Ord. 714, passed 5-23-02)



ARTICLE A30.  DESIGNATION NO. 716



§ A30-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish specific performance
standards in compliance with §§ 155.260 through 155.271 for property
designated by Ordinance No. 716 on the official zoning map. The purpose of
this zone is to provide for a pedestrian-oriented, integrated mix of
high-density residential uses, mixed retail business, full-service
restaurants, limited business, and institutional uses.  In addition to the
performance standards contained within this article, the design and location
of all buildings, as well as lot, block and street layouts shall be
consistent with the design guidelines as contained within the "Apple Valley
Central Village Plan", as formally adopted to the satisfaction of the City
Council.



(Ord. 716, passed 6-27-02; Am. Ord. 740, passed 12-8-03)



§ A30-1.1  CONFLICT OF PROVISIONS.



   If any provision or requirement of this article is in conflict with any
term, condition or standard contained in the "Apple Valley Central Village
Plan" or with any provision or requirement of any other chapter in this Code,
the provisions and requirements set forth in this article shall govern.



(Ord. 740, passed 12-8-03)



§ A30-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



      (1)   Townhouse/condominium multiple dwellings provided they
are serviced by public sanitary sewer and water systems, and no single
structure contains more than eight dwelling units.



      (2)   Home occupation as defined in § 155.003 .



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures.



      (4)   Community-based family care home, day care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or such home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state.



      (5)   Parks and playgrounds.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



      (1)   Apartment multiple-dwellings provided they are serviced
by public sanitary sewer and water systems. The minimum density shall be at
least 24 units per acre and the maximum density shall not exceed 47 units per
acre.



      (2)   Apartment multiple-dwellings for senior citizens
provided they are serviced by public sanitary sewer and water systems. The
minimum density shall be at least 24 units per acre and the maximum density
shall not exceed 54 units per acre.



      (3)   Home occupation as defined in § 155.003 .



      (4)   Public utility buildings and structures.



      (5)   Community-based family care home, day care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or such home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state.



      (6)   Parks and playgrounds.



      (7)   Recreational buildings, community centers and structures.



   (C)   Zone 3.  Within this zone no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council.



      (1)   Multi-tenant general retail. Permitted uses within
multi-tenant retail spaces shall be limited to the following unless similar
uses are specifically approved by the City Council: Stores and shops selling
the personal service or goods over a counter. These may include but not
necessarily be limited to the following: antique or gift shops; appliance
store (sales and/or repair); art and school supply store; bakery; bank,
and/or savings and loan (no drive-up teller); barbershop; beauty salon;
bicycle sales; books; stationery and office supplies; candy; camera and
photographic supplies; carpet and rug sales; catering services; china and
glassware sales; clothing and costume sales and rental; coin-operated
amusement devices and similar facilities; drugstore (no drive-thru pharmacy
service); dry cleaning; dry goods; electronic sales and/or service; florist;
furniture store; garden supplies; hardware store; health or athletic club and
facilities; hobby/crafts store; jewelry and watch repair; laundromat; leather
goods and luggage; musical instruments; off-sale liquor store; on-sale wine
or 3.2 beer in conjunction with a restaurant facility; paint and wallpaper
sales; pipe and tobacco shop; recorded music sales; restaurant (Class I or
Class III only); shoe sales or repair; sporting goods; theater (except open
air drive-in); toy store.



      (2)   Multi-tenant service retail.  For the purposes of this
section, service retail shall include the following: drapery/rug services;
direct selling, interior decorating; small appliance repair, tool and
appliance rentals, mail order, merchandise vending, film/video rentals and
sales, printing/copy sales and service, shoe repair, pawn shops, photographic
studios, locksmith, tailoring and dressmaking, upholstery, optical shops.



      (3)   Offices for doctors, dentists, lawyers, realtors,
insurance agents, banks, savings and loans (no drive-up teller services), and
similar uses.



      (4)   Offices of a general nature where the operations do not
include over-the-counter retail sales or warehousing from the site.



      (5)   Day care centers.



      (6)   Freestanding Class I or Class III restaurants.



      (7)   Condominium or apartment multiple dwellings provided
they are serviced by public sanitary sewer and water systems, and have
sufficient parking.



      (8)   Stormwater ponds, trailways, parks, open space and other
public amenities on Outlot B, The Legacy of Apple Valley, only.



   (D)   Zone 4. There are no permitted uses in this zone.



(Ord. 716, passed 6-27-02; Am. Ord. 734, passed 9-25-03)



§ A30-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zones 1 and 2.  Within these zones, no structure or land
shall be used for the following use or uses deemed similar by the City
Council except through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family care home, day care home not
licensed under M. S. § 245.812 or a community-based residential care
facility or day care facility in a multiple dwelling unit when:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes.



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between such
facilities. The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile rule
when strong community support exists, program effectiveness is closely tied
to particular cultural resources in the community, or an effective natural or
manmade barrier exists between facilities.



         (c)   Such conditional use permit shall be reviewed at
one-year intervals.



      (2)   Daycare centers as licensed by the State of Minnesota,
subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   A drop off/pick up lane, if included, shall be
located in the back of the building and shall not have direct access from an
arterial or collector street.



         (b)   Any drop off/pick up lane circulation pattern,
including ingress and egress, shall be designed not have an adverse impact to
overall pedestrian and vehicular traffic of the area.



         (c)   Recreational areas shall be located inside the
building or on the roof and shall be appropriately screened and fenced.



   (B)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following use or uses deemed similar by the City Council except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   On-sale liquor in conjunction with a Class I restaurant.



   (C)   Zone 4.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for the following use or uses deemed similar by the City Council and
upon the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Off-street parking subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   No less than 275 parking spaces shall be provided.



         (b)   Cross-access and cross-parking easements for Lots
1 - 3 and Outlots A and B shall be executed and recorded with the Dakota
County Recorder's Office.



         (c)   The parking facility shall be constructed and
completed prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy, temporary or
final, for any use, building, or structure within Zone 3.



         (d)   Any and all documents required to provide for
undivided joint ownership of Zone 4 between all lots in Zone 3 shall be
executed and recorded with the Dakota County Recorder's Office.



         (e)   Any other conditions as required by the City
Council.



         (f)   Parking area shall be landscaped in accordance
with a landscape plan approved by the city.



(Ord. 716, passed 6-27-02; Am. Ord. 734, passed 9-25-03; Am. Ord. 747, passed
2-26-04)



§ A30-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Zones 1 and 2.  Within these zones, the following uses or
uses deemed similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for the purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary
for such construction.



      (2)   Temporary sales office.



      (3)   Decorative landscape features.



      (4)   Gardening and other horticultural uses where no sale of
products is conducted on the premises.



      (5)   The keeping of domestic animals commonly referred to as
"house pets" for noncommercial purposes.



      (6)   Repair and maintenance of motor vehicles owned by the
occupant; see screening requirements, § 155.348 .



      (7)   Garage sales not to exceed three per calendar year.



      (8)   Accessory uses customarily associated with and
incidental to the conditional uses permitted in the multiple dwelling
districts.



      (9)   Parks, playgrounds, putting greens, shuffleboard courts,
picnic area, community building, swimming pool, tennis court, play apparatus,
and similar recreational or service areas, for use by occupants of the
premises.



      (10)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met.



    (B)    Zone 3. Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Walk-up outdoor ATM in conjunction with a bank or
savings and loan.



      (2)   Buildings temporarily located for the purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary to
complete the construction.



      (3) Decorative landscape features, benches, public art, and other
public amenities.



      (4)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met.



      (5)   Off-street parking, refuse storage, and loading space as
regulated elsewhere in this code.



      (6)   Outdoor restaurant seating by and adjacent to a
permitted restaurant hereunder provided physical barriers are installed to
delineate the outdoor seating area; a minimum of five feet of sidewalk along
the curb and leading to the entrance of the restaurant shall be unobstructed
by tables and other encumbrances; and the area is kept in a clean and
sanitary condition at all times.



      (7)   Temporary outdoor display or sales of retail goods
conducted by an occupant of a multi-tenant retail space subject to the
following conditions:



         (a)   Outdoor displays shall be permitted directly in
front of an establishment, provided that at least five feet of clearance is
maintained at the storefront entrance, and shall not interfere with
pedestrian or vehicular access;



         (b)   Display items shall be placed on professionally
constructed and commercially available shelving and/or platforms only.
Pallets and cardboard boxes shall not be used to display goods;



         (c)   Outdoor displays shall be clean, litter-free, and
well maintained at all times and shall be compatible with the colors and
character of the storefront from which the business operates;



         (d)   Outdoor displays shall be permitted only during
business hours and shall be removed at the end of business day;



         (e)   Outdoor displays shall be subject to any other
conditions as required by the City Council.



   (C)   Zone 4.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Pedestrian plazas.



      (2)   Buildings temporarily located for purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary to
complete the construction.



      (3)   Essential security and safety facilities as approved by
the City Council.



      (4)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met.



(Ord. 716, passed 6-27-02; Am. Ord. 734, passed 9-25-03)



§ A30-5 MINIMUM AREA STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be
met and no improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be
used or improved shall meet the following area and dimensional requirements:



      (1)   Table of Minimum Area Standards and Requirements.



 


Specification

 

Zone 1

 

Zone 2

 

Zone 3

 

Zone 4






Dwelling unit density in square feet per unit (units per acre)

 



 



 



 






  One-story building

 

5,433 (8)

 

3,351 (13)

 

--

 

--




  Two-story building

 

2,723 (16)

 

1,610 (27)

 

1,610 (27)

 

--




  Three-story building

 

N/A

 

1,610 (27)

 

1,610 (27)

 

--




  Four-story building

 

N/A

 

796 (55)

 

807 (54)

 






Minimum building setbacks from perimeter lot line1



  (feet)

 



 



 



 






  Along principal or arterial streets

 

30

 

30

 

15

 

--




  Along collector streets

 

10

 

10

 

10

 

--




  Along all other public streets

 

10

 

10

 

10

 

--




  Along private streets or drives

 

  5

 

  5

 

5

 

--




Setbacks between buildings

 



 



 



 






  Front-to-front

 

20

 

20

 

0

 

--




  Front-to-side

 

30

 

30

 

0

 

--




  Side-to-side

 

12

 

12

 

0

 

--




  Rear-to-rear

 

35

 

35

 

0

 

--




Maximum building lot coverage (percent)

 

40

 

40

 

60

 

--




Maximum impervious surface (percent)

 

70

 

70

 

70

 

90




Maximum building height5

 

26

 

26

 

265

 

--




Maximum building height (feet)

 

26

 

55 2, 6

 

55

 

--




Minimum number of stories

 

2

 

2

 

2

 

--




Maximum number of stories

 

2

 

4

 

4

 

--




Minimum use within zone

 



 



 



 






  Retail

 

--

 

--

 



 






   Service retail

 

--

 

--

 

5,000

 

--




   General retail

 

--

 

--

 

5,000

 

--




  General/professional office

 

--

 

--

 

14,000

 

--




  Restaurant (gross floor area or number of seats3)

 

--

 

--

 

100 seats

 

--




Maximum use within zone4

 



 



 



 






  Retail

 

--

 

--

 



 






   Service retail

 

--

 

--

 

35,000

 

--




   General retail

 

--

 

--

 

20,000

 

--




  General/professional office

 

--

 

--

 

40,000

 

--




  Restaurant (gross floor area or number of seats)

 

--

 

--

 

500 seats

 

--




Off-street parking - commercial uses

 



 



 



 






  Outlot A

 

--

 

--

 

Minimum 72 total underground spaces or 15 under-ground spaces for every
10,000 sq. ft.

 

Minimum 275 surface spaces to be shared by all uses within The Legacy of
Apple Valley 3rd Addition



Notes to Table:


1   “Perimeter lot line” shall mean the property line around the
perimeter of the platted lot along with the lot lines around all common
ownership lots, excluding private streets.



2   Building height shall be measured from elevation of the first floor to
highest point of the roof.  Exposed entrances to underground garages shall
not be computed into building heights.



3   Gross floor area or number of seats within this zone, not on a per
building calculation.



4   Maximum use shall be subject to demonstration of sufficient parking
for all uses within this zone.



5   Freestanding restaurants shall be a minimum of one story high or at
least 12 feet.



6   Multi-tenant buildings within Zone 2 shall not exceed 55 feet in
height, except that architectural features such as towers may be a maximum of
65 feet in height, provided such architectural features do not comprise more
than 6% of any building elevation.











      (2)    Screening, see § 155.348.



      (3)   Landscaping, see § A30-6(C) below.



      (4)    Parking, see § A30-6(E) below.



      (5)   Lighting, s ee § 155.353 .



(Ord. 716, passed 6-27-02; Am. Ord.  728, passed 6-26-03; Am. Ord. 731,
passed 7-24-03; Am. Ord. 734, passed 9-25-03; Am. Ord. 740, passed 12-8-03 ;
Am. Ord. 822, passed 10-11-07 )



§ A30-6  SPECIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   In order to ensure quality building and site design within this mixed
use planned development, special standards are necessary. These include
regulations governing site design, streetscape design, building materials,
landscaping, screening and parking.  In addition to the standards and
requirements set forth herein, uses within this district shall be consistent
with the terms, conditions, and standards contained within the Apple Valley
Central Village Plan.  The Apple Valley Central Village Plan is hereby
adopted and incorporated herein in its entirety by reference as though
repeated verbatim.



   (A)   Residential site design.  The following design elements shall
be incorporated into Zones 1and 2 of the planned development to assure an
overall sense of harmony.



      (1)   Paths and sidewalks, a minimum of five feet in width,
shall be installed along all public and private streets and in other areas as
necessary to assure that pedestrians can move safely and conveniently on the
site between the site and the neighborhood, and between the site and adjacent
streets, except for those paths and sidewalks located adjacent to parking
areas which shall be a minimum of six and one-half feet to allow for the
overhang of automobiles into sidewalk spaces.



      (2)   Private residential streets shall be designed narrow
enough to discourage speeding, but wide enough  to allow for on-street
parking along one side. Private streets shall have a minimum paved driving
surface width of 24 feet.



      (3)   All garages shall be located either on the rear of a
building or underground to enhance the pedestrian-friendly environment.



      (4)   The main entrance to any building shall face either the
front of another residential building, a public or private street.



   (B)   Commercial site design. The following design elements shall be
required in Zone 3 and Zone 4 of the planned development to assure an overall
sense of harmony.



      (1)   Paths and sidewalks, a minimum of five feet in width
shall be installed along all public and private streets and in other areas as
necessary to assure that pedestrians can move safely and conveniently on each
lot, between the lots of this zone, and this zone and surrounding
neighborhood, and between the site and adjacent streets, except for those
paths and sidewalks located adjacent to parking areas which shall be a
minimum of six and one-half feet to allow for the overhang of automobiles
into sidewalk space.



      (2)   All buildings shall have both front and rear entrances
and shall have storefront appearances.



      (3)   All exterior vertical surfaces of any primary structure
shall be treated as a front and have the same or similar fascia.



      (4)   All waste material, debris, refuse or garbage shall be
kept in an enclosed building or enclosed within a waste container within a
screened enclosure wall that shall be architecturally compatible with the
principal building it serves.



      (5)   Specially emphasized pedestrian access as shown on an
approved site plan shall be constructed of pavers, stamped, colored concrete,
or other decorative paving material.  Such areas may include but not be
limited to pedestrian crosswalks from Zone 4 to Zone 3, and connections to
public bituminous pathways and sidewalks.  Other pedestrian walkways may be
constructed of standard concrete sidewalk.



   (C)  Building design and materials. The following design elements
shall be incorporated into all site plans for buildings:



      (1)   A building or group of buildings shall maintain a
compatible relationship with the sur-rounding context of an area in regard to:



         (a)   Rhythm of spaces between buildings.



         (b)   Rhythm of facade details and relationships, such
as relationship to horizontal or vertical lines, and facade openings.



         (c)   Building scale and mass and setbacks.



         (d)   Building forms and roof shapes.



         (e)   Variations in color and texture of building
materials.



      (2)   All apartment and commercial building elevations shall
be considered a front for the purpose of exterior building material use and
appearance.



      (3)   Appropriate transitions, such as height, facade details,
and landscape buffers shall be created.



      (4)   Building materials shall be those normally used in this
part of the country for permanent type construction, which are found in what
is generally accepted as good architectural design, and which are compatible
with other buildings in the planned development area. Non-combustible
materials such as brick, stone, stucco and the like shall be integrated into
building elevations.



      (5)   All masonry exterior facades of plain concrete, either
precast or cast in place, shall not be permitted, except as a small design
element.



      (6)   Metal skins materials, such as baked enamel, stainless
steel, aluminum sandwich panels and the like as primary field materials for
buildings shall not be permitted. This type of material may be used as a
minor design element.



      (7)   All mechanicals, meters, and the like shall be
appropriately screened from view.



   (D)   Landscape design.  The following design elements shall be
incorporated into all site plans in any area. The goal of these regulations
is to assure an overall harmonious theme will be created for all projects
within this planned development. A master landscape plan for all zones shall
be submitted to the city and the following design elements shall be
incorporated:



      (1)   All plant materials to be utilized shall be identified
on the plan and a landscape plant materials list provided.



      (2)   The minimum cost of landscaping materials shall be two
and one-half percent of the estimated cost of building construction based on
current Means Construction Data. Landscaping materials may include plant
materials, underground irrigation systems, public art, fountains, and
streetscape benches. Sod is not considered a landscaping material.



      (3)   Complement the architectural form of the building.



      (4)   In addition to landscaping materials, some or all of the
following materials shall be used to define and enhance walkways, internal
traffic circulation areas, special use areas, and building entries: brick
pavers, stamped concrete, paving stones, etc., or a combination thereof.



      (5)   Reduce the visibility of large paved areas to pedestrian
and vehicular traffic.



      (6)   Provide a landscape buffer for a parking lot or street
and building.



      (7)   Mitigate the impacts of on-site lighting.



      (8)   The landscaping for each individual lot within the
planned development shall be consistent with the master landscape plan.



      (9)   Signage and identity structures shall be incorporated in
the master landscape plan. Planting beds, conifers, and ornamental trees
shall be used to accent entries and signage.



      (10)   All commercial and residential areas that have grassed
areas shall have underground automatic irrigation systems to maintain the
landscaped area.



   (E)   Streetscape design. The following design elements shall be
incorporated into all site plans. The goal of these regulations is to assure
an overall harmonious theme will be created for all areas within this planned
development. These areas shall be considered focus points for the overall
development.



      (1)   Streetscape treatments shall include deciduous canopy
trees to soften parking and circulation areas from public view as needed.



      (2)   The constructed storm water detention pond and any storm
water infiltration areas shall be regarded as a water feature and open space
amenity.



      (3)   Where appropriate, streetscape treatments shall include
some or all of the following: statuary, common meeting areas, gardens,
benches, waste receptacles, decorative street lighting, and fountains.



   (F)   Parking.  The following design elements shall be followed in
all site plans:



      (1)    On-site parking shall be provided at a rate of 1.8
parking spaces per unit for standard apartment buildings; 2.3 parking spaces
per unit for attached single-family townhouses; and 1.0 parking spaces per
unit for senior-only apartment buildings.



      (2)   Commercial uses. On-site parking shall be provided at
the following rates:



         (a)   General retail uses.  One parking space per 150
square feet of floor space for the first 20,000 square feet of floor area;
thence one parking space per 200 square feet.



         (b)   Service retail uses.  One parking space per 400
square feet of floor area.



         (c)   General office uses.  One parking space per 150
square feet of floor area for the first 6,000 square feet of floor area;
thence one space per 200 square feet of floor area.



         (d)   Class I restaurants and other establishments with
on-sale liquor licenses, Class I restaurants without liquor licenses and
Class III restaurants.  One space per 2.5 customer seats; and one space per
five seats of outdoor eating area, excluding the first ten outdoor seats.



      (3)    Shared parking .  The following provisions shall apply
to Zones 3 and 4 only.  The Community Development Director may approve
shared use of parking facilities located on separate properties if:



         (a)   A convenient pedestrian connection between the
properties exists;



         (b)   The properties are within 1,000 feet of each other;



         (c)   Where the uses to be served by shared parking do
not overlap their hours of operation, the property owner or owners shall
provide parking stalls equal to the greater of the applicable individual
parking requirements.



         (d)   Where the uses to be served by shared parking have
overlapping hours of operation, the property owner or owners shall provide
parking stalls equal to the total of the individual parking requirements. 
If all of the following criteria are met, that total is reduced by up to 30%:



            1.   The parking areas share a property line;



            2.   The property owner or owners will produce a
shared parking model that demonstrate that parking needs will be met for all
tenants.



            3.   A vehicular connection between the lots
exists;



            4.   A convenient, visible pedestrian connection
exists between the lots; and



            5.   Prior to establishing shared use of parking,
the property owner or owners shall file a written agreement to be approved by
the Community Development Director.  The written agreement shall be recorded
on the title records of each affected property.



   (G)   Signage.  The following design elements shall be incorporated
into all site plans. The goal of these regulations is to assure an overall
harmonious theme will be created for all areas within this planned
development:



      (1)   Signage shall be in accordance with Chapter 154 of this
Code, except as follows:



         (a)   In Zones 1 and 2, monument signs designating
residential developments shall be located a minimum of five feet from a
property line and a minimum of ten feet from a residence or building.  There
shall be no building signage.



         (b)   In Zone 3 and Zone 4, there shall be no ground
signs for individual buildings except for free-standing directory signs, not
exceed 16 square feet and shall be no higher than six feet.  Ground signs
may be used only to identify the overall development.



         (c)   In Zones 3 and 4, building signage  shall be
subject to the following:



            1.   Building signs - ground level. All ground
level signs shall be located no higher than the first story of a multi-story
building, or for single-story building, the roof overhang or top of the
parapet walls. All signs shall be located in a sign band(s) or other
designated area(s) noted on the master sign plan on the front facade of the
building. The sign band shall be no greater than 24 inches high and no longer
than 80% of the length of the tenant frontage. The sign band shall be located
near the entrance to individual tenant spaces, and in no case no more than
ten feet from the main entrance to each business.



            2.   Building signs - upper level. Multi-story,
multi-tenant buildings, offices or services located above the ground floor
are allowed and shall be located in a sign band(s) or other designated
area(s) noted on the master sign plan on the front facade of the building.
The sign band shall be no greater than 24 inches high and no longer than 80%
of the length of the tenant frontage. The sign band shall be located near the
entrance to individual tenant spaces, and in no case no more than ten feet
from the main entrance to each business.



         (d)   Design standards.



            1.   Building signs.  In multiple-tenant
buildings, any commercial tenant space shall not have more than one sign per
building face; this shall include window signage. Signs installed on the
building face shall be located in a dedicated sign band or other area
designated on the master sign plan. In no case, shall a sign project above
the roof line or wall parapet. The sign shall be flat and parallel to the
surface of the building and projecting no more than one foot from it.



            2.   Projecting signs. All projecting signs shall
be perpendicular to the surface of the building and no more than one foot in
thickness. Projecting signs may project no more than four feet from the front
edge of the building and may not extend over a public right-of-way, a
designated parking space, or a loading area. Projecting signs may project
over pedestrian walkways but must be at least eight feet from grade.
Projecting signs may not rise above the level of the building's roofline.
Projecting signs shall be supported in a stationary position by a
cantilevered structure without the use of any guy wires, cables, angle irons
or turnbuckles.



            3.   Hanging signs. All hanging signs shall be at
least eight feet above the sidewalk or ground level, and shall be located
within the central one-third of the facade length so as not to obstruct
neighboring signs. Hanging signs may not extend over a public right-of-way, a
designated parking space, or a loading area. All hanging signs shall be
safely and securely attached to the roof support beams of the primary
structure by metal anchors, bolts, or expansion screws. No excess chain shall
be allowed. In no case shall any hanging sign be attached by wire, string,
rope, wood, or secured by nails.



            4.   Awning signs. Any portion of an awning or
canopy sign containing advertising copy shall be shall be treated as building
signage and shall be included in the overall area calculations for building
signage, except for if it is smaller than one foot in height and six feet in
length. All awning and canopy signs shall be at least eight feet above grade
and these signs may not rise above the level of the building's roofline.
Awning signs may not be backlit.



            5.   Marquee signs. No more than one marquee sign
per building, and the marquee sign shall be on the building front. No more
than two-thirds of the sign shall be composed of changeable copy.



            6.   Neon. Exposed neon tube illumination is
allowed on permanent non-residential signs in Zone 3. The neon tubing may be
used for sign copy and shall be calculated in the manner noted
in § 154.02 of this Code. Neon tubing used for a border or framing of the
sign copy shall not be included in the total square footage of the sign.



         (e)   Prohibited signs. In addition to those signs
prohibited by the Sign Code, the following signs shall be prohibited within
this zoning district:



            1.   Flashing signs, except when used to provide
time and temperature or other public service announcements in a permanent
sign.



            2.   Roof signs.



            3.   Signs placed on or painted on a motor vehicle
or trailer and parked with the primary purpose of providing signage.



            4.   Audible signs.



            5.   Searchlights or strobe lights.



            6.   Signs intended to be read from the public
right-of-way.



            7.   Pylon signs.



            8.   Box signs or cabinet signs, whether of a
wall, projecting or on canopies, except for logo signs as approved as part of
a master signage plan.



      (2)   A master signage plan for each zone shall be submitted
for approval by the city and shall contain identification of all sign
locations, dimensions, finishes, materials, range of colors, and method of
lighting.



(Ord. 716, passed 6-27-02; Am. Ord. 731, passed 7-24-03; Am. Ord. 734, passed
9-25-03; Am. Ord. 740, passed 12-8-03 ; Am. Ord. 822, passed 10-11-07 )



ARTICLE A31.  DESIGNATION NO. 739



§ A31-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish specific performance
standards in compliance with § A1-46 for property designated by Ordinance
No. 739 on the official zoning map. The purpose of this planned
development-zoning district is to provide for pedestrian oriented, integrated
mixed use by means of innovative, neo-traditional mixed use developments. In
addition to the performance standards contained within this article, the
design and location of all buildings, as well as lot, block, and street
layouts shall be consistent with the design guidelines as contained within
the "Apple Valley Central Village Plan ", as formally adopted, to the
satisfaction of the City Council.



(Ord. 739, passed 12-8-03)



§ A31-2  CONFLICT PROVISION.



   If any provision or requirement of this article is in conflict with any
term, condition, or standard contained in the "Apple Valley Central Village
Plan " or with any provision or requirement of any other chapter in this
Code, the provisions and requirements set forth in this article shall govern.



(Ord. 739, passed 12-8-03)



§ A31-3  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   LIVE/WORK UNIT.  A residential dwelling unit that also serves as the
resident's workplace.



   MIXED USE. The development of a tract of land, building, or structure
with a variety of complementary and integrated uses such as, but not limited
to residential, commercial, or civic, in a compact urban form.



   NEO-TRADITIONAL DEVELOPMENT. A pedestrian oriented compact development,
with variable lot width and sizes, a mix of dwelling and commercial uses,
onstreet parking, a main street and structures built no greater than the
front line on major streets.



   TOWN OFFICE. A multiple-unit commercial office building that is
designed and constructed to resemble a townhouse structure and is built to no
greater than ten feet  from the front property line of its lot.



(Ord. 739, passed 12-8-03)



§ A31-4  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1. Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



      (1)   Townhouses at a maximum of 25 units per acre.



      (2)   Multi-family residential apartment and condominiums at a
maximum density of 48 units per acre.



      (3)   Town offices at a maximum density of 25 units per acre.



      (4)   Family-care home or day-care home licensed by the State
of Minnesota or such home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the State.



      (5)   Public utility buildings and structures.



      (6)   Home occupation as defined in § 155.003 .



      (7)    Parks and playgrounds.



      (8)    Public libraries.



      (9)    Public recreation buildings, community centers and
swimming pools.



      (10)   Municipal government administrative buildings.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure shall be used, except
as a mixed use that consists of any two or more of the following uses or uses
deemed similar by the City Council:



      (1)   The following retail uses: Antique or gift shops;
appliance store (sales and/or repair); art and school supply store; bakery;
bank; savings and loan (drive-up teller service and outdoor ATM service are
subject to conditional use permit); barbershop; beauty salon; bicycle sales;
books; stationery and office supplies; candy; camera and photographic
supplies; carpet and rug sales; catering services; china and glassware sales;
clothing and costume sales and rental; coin operated amusement devices and
similar facilities; department store; drugstore; dry cleaning; dry goods;
electronic sales and/or service; florist; furniture store; garden supplies;
grocery; hardware store; hobby store; interior decorating; jewelry and watch
repair; laundromat; leather goods and luggage; locksmith; musical
instruments; nail salon; off-sale liquor store; on-sale liquor, wine or 3.2%
beer in conjunction with a Class I restaurant facility; paint and wallpaper
sales; photography studio; pipe and tobacco shop; recorded music sales; Class
I, II, or III restaurant (no drive-through facilities allowed), subject to
the installation of state of the art ventilation equipment in restaurants
where applicable; shoe sales or repair; sporting goods; tailoring; theater
(except open air drive-in); toy store; and video rental and sales.



      (2)   Professional offices for doctors, dentists, lawyers,
realtors, insurance agents, and similar uses. Individual tenant office spaces
shall not exceed 25% of the first floor gross area within any one building.



      (3)   Offices of a general nature where the operations do not
include over-the-counter retail sales or warehousing from the site.
Individual offices shall not exceed 25% of the first floor gross area within
any one building.



      (4)   Multi-family residential.



      (5)   Live/work units when part of a mixed use building.



      (6)   Community-based family care home, day care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or such home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state.



      (7)   Public utility buildings and structures.



      (8)   Home occupation as defined in § 155.003.



      (9)   Parks and playgrounds.



      (10)   Public libraries.



      (11)   Public recreation buildings, community centers, and
swimming pools.



      (12)   Municipal government administrative buildings.



      (13)   Parking ramps and structures in conjunction with a
commercial retail building, residential structure, or residential/commercial
mixed use structure.



      (14)   Hotels.



   (C)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



      (1)   Any permitted use specified for Zone 1 of Planned
Development Designation No. 739 herein.



      (2)   Assisted care facility on Lots 1 & 2, Block 10 of The
Legacy of Apple Valley North.  For purposes of this clause, an “assisted
care facility” shall mean a structure or several structures developed as a
single facility in which residential housing and limited medical care is
provided to persons who reside in a single unit dwelling that includes
complete, permanent independent living facilities for the resident,
including, but not limited to: living, sleeping, cooking, eating, and
sanitation provisions and receives some personalized supportive services or
care from the facility staff, but not full, 24-hour personal or medical care.



   (D)   Zone 4.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



      (1)   The following retail uses: antique or gift shops;
appliance store (sales and/or repair); art and school supply store; bakery;
bank and savings and loan; barbershop; beauty salon; bicycle sales; books;
stationery and office supplies; candy; camera and photographic supplies;
carpet and rug sales; catering services; china and glassware sales; clothing
and costume sales and rental; coin operated amusement devices and similar
facilities; department store; drugstore; dry cleaning; dry goods; electronic
sales and/or service; florist; furniture store; garden supplies; grocery;
hardware store; hobby store; interior decorating; jewelry and watch repair;
laundromat; leather goods and luggage; locksmith; musical instruments; nail
salon, on-sale liquor, wine or 3.2 beer in conjunction with a Class I
restaurant facility; paint and wallpaper sales; photography studio; pipe and
tobacco shop; recorded music sales; Class I, II, or III restaurant (no drive
through facilities allowed), subject to the installation of state of the art
ventilation equipment in restaurants where applicable; shoe sales or repair;
sporting goods; tailoring; theater (except open air drive-in); toy store;
video rental and sales.



      (2)   Professional offices for doctors, dentists, lawyers,
realtors, insurance agents, and similar uses. Individual tenant office spaces
shall not exceed 25% of the first floor gross area within any one building.



      (3)   Offices of a general nature where the operations do not
include over-the-counter retail sales or warehousing from the site. 
Individual offices shall not exceed 25% of the gross floor area within any
one building.



      (4)   Parking ramps and structures in conjunction with a
commercial building.



      (5)   A single-story building, provided the following
conditions are met:



         (a)   The height of the building as measured from grade
shall be a minimum of 25 feet and shall be designed to appear as a two or
more story building.  The minimum building height shall not include
decorative parapets, towers, or other architectural, ornamental or mechanical
treatments.



         (b)   Any elevation of the building that fronts a public
street, sidewalk, parking lot, or open space as defined herein shall have
window coverage of a minimum of 35% of the total square feet area of the
elevation.  The windows in the lower 50% area of the elevation, as measured
from grade to the roof line, shall be constructed of a material that allows
unobstructed view into the building.  Spandrel glass or other false window
material shall not be permitted for windows that are located in the lower 50%
area of the elevation, but may be installed in the upper 50% area of the
elevation.  The phrase “open space” shall mean any public right-of-way,
public property, and any outdoor private property which is open to the
general public, including, but not limited to: plaza areas, court yards,
outdoor dining areas, patios, commons, gardens or other feature areas for
display to and review by the public.



      (6)   Publicly owned parking lots and facilities.



(Ord. 739, passed 12-8-03; Am. Ord. 765, passed 1-27-05; Am. Ord. 851, passed
12-11-08; Am. Ord. 938, passed 1-24-13; Am. Ord. 993, passed 7-9-15; Am. Ord.
1037, passed 12-28-17)



§ A31-5  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zone 1. Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following use or uses deemed similar by the City Council except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family care home, day care home not
licensed under M.S. § 245.812 or a community-based residential care facility
or day care facility in a multiple dwelling unit when:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes.



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between such
intervals.



         (c)   Such conditional use permit shall be reviewed at
one-year intervals.



   (B)   Zone 2. Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following use or uses deemed: similar by the City Council except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Bank or savings and loan with drive- through teller and
ATM services, subject to the following:



         (a)   A maximum of one drive-through teller lane and ATM
service lane shall be allowed per lot.



         (b)   Drive-through lanes shall be located in the back
of the building and shall not have direct access from an arterial or
collector street.



         (c)   Drive lane circulation patterns, including ingress
and egress, shall be designed not have an adverse impact to overall
pedestrian and vehicular traffic of the area.



      (2)   Day care center, subject to the following:



         (a)   The drop off/pick up lane shall be located in the
back of the building and shall not have direct access from an arterial or
collector street.



         (b)   The drop off/pick up lane circulation pattern,
including ingress and egress, shall be designed not have an adverse impact to
overall pedestrian and vehicular traffic of the area.



         (c)   Recreational areas shall be located inside the
building or on the roof and shall be appropriately screened and fenced.



      (3)   Health or athletic facilities, subject to the following:



         (a)   The facility shall be contained within a
multi-story building with a total building footprint area not to exceed
40,000 square feet.



         (b)   The facility shall be located within this zone to
allow for shared parking with adjacent non-conflicting uses.



      (4)   Sidewalk display or sales of goods conducted by an
occupant of a retail building subject to review by the Planning Commission
and City Council and to the following standards:



         (a)   Sidewalk displays or sales shall be permitted only
directly in front of the occupant's business, provided that at least five
feet of clearance is maintained at the storefront entrance, the display is
located against the building wall and no greater than three feet deep, no
higher than the sill of the first floor windows and does not exceed 75% of
the length of the storefront.



         (b)   Sidewalk displays or sales shall be clean,
litter-free, and well maintained at all times and shall be compatible with
the colors and character of the storefront from which the business operates.



         (c)   Sidewalk displays or sales shall be permitted only
during business hours and shall be removed at the end of the business day.



         (d)   Items for sale shall be displayed on commercially
available or professionally constructed, custom-designed shelving or
platforms of waterproof, high quality, and durable materials. Cardboard boxes
and wood pallets shall not be used for sidewalk displays or sales.



         (e)   A minimum of five feet sidewalk shall remain clear
to allow for unencumbered pedestrian movement.



      (5)   Outdoor sidewalk cafes in conjunction with a restaurant,
subject to review by the Planning Commission and City Council and to the
following standards:



         (a)   A minimum of five feet of sidewalk along the curb
and leading to the entrance of the restaurant shall be maintained free of
tables, chairs, and other obstructions.



         (b)   Temporary barriers shall be used as a way of
defining the sidewalk cafe area.



         (c)   Extended awnings, canopies, or large umbrellas
with colors that complement the building colors may be permitted.



         (d)   Additional outdoor trash receptacles shall be
provided.



         (e)   Tables, chairs, planters, trash receptacles, and
other elements of street furniture shall be compatible with the architectural
character of the building where the restaurant is located and/or city street
furniture standards.



   (C)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council pursuant to the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Any conditional use specified for Zone 1 of Planned
Development Designation No. 739 herein.



   (D)   Zone 4.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council pursuant to the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Sidewalk display or sales of goods conducted by an
occupant of a retail building subject to the following standards:



         (a)   Sidewalk displays or sales shall be permitted only
directly in front of the occupant’s business, provided that at least five
feet of clearance is maintained at the storefront entrance, the display is
located against the building wall and no greater than three feet deep, no
higher than the sill of the first floor windows and does not exceed 75% of
the length of the storefront.



         (b)   Sidewalk displays or sales shall be clean,
litter-free, and well-maintained at all times and shall be compatible with
the colors and character of the storefront from which the business operates.



         (c)   Sidewalk displays or sales shall be permitted only
during business hours and shall be removed at the end of the business day.



         (d)   Items for sale shall be displayed on commercially
available or professionally constructed, custom-designed shelving or
platforms of waterproof, high quality, and durable materials.  Cardboard
boxes and wood pallets shall not be used for sidewalk displays or sales.



         (e)   A minimum of five feet sidewalk shall remain clear
to allow for unencumbered pedestrian movement.



      (2)   Outdoor sidewalk seating in conjunction with a
restaurant, subject to the following standards:



         (a)   A minimum of five feet of sidewalk along the curb
and leading to the entrance of the restaurant shall be maintained free of
tables, chairs, and other obstructions.



         (b)   Temporary barriers shall be used as a way of
defining the sidewalk cafe area.



         (c)   Extended awnings, canopies, or large umbrellas
with colors that complement the building colors may be permitted.



         (d)   Additional outdoor trash receptacles shall be
provided.



         (e)   Tables, chairs, planters, trash receptacles, and
other elements of street furniture shall be compatible with the architectural
character of the building where the restaurant is located and/or the city’s
street furniture standards.



(Ord. 739, passed 12-8-03; Am. Ord. 851, passed 12-11-08; Am. Ord. 938,
passed 1-24-13)



§ A31-6  [RESERVED].



§ A31-7  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for the purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary to
complete said construction.



      (2)   Temporary sales office.



      (3)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for the purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary to
complete said construction.



      (2)   Temporary sales office.



      (3)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all yard requirements are met.



      (4)   Special promotions, see § 155.358.



   (C)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, one or more of the following uses
or uses deemed similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Any permitted accessory use specified for Zone 1 of
Planned Development Designation No. 739 herein.



   (D)   Zone 4.  Within this zone, one or more of the following uses
or uses deemed similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Any permitted accessory use specified for Zone 2 of
Planned Development Designation No. 739 herein, except no temporary sales
office shall be permitted.



(Ord. 739, passed 12-8-03; Am. Ord. 851, passed 12-11-08; Am. Ord. 938,
passed 1-24-13)



§ A31-8  AREA STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   In addition to the standards and requirements set forth in
this section, development shall also be consistent with the terms, conditions
and standards contained in the "Apple Valley Central Village Plan" and the
"Apple Valley Central Village Plan" is hereby adopted in its entirety by
reference as though repeated verbatim.



   (B)   The maximum number of dwelling units, commercial, retail, and
institutional square footage for the development shall be the following:



      (1)   The number of dwelling units within the planned
development area shall not exceed 1,200 units.



      (2)   The square footage of commercial, retail, and
institutional uses within the planned development area shall not exceed
400,000 square feet.



   (C)   The following standards and requirements shall be met and no
improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be used or
improved shall meet the following area and dimensional requirements:




Table of Minimum Area Standards and Requirements




 




 
Zone 1
 
Zone 2
 
Zone 3
 
Zone 4


Building setbacks (feet)




Along Galaxie Avenue (west right-of-way line)
 
–
 

0

 

–

 
–


Along Galaxie Avenue (east right-of-way line)
 
 
 



 



 
 



   Minimum

 
 
 



 

7

 
10



   Maximum

 
 
 



 

15

 
25


Along 153rd Street West:
 
 
 



 



 
 



   West of Galaxie Avenue

 
–
 

0

 

–

 
–



   East of Galaxie Avenue

 
 
 



 



 
 



      Minimum

 
15
 

0

 

0

 
–



      Maximum

 
25
 

25

 

25

 
–


Along Founders Lane:
 
 
 



 



 
 



   West of Galaxie Avenue

 
15
 

0

 

–

 
–



   East of Galaxie Avenue

 
 
 



 



 
 



      Minimum

 
–
 

15

 

–

 
–



      Maximum

 
–
 

25

 

–

 
–


Foliage Avenue
 
 
 



 



 
 



      Minimum

 

15

 

10

 

10

 

–




      Maximum

 

25

 

25

 

25

 

–



Fontana Trail
 



 



 



 






      Minimum

 

15

 

15

 

–

 

–




      Maximum

 

25

 

25

 

–

 

–



Along all other streets:
 
 
 



 



 
 



      Minimum

 
15
 

10

 

10

 
15



      Maximum

 
25
 

25

 

25

 
25


Along private drives
 
5
 

5

 

5

 
5


Along private alleys
 
5
 

5

 

5

 
5


Building and impervious surface (percent)
 
70*
 
70*
 
70*
 
70*


Maximum building height


Maximum height (feet)
 
55
 

80

 

60

 
60


Maximum number of stories
 
4
 

6

 

4

 
4


Notes to table:

* No lot shall exceed 70% unless accommodated with an overall layout that
does not exceed 70% to conform to storm water management plan within the
subdistrict.




 



   (D)   Street design. The following street design elements shall be
incorporated into all site plans for the planned development:



      (1)   Galaxie Avenue shall be designed with a right-of way
width of 110 feet with recessed "bump out" parking and a landscaped median.



      (2)   Local streets shall have a minimum right-of-way width of
60 feet and a paved driving surface width of 32 feet.



      (3)   Private streets shall have a minimum paved driving
surface of 28 feet.



      (4)   On-street parking on both sides of all public streets
and a minimum of one side of all private streets shall be incorporated into
their design and construction.



      (5)   All private alleys shall have a minimum paved driving
surface of 16 feet.



      (6)   Recessed or "bump out" parking spaces shall be a minimum
of 8 feet deep and 50 feet long.



      (7)   Sidewalks, a minimum of five feet  wide, shall be
installed along all public and private streets in the residential areas.



      (8)   Sidewalks, a minimum of eight feet wide, shall be
installed along all public and private streets in commercial areas.



      (9)   If deemed appropriate the city may require that a
separate pedestrian circulation plan be submitted for review and approval.



   (E)   Building and site design. The following design elements shall
be incorporated into the site design and design for all buildings to assure
an overall sense of harmony:



      (1)   The main entrance of any building or residential
dwelling unit shall face a public or private street, or public square or
park, unless it can be demonstrated that access to the front entry is done in
a fashion which the city agrees meets the principles of the planned
development's intent and street presence.



      (2)   Commercial retail, office, and service uses shall be
contained in multi-story, mixed use structures with commercial, retail,
restaurant, and service uses on the ground floor and apartment dwellings or
offices on the upper levels.



      (3)   All mechanical systems, including telecommunications
receiving devices shall be screened from view from the public right-of-way
and from adjacent properties by using walls, fencing, roof top screening
devices or landscaping.



      (4)   All building elevations shall be considered as a front
for the purpose of exterior building material use and appearance.



      (5)   Commercial and multiple use buildings shall have a
vertical exposed finish exterior finish of 100% non-combustible,
non-degradable and main-tenance-free construction materials (such as face
brick or natural stone but excluding such construction materials as sheet or
corrugated aluminum, iron, or concrete block). All masonry exterior facades
of plain concrete, either precast or cast in place, shall not be permitted,
except as a small design element.



      (6)   Multiple residential buildings, comprehensive care
residential housing facilities and assisted care facilities, shall have a
vertical exposed finish consisting of at least 50% non-combustible,
non-degradable and maintenance- free construction materials (such as face
brick or natural stone, but excluding such construction materials as sheet or
corrugated aluminum, iron, or plain concrete block), with the balance being a
non-combustible material such as high quality fiber cement panels and siding,
architectural concrete masonry units and composite metal panels.



   (F)   Landscape design. The following design elements shall be
incorporated into all site plans in any area. The goal of these regulations
is to assure an overall harmonious theme will be created for all projects
within this planned development. A master landscape plan for all zones shall
be submitted to the city and the following design elements shall be
incorporated:



      (1)   All plant materials to be utilized shall be identified
on the plan and a landscape plant materials list provided.



      (2)   Define walkways, internal traffic circulation areas,
special use areas, and building entries through the use of special paving
materials such as brick pavers, stamped concrete, paving stones, etc., or a
combination thereof.



      (3)   Soften the visual impact of large paved areas.



      (4)   Soften the edge between a parking lot or street and
building.



      (5)   The landscaping for each individual lot within the
planned development shall be consistent with the master landscape plan.



      (6)   Signage and identity structures shall be incorporated in
the master landscape plan. Planting beds, conifers, and ornamental trees
shall be used to accent entries and signage.



   (G)   Parking design and maintenance. The following parking
requirements shall be incorporated into all site plans:



      (1)   Off-street parking space design, see § 155.372(B).



      (2)   Parking lot or structure layout, landscaping, buffering,
and screening shall be used to prevent direct views of parked vehicles from
streets and sidewalks, avoid spillover light, glare, and noise onto adjacent
properties. Parking lots and structures exposed to view from a street or
sidewalk shall be properly screened by a year round visually impervious
screen, hedge or wall, which may be incorporated as a architectural feature
of the parking structure.



      (3)   Landscaped islands shall be provided in parking lots
containing more than 25 parking spaces.



      (4)   Parking lot layout shall take into consideration
pedestrian circulation. Pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided, where
necessary and appropriate, which shall be distinguished through the use of
special paving material such as brick pavers, stamp concrete, paving stones
and the like, or a combination thereof.



      (5)   The exterior finish of any parking structure shall be
similar to the exterior finish of adjacent buildings.



      (6)   Bicycle parking, in the form of bicycle racks that
complement the building facade, shall be provided near commercial building
entries, but shall not be located in a manner that could have an adverse
impact on the ability to use pedestrian walkways in a safe and efficient
manner.



      (7)   The following minimum off-street parking spaces shall be
provided and maintained by ownership, easement, or lease, for and during the
life of the respective uses hereinafter set forth. Where not specifically
stated, the City Council shall determine the adequacy of parking when
approving a site plan. These requirements are subject to upward or downward
revisions based on the experiences of the city:



         (a)   Townhouse dwellings shall provide one garage space
for the first bedroom, plus one-half open space per each additional bedroom.



         (b)   Apartment dwellings shall provide one garage space
for the first bedroom, plus one space by either garage or outdoor surface
space for each additional bedroom.



         (c)   Guest parking shall be provided at the rate of
one-half open space per dwelling unit. The guest parking spaces shall be
designed to be accessible to all tenants and guests. On street parking spaces
may be counted towards guest parking.



         (d)   Commercial uses shall provide one off-street
parking space for each 400 square feet of floor area.



         (e)   Restaurants shall provide one off street parking
space for each 2.5 seats based on capacity. One off-street parking space per
five  outdoor seats, excluding the first ten outdoor seats shall be required
for any outdoor seating area.



         (f)   Parking for comprehensive care residential housing
facilities and assisted care facilities, see § 155.379.



         (g)   The minimum number of off-street parking spaces
for multiple-family residential uses may be reduced to one total spaces/unit
(including both garage and surface parking) and garage stalls may be reduced
to 18 feet in length when the development is restricted to occupancy by
persons 55 years of age or older.



      (8)   A shared parking plan may be approved by the city if:



         (a)   A convenient pedestrian connection between the
properties exists;



         (b)   The properties are within 1,000 feet of each other;



         (c)   Where the uses to be served by shared parking do
not overlap their hours of operation, the property owner or owners shall
provide parking stalls equal to the greater of the applicable individual
parking requirements.



      (9)   Parcels within Zone 3 and abutting Galaxie Avenue may
have up to 10% of the parking stalls in an underground parking garage be a
minimum of 8.5 feet wide.



      (10)   Parcels within Zone 3 and abutting Galaxie Avenue may
have 90% parking stalls within a surface parking lot a minimum of 19 feet in
length, provided a stall abutting a curb may be a minimum of 18.5 feet.



      (11)   Underground parking facilities on parcels in Zone 3
abutting Foliage Avenue may provide "compact" parking stalls with a dimension
of 8.5 feet by 18 feet not to exceed 15% of all parking stalls provided
therein. 



      (12)   Parking stalls in an underground garage or structured
parking facilities may be 9 feet by 18 feet, provided a minimum of 25% of all
parking stalls therein shall be a minimum of 9 feet by 20 feet.



(Ord. 739, passed 12-8-03; Am. Ord. 851, passed 12-11-08; Am. Ord. 938,
passed 1-24-13; Am. Ord. 940, passed 3-28-13; Am. Ord. 1032, passed
7-27-17;  Am. Ord. 1037, passed 12-28-17)



§ A31-9  SIGNAGE.



   The purpose of this section is to provide sign controls and is intended
to protect property values, to maintain and enhance the visibility of unique
architectural and natural features, and to encourage investment and
beautification in residential and commercial areas by reducing the visual
clutter of advertising signs which impair the effectiveness of neighborhood
business and institutional signs and otherwise detract from the appearance,
perception and safety of the Central Village Area.



   (A)   Interpretation. The provisions of these signage standards are
supplementary to the provisions of Chapter 154, entitled Sign Regulations,
hereafter referred to as the Sign Code. Provisions of this sign plan that are
more restrictive than the provisions of the Sign Code shall prevail and
supersede provisions in the Sign Code. All other provisions of the Sign Code
shall continue to apply to signs in the Central Village Area. All words and
terms shall be defined as in this sign plan and in the Sign Code.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of these signage standards, the
following definitions shall apply, in addition to those definitions found in
the Sign Code.



      AWNING. A shelter extending from a building not more than four
feet that is supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building and
composed of non-rigid fabric or materials except for support framework.



      AWNING SIGN.  A sign that is part of or attached to the face of
an awning, which shall be constructed in the same non-rigid fabric or
material as the awning.



      CANOPY. A structure extending from a building not more than four
feet constructed of rigid materials including, but not limited to metal,
wood, concrete, plastic, or glass, which is attached to and supported by a
building or by columns, poles, or braces extended to the ground.



      CANOPY SIGN.  A sign that is suspended from, attached to,
supported form, or forms part of a canopy.



      DIRECTORY SIGN.  A sign listing only the names and/or use, or
location of more than one business, activity, or professional office
conducted within a building, group of buildings, or commercial center.



      HANGING SIGN.  A sign that projects from a commercial building
or and overhangs an abutting pedestrian walkway.



      MARQUEE SIGN. A sign attached to a permanent roof-like structure
projecting more than four feet but no more than six feet  beyond a building
wall at an entrance to a building and includes a reader board with changeable
copy.



      PROJECTING SIGN.  Any sign, single- or double-faced, mounted on
brackets, poles, or beams projecting at right angles from the front or side
of any building and supported solely by brackets, poles, or beams.



      ROOF SIGN. Any sign erected or constructed wholly upon or over
the roof of any building and supported solely or partially on the roof
structure.



      SIGNABLE AREA. The area or areas on a commercial or mixed-use
building facade where signs may be placed without disrupting facade
composition. SIGNABLE AREA will often include panels at the top of show
windows, transoms over storefront doors and windows, sign boards on fascias,
and areas between the top of the storefront and the sills of second story
windows.



      WINDOW SIGN. Any permanent sign attached or painted to any
surface of a window denoting the name of a business and/or the goods or
services sold at the business. The area of such sign shall count in the
maximum allowable sign area.



   (C)   Signs allowed without a permit.  See also the Sign Code.



      (1)   For lease, sale, or rent signs. Single- and
multiple-tenant commercial buildings may have a dedicated wall sign listing
the property management company or agent and any pertinent information. Such
signage shall not exceed four square feet and may be in addition to any
permitted building signage. These signs shall be located near the primary
entrances of buildings and shall be located no higher than eight feet above
grade. There shall not be freestanding for lease, sale, or rent signs for a
standing commercial building.



      (2)   Temporary window signs. Single and multiple tenant
commercial buildings may post such signs inside provided they do not,
individually or combined, occupy more than 50% of the total area of said
window.



      (3)   Commemorative plaques. Any memorial, commemorative
plaques, or tablet that contains the primary name of a building, the date of
erection, and use of the building when the signs is built into the building
or mounted flat against the wall of the building.



      (4)   Menu boards.  Restaurant and cafe uses only may post
one  display case that features the actual menu of the restaurant used at
the dining table. The display case, which may be lighted, shall not exceed
two square feet and must be attached to the wall of the restaurant tenant
space approximately five feet from grade.



      (5)   Sandwich boards.  Restaurant and cafe uses only may
place one sandwich board outside of the entrance of the restaurant or cafe.
The sandwich board shall not exceed five square feet, shall be constructed of
wood, chalkboard, or finished metal, and shall be located within four feet of
the main entrance to the business provided it does not interfere with
pedestrian or vehicle traffic. The information displayed on the sandwich
board shall be limited to daily specials and hours of operation, and must be
removed at the end of the business day.



      (6)   Directory signs - wall-mounted. A wall-mounted directory
sign may be located next to the primary entrance of a multiple tenant,
multi-story building no higher than six feet above grade. The wall-mounted
sign shall list only the names of the businesses located within a particular
multiple-tenant building. The wall-mounted sign shall not exceed four square
feet and shall be approximately five feet from grade.



      (7)   Directory signs - free-standing. A free-standing
directory may display businesses within a multi-tenant development, and may
be placed at points nearest the pedestrian entrances to the businesses within
that development. A free-standing directory may not exceed 16 square feet and
shall be no higher than 6 feet.



   (D)   Signs allowed with a permit.



      (1)   Building signs - ground level.



         (a)   Location. All ground level signs shall be located
no higher than the first story of a multi-story building, or for single-story
building, the roof overhang or top of the parapet walls. All signs shall be
located in a sign band(s) or other designated area(s) noted on the master
sign plan on the front facade of the building. The sign band shall be no
greater than 24 inches high and no longer than 80% of the length of the
tenant frontage. The sign band shall be located near the entrance to
individual tenant spaces, and in no case shall be more than 10 feet from the
main entrance to each business.



         (b)   Types of signs.  Buildings signs on the ground
level may be: attached, projecting, marquee, hanging, awning, or canopy signs.



      (2)   Building signs - upper level.



         (a)   Location.  Multi-story, multi-tenant buildings,
offices or services located above the ground floor are allowed and shall be
located in a sign band(s) or other designated area(s) noted on the master
sign plan on the front facade of the building. The sign band shall be no
greater than 24 inches high and no longer than 80% of the length of the
tenant frontage. The sign band shall be located near the entrance to
individual tenant spaces, and in no case shall be more than 10 feet from the
main entrance to each business.



         (b)   Types of signs.  Building signs on an upper level
may be: attached, permanent window, or projecting.



      (3)   Additional building signage. Additional signs are
allowed on a side of a building that abuts business or industrially zoned
property or a public street, except where the side of the building faces an
adjacent public street which abuts residentially zoned property. Additional
signs shall not be installed on the same face of the building as the main
entrance sign. The wall of a building where additional signs are located
shall have sign band, wall materials, and/or exterior colors similar to the
main entrance wall and all trash, storage, and loading facilities along the
wall shall be screened from adjacent properties in the same materials and/or
exterior colors. Additional building signs shall be identical to the main
primary business sign, but shall not be considered as part of the total
square footage allowed for that property or business.



      (4)   Ground signs. Ground signs shall be used only for the
identification of the Central Village Area, and for residential developments.
Such signs shall be located only at the intersections or along the street
frontages of minor arterials and/or collectors and shall be identified on a
master sign plan for the Central Village Area plan.



   (E)   Design standards.



      (1)   Building signs. In multiple-tenant buildings, any
commercial tenant space shall not have more than one sign per building face;
this shall include window signage. Signs installed on the building face shall
be located in a dedicated sign band or other area designated on the master
sign plan. In no case shall a sign project above the roof line or wall
parapet. The sign shall be flat and parallel to the surface of the building
and projecting no more than one  foot from it.



      (2)   Projecting signs. All projecting signs shall be
perpendicular to the surface of the building and no more than one foot in
thickness. Projecting signs may project no more than four feet from the front
edge of the building and may not extend over a public right-of-way, a
designated parking space, or a loading area. Projecting signs may project
over pedestrian walkways but must be at least eight feet from grade.
Projecting signs may not rise above the level of the building's roofline.
Projecting signs shall be supported in a stationary position by a
cantilevered structure without the use of any guy wires, cables, angle irons,
or turnbuckles.



      (3)   Hanging signs.  All hanging signs shall be at least
eight feet above the sidewalk or ground level, and shall be located within
the central one-third of the facade length so as not to obstruct neighboring
signs. Hanging signs may not extend over a public right-of-way, a designated
parking space, or a loading area. All hanging signs shall be safely and
securely attached to the roof support beams of the primary structure by metal
anchors, bolts, or expansion screws. No excess chain shall be allowed. In no
case shall any hanging sign be attached by wire, string, rope, wood, or
secured by nails.



      (4)   Awning signs. Any portion of an awning or canopy sign
containing advertising copy shall be shall be treated as building signage and
shall be included in the overall area calculations for building signage,
except for if it is smaller than one foot in height and six feet in length.
All awning and canopy signs shall be at least eight feet above grade and
these signs may not rise above the level of the building's roofline. Awning
signs may not be backlit.



      (5)   Marquee signs.  No more than one  marquee sign per
building and the marquee sign shall be on the building front. No more than
two-thirds of the sign shall be composed of changeable copy.



      (6)   Neon.  Exposed neon tube illumination is allowed on
permanent, nonresidential, signs in the Central Village Area. The neon tubing
may be used for sign copy and shall be calculated in the manner noted in §
154.02 of the Sign Code. Neon tubing used for a border or framing of the sign
copy shall not be included in the total square footage of the sign.



   (F)   Prohibited Signs.  In addition to those signs prohibited by
the Sign Code, the following signs shall be prohibited within the Central
Village Area:



      (1)   Flashing signs, except when used to provide time and
temperature or other public service announcements in a permanent sign.



      (2)   Roof signs.



      (3)   Balloon signs.



      (4)   Signs placed on or painted on a motor vehicle or trailer
and parked with the primary purpose of providing signage.



      (5)   Audible signs.



      (6)   Searchlights or strobe lights.



      (7)   Signs intended to be read from the public right-of-way.



      (8)   Pylon signs.



      (9)   Box signs or cabinet signs, whether of a wall,
projecting or on canopies, except for logo signs as approved as part of a
master signage plan.



   (G)   Sign permits; administration. See also § 154.07 of the Sign
Code.



      (1)   Permits.  Whenever a permit for a sign in the Central
Village Area is required under the provisions of Chapter 154, a permit shall
not be issued unless the plans for the sign have been approved by the Zoning
Administrator in conformance with this sign plan. All permit applications for
signs in the Central Village Area shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator for review and approval. A fee to cover the costs of the review
shall be established by resolution of the City Council.



      (2)   Master sign plans. Applicants submitting plans for new
construction of buildings shall submit a master sign plan for the building,
regardless of use, which shall comply with the requirements of this article.
The master signage plan shall be drawn to scale showing the proposed
location, maximum height and width of signs, finishes, colors, materials, and
types of signage for the building. In the case of multiple tenant buildings,
all signs shall be compatible, though not necessarily similar. All signs
proposed by building owners or tenants shall adhere to the requirements
outlined in the signage plan for the building.



      (3)   All applications submitted for Zoning Administrator
approval shall be of sufficient detail to demonstrate that the proposed sign
complies with the provisions of this sign plan as well as the Sign Code. The
Zoning Administrator shall review the application within 30 days and notify
the applicant of any decision to approve or disapprove the application.
Written reasons, prepared by the Zoning Administrator, shall accompany any
application denied by the Zoning Administrator.



   (H)   Sign Maintenance.  It shall be unlawful for any owner of
record, lessor, lessee, manager, agent, or other person having lawful
possession or control over a building, structure, or parcel of land to fail
to maintain the property and all signage thereon in conformance with §
154.06 of the Sign Code.



   (I)   Sign standards.  The following signs may be erected or
maintained, as shown for each zoning district or land use, only after
obtaining a permit from the city and payment of permit fees, providing the
standards of § 154.03 are met.



 


Type of Sign

 

Number

 

Area (sq. ft.)

 

Standards






Building signs

 



 



 






  Ground level:

 



 



 






   Attached

 

1

 

40*

 






   Projecting

 

1

 

40*

 






   Marquee

 

1

 

80*

 






   Hanging

 

1

 

10

 






   Awning & canopy

 

1

 

10

 






  Upper level:

 



 



 






   Window

 

1

 

25

 






   Attached

 

1

 

40

 






Ground signs

 

1 per development

 

40

 

No higher than 8 feet. Must be set back at least 13 feet from the property
line.




Monument signs for residential developments

 

1

 

40

 

Must be at least 5 feet from property line and 10 feet from all buildings.




Notes to table:
* Sign area for retail and office uses.
  Building floor area: <5,000 sq. ft. of sign per 25 sq. ft. of occupant's
retail floor area
>5,000 sq. ft. = after the first 5,000 sq. ft. of sign per 100 sq. ft. of
occupant's retail floor area.
  Maximum allowed: 200 sq. ft. of sign.
  Minimum entitlement: 40 sq. ft. of sign.





 



ARTICLE A32.  DESIGNATION NO. 746



§ A32-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish specific performance
standards in compliance with § A1-46 for property designated by Ordinance
No. 746 on the official zoning map.  The purpose of this zone is to provide
for a mix of high density residential uses.



(Ord. 746, passed 2-26-04)



§ A32-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for the one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Townhouse dwellings, provided they are serviced by
public sanitary sewer and water systems and provided no single structure
contains in excess of 14 dwelling units.



      (2)   Condominium dwellings, provided they are serviced by
public sanitary sewer and water systems and provided no single structure
contains in excess of 24 dwelling units.



      (3)   Community-based family care home, day care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or such home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state.



      (4)   Public utility buildings and structures.



      (5)   Home occupation as defined in § 155.003



      (6)   Parks and playgrounds.



      (7)   Public libraries.



      (8) Private recreation buildings, facilities community centers
and swimming pools.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for the one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Public utility buildings and structures.



      (2)   Parks and playgrounds.



      (3)   Private recreation buildings, facilities community
centers and swimming pools.



   (C)   Zone 3.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council.



      (1)   Multiple-residential dwellings, provided they are served
by public sanitary sewer and water systems and provided no single structure
contains in excess of 20 dwelling units.



      (2)   Community based family care home, day care home licensed
under M.S. §245.812 or such home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state.



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures.



      (4)   Home occupation as defined in § 155.003.



      (5)   Parks and playgrounds.



      (6)   Municipal government administrative buildings.



(Ord. 746, passed 2-26-04; Am. Ord. 988, passed 5-14-15)



§ A32-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zone 1. Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for the one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council except through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family care home, day care home not
licensed under M.S. § 245.812 or a community-based residential care facility
or day care facility in a multiple dwelling unit when:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire building
and housing codes.



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between such
facilities. The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile rule
when strong community support exists, program effectiveness is closely tied
to particular cultural resources in the community, or an effective natural or
manmade barrier exists between facilities.



         (c)   Such conditional use permit shall be reviewed at
one-year intervals.



   (B)   Zone 2. Within this zone, there are no conditional uses
provided.



   (C)   Zone 3. Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following use or uses deemed similar by the City Council except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family care home, day care home not
licensed under M.S. §245.812 or a community-based residential care facility
or day care facility in a multiple dwelling unit when:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes.



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between such
facilities. The city council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile rule
when strong community support exists, program effectiveness is closely tied
to particular cultural resources in the community, or an effective natural or
manmade barrier exists between facilities.



         (c)   Such conditional use permit shall be reviewed at
one-year intervals.



(Ord. 746, passed 2-26-04; Am. Ord. 988, passed 5-14-15)



§ A32-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Zones 1 and 2. Within these zones, no structure or land shall
be used except for the one or more of the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for the purposes of
construction of the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary to
complete said construction.



      (2)   Temporary sales office.



      (3)   Public telephone booths and other essential public
service facilities provided all requirements are met.



(Ord. 746, passed 2-26-04)



§ A32-5  MINIMUM AREA STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be
met and no improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be
used or improved shall meet the following area and dimensional requirements:




Table of Minimum Area Requirements and Standards




 




 

Zone 1

 

Zone 2

 

Zone 3






Minimum lot dimensions



Lot area (square feet)
 



 



 






   Townhouse building

 

17,000

 

–

 

–




   Condominium building

 

17,500

 

–

 

–



Lot width (feet)
 



 



 






   Townhouse building

 

100

 

–

 

–




   Condominium building

 

100

 

–

 

–



Minimum square feet of land per unit
 

2805

 

–

 

3,000



Maximum units per acre
 

16*

 

–

 

28



Minimum building setbacks (feet)


  Along collector streets
 

30

 

–

 

30



  Along local streets
 

25

 

–

 

25



  Along private streets
 

30

 

30

 

30



  Between structures
 

30

 

–

 

–



  Along side lot line (ft.)
 

–

 

30

 

30



  Along rear lot line (ft.)
 

–

 

30

 

30



Maximum lot coverage (percent)


  Building
 

45

 

35

 





  Building and impervious surface
 

55

 

50

 

70



Maximum building height (feet)
 

45

 

50

 

35



Maximum number of stories
 

3

 

3

 

2



* Maximum number of 25 dwelling units per lot shall be allowed, subject to
the condition that the overall dwelling unit density for the planned
development district does not exceed the allowed maximum 16 units per acre.










   (B)   Site design. The following design elements shall be
incorporated into Zone 1 of the planned development:



      (1)   Private streets shall have a minimum paved driving
surface of 28 feet.



      (2)   Sidewalks, a minimum of six feet wide, shall be
installed along all public streets.



      (3)   Sidewalks, a minimum of five feet wide, shall be
installed along all private streets.



      (4)   Dwelling units and buildings without direct street
frontage shall have sidewalks, a minimum of five feet wide, installed in
front of the units that connect to sidewalks located directly adjacent to
public and private streets.



   (C)   Building design and materials. The following design elements
shall be incorporated into the design of buildings within the planned
development:



      (1)   All building elevations shall be considered a front for
the purpose of exterior building material use and appearance.



      (2)   The use of vinyl, steel, aluminum or similar materials
for the primary exposed finish shall not be allowed. Non-combustible,
non-degradable and maintenance-free materials (such as face brick or natural
stone); non-manufactured materials such as cedar or redwood; or manufactured,
non-combustible, high quality cementitous fiberboard, sometimes referred to
as "Hardi Plank" or 'Hardi Panel" shall be deemed an acceptable exterior
finish material.



   (D)   Maximum Impervious Surface. See § 155.35.



   (E)   Landscaping.  See § 155.348 .



   (F)   Parking. See §§ 155.370 through 155.379 .



   (G)   The ongoing use and occupancy of the premises is predicated on
the ongoing maintenance of the structures and all required site improvements
as approved.  No alteration, removal, or change to the preceding building
plans or required site improvements shall occur without the express
authorization of the City. Site improvements, which have deteriorated due to
age or wear, shall be repaired or replaced in a timely fashion.



(Ord. 746, passed 2-26-04; Am. Ord. 988, passed 5-14-15)



ARTICLE 33.  DESIGNATION NO. 856



§ A33-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish specific performance
standards in compliance with §§ 155.260 through 155.267 for property
designated by Ordinance No. 856 on the official zoning map.  The purpose of
this zone is to provide for an integrated mix of medium density residential
uses and institutional uses.



(Ord. 856, passed 3-26-09)



§ A33-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council.



      (1)   Townhouse style dwellings, provided they are serviced by
public sanitary sewer and water systems and provided no single structure
contains more than five dwelling units.



      (2)   Community based family care home, day care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or such home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state.



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures.



      (4)   Home occupation as defined in § 155.06.



      (5)   Parks and playgrounds.



      (6)   Public libraries.



      (7)   Public recreation buildings, community centers and
swimming pools.



      (8)   Recreational buildings, community centers and swimming
pools.



      (9)   Municipal government administrative buildings.



   (B)   Zone 2. Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council.



      (1)   One-family detached dwellings meeting the standards of
the Uniform Building Code, placed on permanent foundations and having no
horizontal axis less than 18 feet in length, provided they are serviced by
public sanitary sewer and water systems.



      (2)   Community based family care home, day care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or such home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state.



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures.



      (4)   Home occupation as defined in § 155.003.



      (5)   Parks and playgrounds.



      (6)   Public libraries.



      (7)   Public recreation buildings, community centers and
swimming pools.



      (8)   Recreational buildings, community centers and swimming
pools.



      (9)   Municipal government administrative buildings.



(Ord. 856, passed 3-26-09; Am. Ord. 951, passed 10-24-13)



§ A33-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following use or uses deemed similar by the City Council except
through the granting of a conditional use permit.



      (1)   Community-based family care home, day care home not
licensed under M.S. § 245.812 or a community-based residential care facility
or day care facility in a multiple dwelling unit when:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes;



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between such
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when strong community support exists, program effectiveness is closely
tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an effective
natural or manmade barrier exists between facilities; and



         (c)   Such conditional use permit shall be reviewed at
one-year intervals.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following use or uses deemed similar by the City Council except
through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family care home, day care home not
licensed under M.S. § 245.812 or a community-based residential care facility
or day care facility in a multiple dwelling unit when:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes.



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between such
facilities. The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile rule
when strong community support exists, program effectiveness is closely tied
to particular cultural resources in the community, or an effective natural or
manmade barrier exists between facilities.



         (c)   Such conditional use permit shall be reviewed at
one-year intervals.



(Ord. 856, passed 3-26-09; Am. Ord. 951, passed 10-24-13)



§ A33-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for the purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary to
complete the construction.



      (2)   Decorative landscape features.



      (3)   Private parking space and attached garage, one attached.



      (4)   Temporary sales office.



      (5)   Essential public service facilities provided all
requirements are met.



      (6)   Garage sales not to exceed three per calendar year.



      (7)   Private sports court, play apparatus and gazebo, and
picnic shelter for use by the occupants of the premises.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for the purposes of
construction on the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary to
complete said construction.



      (2)   Decorative landscape features.



      (3)   Private parking space and attached garage, one attached.



      (4)   Temporary sales office.



      (5)   Essential public service facilities provided all
requirements be met.



      (6)   Garage sales not to exceed three per calendar year.



      (7)   Private sports court, play apparatus and gazebo, and
picnic shelter for use by the occupants of the premises.



(Ord. 856, passed 3-26-09; Am. Ord. 951, passed 10-24-13)



§ A33-5  MINIMUM AREA STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be
met and no improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be
used or improved shall meet the following area and dimensional requirements.



      (1)   Table of Minimum Area Standards and Requirements.



 




Specification

 

Zone 1




Minimum square feet of land per unit:



   Single loaded building
 

4,500



Minimum units per acre


   Single loaded building
 

6



Minimum building setbacks (feet)


   Along principal or arterial streets
 

50



   Along collector streets
 

40



   Along all other streets
 

30



   Along any private street or drive
 





      Front
 

20



      Side
 

15



   Side lot line
 

30



   Rear lot line
 

30



   Between structures:
 

20



Maximum building coverage(percent)
 

30



Maximum building height (feet):
 

45



Maximum number of stories
 

3





 



 

Specification
 
Zone 2




Minimum lot dimensions:
 





Lot area (square feet)
 





   Interior lot
 

7,500



   Corner lot
 

8,000



Lot width (feet)
 





   Interior lot
 

55



   Corner lot
 

70



Minimum building setbacks (feet)
 





   Along principal or arterial streets
 

50



   Along Embry Path
 

20



   Along all other streets
 





   Dwelling Unit
 

15



   Garage
 

25



   Side lot line
 

5



Rear lot line
 

25



Side yard setback on a corner lot
 





   Street side
 

15



   Interior side
 

5



Maximum building coverage (percent)
 

30



Maximum building height (feet)
 

35



Maximum number of stories
 

2





 



      (2)   Screening, see § 155.348.



      (3)   Drainage, see § 155.350.



      (4)   Parking, see §§ 155.370 through 155.379.



      (5)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



   (B)   Building design and materials.  The following design elements
shall be incorporated into all site plans for buildings:



      (1)   All building elevations shall be considered a front for
the purpose of exterior building material use and appearance;



      (2)   Appropriate transitions, such as height, facade details,
use of a mix of exterior finish materials, and landscape buffers shall be
created;



      (3)   No masonry exterior facades of plain concrete, either
precast or cast in place, shall be permitted, except as a minimal design
element;



      (4)   All exterior elevations shall have a vertical exposed
exterior finish that shall consist of a combination of non-combustible
materials such as brick, stone, stucco, and the like.  The use of cedar,
redwood, and high quality cementitous fiberboard, sometimes referred to as
“Hardi Plank/Panel” may be used when incorporated with before-mentioned
non-combustible materials; and



      (5)   No vinyl, steel, aluminum or similar materials for the
exposed finish shall be allowed.



   (C)   Landscape design.  The following design elements shall be
incorporated into all site plans in any area. The goal of these regulations
is to assure an overall harmonious theme will be created for all projects
within this planned development.



      (1)   All areas of a site not occupied by buildings, parking
lots, sidewalks, driveways, patios or similar hard surface materials shall be
landscaped with a combination of trees, shrubs, flowers, sod, and ground
cover material.



      (2)   All plant materials to be utilized shall be identified
on the plan and a landscape plant materials list provided.



      (3)   A landscape plan prepared by a landscape architect
registered and licensed in the state shall be required and the following
design elements shall be incorporated:



         (a)   Provide screening of undesirable views;



         (b)   Compliment the architectural form of the building;



         (c)   Provide a pleasant street experience;



         (d)   Landscape to soften the visual impact of large
paved areas;



         (e)   Landscape to soften the edge between a parking lot
or street and building;



         (f)   Mitigate the impacts of lighting or other negative
influences; and



         (g)   Landscaping shall be integrated with other
functional and ornamental site design elements, where appropriate, such as
recreational facilities, paths and walkways, fountains, trellises, pergolas,
gazebos, patios, fences, walls, street furniture, art, sculpture, and the
like.



      (4)   In order to provide for adequate maintenance of
landscaped areas, an underground sprinkler system shall be provided as part
of each development project within the planned development.



      (5)   An undulated sodded landscaped berm or berms shall be
installed, where feasible, adjacent to any principal or minor arterial
streets at a maximum 3:1 slope.  The berms shall be subject to the traffic
visibility requirements of § 155.335.



   (D)   Signage.  The following design elements shall be incorporated
into all site plans. The goal of these regulations is to assure an overall
harmonious theme will be created for all areas within this planned
development.



      (1)   Signage shall be in accordance with Chapter 154 of the
City Code of Ordinances.



      (2)   A master signage plan for each phase of development
shall be submitted for approval by the city and shall contain identification
of all sign locations, dimensions, and sign construction materials.



   (E)   Building and site design and materials. The following design
elements shall be incorporated into all site plans for buildings in Zone 2:



      (1)   Local residential streets shall be designed narrow
enough to discourage speeding, but wide enough to allow for on-street parking
along one side of the street. Local streets shall have a minimum right-of-way
width of 54 feet and a roadway width of 30 feet as measured from the back of
the curb.



      (2)   On-street parking shall be allowed on only one side of
the public street.



      (3)   The maximum driveway width within the right of way shall
be 14 feet.



      (4)   Sidewalks shall be installed along both sides of all
public streets.



      (5)   Pathway/sidewalk connections shall be made to
sidewalks/pathways located along arterial and community collector streets.



      (6)   Pathway/sidewalk connections shall be made to
sidewalks/pathways located within the commercial area located south of Zone 2.



      (7)   All building elevations shall be considered a front and
have an equally attractive or same facade.



      (8)   The use of vinyl, steel, aluminum or similar materials
for the exposed finish of one-family detached dwelling units within Zone 2
shall be allowed.



      (9)   An undulated, sodded, landscaped berm or berms shall be
installed, where feasible, adjacent to any principal or minor arterial
streets at a maximum 3:1 slope. The berms shall be subject to the traffic
visibility requirements of § 155.335.



(Ord. 856, passed 3-26-09; Am. Ord. 951, passed 10-24-13)



ARTICLE 34.  DESIGNATION NO. 975



§ A34-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish specific performance
standards in compliance with §§ 155.260-155.267 for property designated by
Ordinance No. 975 on the official zoning map.  The purpose of this zone is
to provide for an integrated mix of medium density residential uses and
institutional uses.



(Ord. 975, passed 7-10-14)



§ A34-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for the one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   One-family detached dwellings meeting the standards of
the Uniform Building Code, placed on permanent foundations and having no
horizontal axis less than 18 feet in length.



      (2)   Public utility buildings and structures;



      (3)   Home occupation as defined in § 155.003;



      (4)   Parks and playgrounds;



      (5)   Public libraries;



      (6)   Public recreation buildings, community centers and
swimming pools;



      (7)   Private recreation buildings, facilities community
centers and swimming pools; and



      (8)   Municipal government administrative buildings.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for the one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council:



      (1)   Public storm water ponding areas.



(Ord. 975, passed 7-10-14)



§ A34-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zone 1. Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for the one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council except through the granting of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Community-based family care home, day care home not
licensed under M.S. § 245.812 or a community based residential care facility
or day care facility in a multiple dwelling unit when:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire building
and housing codes;



         (b)   Separation of one-quarter mile exists between such
facilities.  The City Council may grant exception to the one-quarter mile
rule when strong community support exists, program effectiveness is closely
tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an effective
natural or manmade barrier exists between facilities; and



         (c)   Such conditional use permit shall be reviewed at
one-year intervals.



   (B)   Zone 2.  There are not conditional uses provided.



(Ord. 975, passed 7-10-14)



§ A34-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Zone 1.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for the one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Buildings temporarily located for the purposes of
construction of the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary to
complete said construction;



      (2)    Temporary sales office;



      (3)   Essential public service facilities provided all
requirements are met; and



      (4)   Detached garages/accessory buildings that shall have the
same exterior finish as the primary structure.



   (B)   Zone 2.  Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for the one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by
the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Essential public service facilities.



(Ord. 975, passed 7-10-14)



§ A34-5  MINIMUM AREA STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be
met and no improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be
used or improved shall meet the following area and dimensional requirements.



      (1)   Table of minimum area standards and requirements



 


Specification

 

Zone 1






Minimum lot dimensions:




   Lot area (square feet)




   Interior lot

 

8,450




   Corner lot

 

10,400




   Lot width (feet)




   Interior lot

 

65




   Corner lot

 

80



Minimum building setbacks (feet)


   Along principal or arterial streets
 

50



   Along collector streets1
 

40



   Along all other streets
 






   Front

 

30




   Side lot line

 

5




      Rear lot line

 

25




   Side yard setback on a corner lot

 






   Street side

 

20




      Interior side

 

5



Maximum impervious surface coverage (percent)
 

35



Maximum building height (feet)
 

35



Maximum number of stories
 

2



NOTES TO TABLE

1 - Minimum rear yard setback for lots abutting the portion of 157th Street
West having a right-of-way width of 100 feet shall be 30 feet.

2 - A minimum front yard setback of 25 feet shall be allowed for lots that
contain a minimum of 52 feet of an existing underground pipeline easement.
 







 



      (2)   Building and site design, see § 155.346.



      (3)   Screening, see § 155.348.



      (4)   Landscaping, see § 155.349.



      (5)   Drainage, see § 155.350.



      (6)   Parking, see § 155.370 through 155.379.



      (7)   Signage shall be in accordance with Chapter 154 of the
City Code of Ordinances.



   (B)   Site design:  The following design elements shall be
incorporated into all site plans for buildings in Zone 1:



      (1)   Sidewalks shall be installed along both sides of all
public local streets;



      (2)    Pathways shall be installed along both sides of all
collector streets;



      (3)   A pathway connection shall be made within Outlot C, to
the sidewalk along Everglade Avenue and the westerly pathway within Quarry
Point Park;



      (4)   An undulated sodded landscaped berm or berms shall be
installed on lots, where feasible, adjacent to any principal or minor
arterial streets at a maximum 3:1 slope.  The berms shall be subject to the
traffic visibility requirements of § 155.335;



      (5)   A landscape plan prepared by a landscape architect
registered and licensed in the state shall be required for all landscaped
berms and the following design elements shall be incorporated:



         (a)   Provide screening of undesirable views.



         (b)    Provide a pleasant street experience.



         (c)   Landscape to soften the visual impact of large
paved areas.



      (6)   A landscape plan prepared by a landscape architect
registered and licensed in the state shall be required for all lots abutting
a collector street and the following design shall be elements incorporated:



         (a)   Provide screening of undesirable views.



         (b)   Provide a pleasant street experience.



(Ord. 975, passed 7-10-14; Am. Ord. 1042, passed 3-22-18)



ARTICLE A35. DESIGNATION NO. 1014



§ A35-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish specific performance
standards in compliance with §§ 155.260 through 155.271 for property
designated by Ordinance No. 1014 on the official zoning map. The purpose of
this zone is to provide for high density townhomes, apartments and
condominiums that exclusively service persons 55 years of age or older.



(Ord. 1014, passed 8-11-16)



§ A35-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1. Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



      (1)   Townhouse, condominium, and apartment, multiple
dwellings in which exclusively persons 55 years of age or older reside
provided the building is served by public sanitary sewer and water systems.
The maximum density shall not exceed 46 units/acre.



      (2)   Continuum of care retirement community, provided it is
served by public sanitary sewer and water systems and the following
conditions:



         (a)   If more than one structure is used for a continuum
of care retirement community, all structures shall be located on a single
parcel or lot under single ownership;



         (b)   No more than 15% of the total units provided shall
be for assisted living;



         (c)   No more than 15% of the total units provided shall
be for comprehensive, intensive or full care living; and



         (d)   The density of the total units shall not exceed 32
units per acre.



      (3)   Home occupation as defined in § 155.003.



      (4)   Public utility buildings and structures.



      (5)   Community based family care home, day care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or such home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state.



(Ord. 1014, passed 8-11-16)



§ A35-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zone 1. Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council except
through the granting of a conditional use permit.



      (1)   Community based family care home or day care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812; or a community based residential
care facility or day care facility only when located in a multiple dwelling,
when:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes.



         (b)   Separation of 1/4 mile exists between such
facilities.



      (2)    The City Council may grant exception to the 1/4 mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or manmade barrier exists between facilities.



(Ord. 1014, passed 8-11-16)



§ A35-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Zone 1. Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Parks, playgrounds, putting greens, shuffleboard courts,
picnic areas, community buildings, swimming pools, tennis courts, play
apparatus, and similar recreational or service areas, for use by occupants of
the premises.



      (2)   Buildings temporarily located for the purposes of
construction of the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary to
complete said construction.



      (3)   Public service facilities.



(Ord. 1014, passed 8-11-16)



§ A35-5  MINIMUM AREA STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be
met. No improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be so
used or improved shall meet the following area and dimensional requirements:



      (1)   Table of minimum area requirements and standards.



 


Specification

 

Zone 1






Dwelling unit density:




   Minimum units per acre:

 

12




   Maximum units per acre:

 

46



Minimum building setback: (feet)



   Along principal or minor arterial streets

 

20*




   Along community or neighborhood collector streets

 

15



   Along all other public streets
 

25




   Side setback

 

20




   Rear setback

 

20



Minimum parking setback: (feet)
 






   Along principal or arterial streets

 

15




   Along all other public streets

 

10




   Side or rear lot line

 

5




   Driveway setback from principal or arterial street intersections

 

100




   Driveway setback from all other street intersections

 

50



Maximum building height (feet)
 

55



NOTES TO TABLE

* -The setback on the northeast corner of the building may be reduced five
feet, but in no case may the building encroach into the drainage and utility
easement.
 







 



      (2)   Encroachments. The following shall not be considered as
encroachments on yard or setback requirements:



         (a)   Encroachments as listed in § 155.333(C)(1).



         (b)   The preceding setback encroachments shall not be
construed to allow encroachments into an easement of record.



      (3)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



      (4)   Screening, see § 155.348.



      (5)   Landscaping, see § 155.349. LANDSCAPE MATERIAL may
include live plant materials, underground irrigation systems, public art,
fountains, decorative paving, and other outdoor common area elements that
create an enhanced sense of place and fosters positive social interaction.



      (6)   Parking. The minimum number of parking stalls required
to be installed shall be based upon the following:



         (a)   Surface: 0.9 spaces/unit.



         (b)   Garage: 0.3 spaces/unit.



      (7)   Lighting, see § 155.353.



(Ord. 1014, passed 8-11-16; Am. Ord. 1024, passed 12-22-16)



ARTICLE A36. DESIGNATION NO. 1025



§ A36-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish specific performance
standards in compliance with §§ 155.260 through 155.271 for property
designated by Ordinance No. 1025 on the official zoning map. The purpose of
this zone is to provide for apartment and condominium dwellings with a
maximum density not to exceed 20 units per acre.



(Ord. 1025, passed 12-22-16)



§ A36-2  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Zone 1. Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
except for one or more of the following uses or uses deemed similar by the
City Council:



      (1)   Condominium and apartment multiple dwellings, provided
the building is served by public sanitary sewer and water systems. The
maximum density shall not exceed 20 units/acre.



      (2)   Home occupation as defined in § 155.003.



      (3)   Public utility buildings and structures.



      (4)   Community based family care home, day care home licensed
under M.S. § 245.812 or such home for the care of the mentally or physically
handicapped licensed by the state.



(Ord. 1025, passed 12-22-16)



§ A36-3  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Zone 1. Within this zone, no structure or land shall be used
for the following uses or uses deemed similar by the City Council except
through the granting of a conditional use permit.



      (1)   Community based family care home or day care home not
licensed by the state under M.S. § 245.812; or a community based residential
care facility or day care facility only when located in a multiple dwelling,
when:



         (a)   Facility meets all existing health, fire, building
and housing codes.



         (b)   Separation of 1/4 mile exists between such
facilities.



      (2)   The City Council may grant exception to the 1/4 mile
rule when either strong community support exists, program effectiveness is
closely tied to particular cultural resources in the community, or an
effective natural or manmade barrier exists between facilities.



(Ord. 1025, passed 12-22-16)



§ A36-4  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Zone 1. Within this zone, the following uses or uses deemed
similar by the City Council shall be permitted accessory uses:



      (1)   Parks, playgrounds, putting greens, shuffleboard courts,
picnic areas, community buildings, swimming pools, tennis courts, play
apparatus, and similar recreational or service areas, for use by occupants of
the premises.



      (2)   Buildings temporarily located for the purposes of
construction of the premises for a period not to exceed the time necessary to
complete said construction.



      (3)   Public service facilities.



(Ord. 1025, passed 12-22-16)



§ A36-5  MINIMUM AREA STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The following minimum area standards and requirements shall be
met. No improvements shall be placed on such lands unless the lands to be so
used or improved shall meet the following area and dimensional requirements:



      (1)   Minimum area standards.



 


Specification

 

Zone 1






Dwelling unit density:




   Minimum units per acre:

 

12




   Maximum units per acre:

 

20



Minimum building setback: (feet)



   Along principal or minor arterial



  streets

 

50




   Along community or neighborhood collector streets

 

40



   Along all other public streets
 

35




   Side/rear setback

 

20




   Abutting R district

 

40



Minimum parking setback: (feet)
 






   Along principal or arterial streets

 

30




   Along community or neighborhood collector streets

 

15




   Along all other public streets

 

15




   Side or rear lot line

 

5




   Abutting R district

 

10




Maximum building height:




   Maximum height (feet)

 

45




   Maximum number of stories

 

3



Minimum detached garage setback: (feet)



   Along any public street

 

35




   Side or rear lot line

 

10




   Abutting R district

 

10





 



      (2)   Encroachments. The following shall not be considered as
encroachments on yard or setback requirements:



         (a)   Encroachments as listed in § 155.333(C)(1).



         (b)   The preceding setback encroachments shall not be
construed to allow encroachments into an easement of record.



      (3)   Maximum impervious surface, see § 155.350.



      (4)   Screening, see § 155.348.



      (5)   Landscaping, see § 155.349. LANDSCAPE MATERIAL may
include live plant materials, underground irrigation systems, public art,
fountains, decorative paving, and other outdoor common area elements that
create an enhanced sense of place and fosters positive social interaction.



      (6)   Parking. The minimum number of parking stalls required
to be installed shall be based upon the following:



         (a)   Surface: 1.5 spaces/unit.



         (b)   Garage: 0.5 spaces/unit.



      (7)   Lighting, see § 155.353.



(Ord. 1025, passed 12-22-16)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2018 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




APPENDIX G:  PLANNING



Section



   17.1   Official map; purpose



   17.2   Building permits in mapped area



   17.3   Filing of map



§ 17.1  OFFICIAL MAP; PURPOSE.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of an official map is to identify land
needed for future public uses in order to permit both public and private
property owners to adjust their building plans equitably and conveniently
before investments are made which will make adjustments difficult to
accomplish.



   (B)   Adopted by reference.  The official map of the city, as
created by Ordinance No. 77, §§ 1 through 3, and adopted June 9, 1970,
together with the legal description and surveyor’s certificate, thereto
attached, are hereby incorporated into this code by reference and made a part
hereof, and the map is hereby declared to be the official map of the city,
pursuant to M.S. § 462.359.



(‘81 Code, § 17-5)  (Ord. 77, passed 6-9-70; Am. Ord. 432, passed 2-9-89;
Am. Ord. 911, passed 3-24-11)



§ 17.2  BUILDING PERMITS IN MAPPED AREA.



   (A)   All buildings on the lands described on the official map shall
be prohibited.  If a request for a building permit in the location is
denied, the City Council shall have the power, upon appeal filed with it by
the owner of the land, to grant a permit for building in the location in any
case in which the Council finds, upon the evidence and the arguments
presented to it:



      (1)   The entire property of the appellant, of which the area
identified for public purposes forms a part, cannot yield a reasonable return
to the owner unless a permit is granted; and



      (2)   Balancing the interest of the city in preserving the
integrity of the official map and of the comprehensive municipal plan and the
interest of the owner of the property in the use of the property and in the
benefits of ownership, the grant of a permit is required by considerations of
justice and equity.



   (B)   The City Council will conduct these appeals using the
procedure outlined in M.S. §§ 462.354, subd. 2, and 462.359, subd. 4.



(‘81 Code, § 17-6)  (Ord. 77, passed 6-9-70; Am. Ord. 432, passed 2-9-89)



§ 17.3  FILING OF MAP.



   The City Clerk is hereby directed to file the official map in the
office of the County Recorder.



(‘81 Code, § 17-7)  (Ord. 77, passed 6-9-70)



APPENDIX H: REQUIREMENTS FOR SHORELAND OVERLAY



   Recreational development waters setback and area requirements shall be
as follows.  The measurements shall be in feet unless otherwise specified.



 



 

Sewered

 

Unsewered





Lot area (square feet)


  Waterfront lots
 

20,000

 

40,000



  Other lots
 

15,000

 

40,000



Water frontage and lot width at building line
 

75

 

150



Building setback from ordinary high water mark
 

75

 

100



Building setback from roads and highways
 


 




  Federal, state or county
 

50

 

50



  Municipal or private
 

30

 

30



Parking setback from ordinary high water mark
 

50

 

50



Elevation of lowest floor above highest known water level
 

3

 

3



Building height limitation
 

35

 

35



Total lot area covered by impervious surface with bonus, subsection
 

30

 

30



Section 155.309 (percentage) 


  Waterfront lots
 

40

 

—



  Other lots
 

50

 

—



Sewage system setback from ordinary high water mark
 

—

 

75



Sewage system elevation above highest groundwater level or bedrock
 

—

 

4





 



(‘81 Code, § A1-49)  (Ord. 291, passed 4-21-83; Am. Ord. 419, passed
6-30-88)



CHAPTER 156:  FLOODPLAIN CONTROL



Section



   156.01   Purpose



   156.02   Definitions



   156.03   General provisions



   156.04   Compliance



   156.05   Permit requirements



   156.06   Permit application



   156.07   Duties of the Community Development Director



   156.08   Variance requirements in the floodplain



   156.09   As-built certification and record keeping



   156.10   Water supply systems



   156.11   Subsurface sewage treatment systems



   156.12   Floodplain (FP) District



   156.13   Annexations and extraterritorial jurisdiction



   156.14   Abrogation and greater restriction



   156.15   Warning and disclaimer of liability



   156.16   Notification to FEMA when changes increase or decrease the
100-year-flood elevation



   156.17   Amendments



   156.18   Nonconformities



   156.19   Recreational vehicles



 



   156.99   Penalty



§ 156.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The city wishes to maintain eligibility in the National Flood
Insurance Program and, in order to do so, must meet the requirements of 44
CFR Parts 59 to 78, as amended from time to time.



   (B)   The city wishes to minimize potential losses due to periodic
flooding, including loss of life, loss of property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental service, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the
tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and
general welfare.



   (C)   The Legislature of the State of Minnesota has, in M.S. Chapter
103F and M.S. Chapter 462, delegated the responsibility to local government
units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.



   (D)   The City Council, in order to determine which developments
would increase the flood hazard or be damaged by flooding, adopts the
following floodplain management regulations within the jurisdictional limits
of the city.



(Ord. 710, passed 3-14-02; Am. Ord. 927, passed 10-27-11)



§ 156.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BASEMENT. Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its
floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of
the depth of excavation below ground level.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any man-made change to real estate, including but not
limited to, construction or reconstruction of buildings, installing
manufactured homes or travel trailers, installing utilities, construction of
roads or bridges, erection of levees, walls or fences, drilling, mining,
filling, dredging, and storage of materials.



   FLOOD.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves,
or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.



   FLOOD FRINGE.  The portion of the floodplain outside the floodway,
also referred to as FLOODWAY FRINGE in the Flood Insurance Study for Dakota
County Minnesota and Incorporated Areas.  For the purposes of this chapter,
the FLOOD FRINGE area shall include those areas designated as Zone AE on the
city's FIRM panels adopted in this chapter that are at or below the
100-year-flood elevation (i.e., the base flood level), but above the ordinary
high water level as defined in M.S. § 103G.005, subd. 14.



   FLOODPLAIN.  Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
from any source (see FLOOD). FLOODPLAIN shall consist of the Zone AE areas
delineated on the city’s FIRM.



   FLOOD-PROOFING.  Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.



   FLOODWAY.  The bed of and portions of the floodplain for a wetland,
lake, or watercourse channel which are reasonably required to carry or store
the regional flood discharge. For the purposes of this chapter, the FLOODWAY
area shall include those areas designated as Zone AE on the city's FIRM
panels adopted in this chapter that are at or below the ordinary high water
level as defined in M.S. § 103G.005, subd. 14.



   LOWEST FLOOR.  The LOWEST FLOOR of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement).



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, built on a permanent chassis and designated for use with or without
a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION.  For the purposes of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or after
December 31, 1974, whichever is later; and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.  For floodplain management purposes, NEW
CONSTRUCTION means structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of these floodplain management regulations,
and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures as regulated
herein.



   PERSON.  Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, or any
other entity, including state and local governments and agencies



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE(for floodplain areas only).  A vehicle built on a
single chassis, 400 square feet or less in area, when measured at the largest
horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable
by a light duty truck, and  designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel,
or seasonal use.  For the purposes of this chapter, the term RECREATIONAL
VEHICLE shall be synonymous with the term TRAVEL TRAILER/TRAVEL VEHICLE.



   REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood that is representative of large floods known to
have occurred generally in Minnesota, and reasonably characteristic of what
can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the
100-year-recurrence interval.  REGIONAL FLOOD is synonymous with the term
BASE FLOOD used in a Flood Insurance Study.



   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.  An elevation no lower than one
foot above the elevation of the regional flood, plus any increases in flood
elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from
designation of a floodway.



   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected on the ground, or attached
in or to the ground, including but not limited to: buildings, sheds, gazebos
or pavilions, manufactured homes and recreational vehicles not meeting the
exemption criteria set forth elsewhere in this chapter.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure,
where the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  All repairs, reconstructions or improvements
of a structure within a two-year period, the cost of which equals or exceeds
50% of the market value of the structure either (a) before the improvement or
repair is started, or (b) if the structure has been damaged and is being
restored before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition,
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure, regardless of the actual work performed. The term does not,
however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to
comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions,
or (2) any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.



(Ord. 710, passed 3-14-02; Am. Ord. 927, passed 10-27-11)



§ 156.03  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Adoption of the National Flood Insurance Program
Regulations.  The National Flood Insurance Program regulations, as codified
in 44 CFR Parts 59 to 78, and any amendments thereto established and adopted
from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference as though set forth
verbatim herein.



   (B)   Adoption of Flood Insurance Study and Flood Insurance Rate
Maps.  The Flood Insurance Study, “Dakota County, Minnesota And
Incorporated Areas,” Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) panels therein for the
city numbered 27037C0090E, 27037C0201E, 27037C0203E, 27037C0204E, and
27037C0208E, and Flood Insurance Rate Map index sheet numbered 27037CIND1A,
all of these documents with an effective date of December 2, 2011, and
developed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, are hereby adopted by
reference as the official floodplain zoning district map and made a part of
this section.



   (C)   Lands to which floodplain regulations apply.  Regulations in
this section shall apply to all lands designated on the city's FIRM as
floodplain within the jurisdiction of the city.



   (D)   Map interpretation.  The boundaries of the Floodplain
District shall be determined by scaling distances on the official floodplain
district map. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the Floodplain District, the city shall make the necessary
interpretations, based on elevations of the regional (100-year) flood and the
ground elevations on the site that existed on the date of adoption of this
chapter.



   (E)   Relationship to other city zoning regulations.  The
Floodplain Zoning District shall be considered an overlay zoning district to
all existing land use regulations of the city. The permitted and conditional
uses set forth in this section shall be permitted only if the use is a
permitted or conditional use in the established, underlying zoning district
as set forth elsewhere in this chapter. The requirements of this section
shall apply in addition to other legally established regulations of the city
and, where they impose greater restrictions, the floodplain regulations
contained in this section shall apply.



(Ord. 927, passed 10-27-11)



§ 156.04  COMPLIANCE.



   No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall
be constructed, located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without
full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable
regulations which apply to uses in the jurisdiction of this chapter.



(Ord. 927, passed 10-27-11)



§ 156.05  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
improve, move, or demolish any building or structure without first obtaining
a separate permit for each building or structure from the Building Inspection
Division.



   (B)   No man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, fences, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, shall
be commenced until a separate permit has been obtained from the Building
Inspection Division for each change.



   (C)   No manufactured home shall be placed on improved or unimproved
real estate within the floodplain.



(Ord. 710, passed 3-14-02; Am. Ord. 927, passed 10-27-11)



§ 156.06  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   To obtain a permit, the applicant shall make application, pursuant to
building/construction regulations of this code, to the Building Inspection
Division.  No construction may commence until after such time that the
permit has been issued, subject to the National Flood Insurance Program
regulations.



(Ord. 710, passed 3-14-02; Am. Ord. 927, passed 10-27-11)



§ 156.07  DUTIES OF THE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.



   (A)   The Community Development Director, hereinafter referred to as
the responsible person, is appointed as the person responsible for receiving
applications and examiningthe plans and specifications for the proposed
construction, development, or subdivision to determine compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, and all requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations adopted herein.



   (B)   After reviewing the application, the responsible person may
require any additional measures which are necessary to meet the minimum
requirements of this chapter.



   (C)   The responsible person shall review the proposed construction,
development, or subdivision to assure that all necessary permits have been
received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334.



(Ord. 710, passed 3-14-02; Am. Ord. 927, passed 10-27-11)



§ 156.08  VARIANCE REQUIREMENTS IN THE FLOODPLAIN.



   (A)   Variance procedures and requirements.  Any variance to the
provisions of this chapter, as requested by an applicant, shall be considered
in accordance with the procedures and requirements for a variance as provided
in the zoning regulations of this city code.



   (B)   Notice of variance request to the Department of Natural
Resources.  The responsible person shall submit, by mail to the Commissioner
of Natural Resources, a copy of the application for the proposed variance,
sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will receive the application
at least ten days prior to the City Council's consideration of the request.



   (C)   Variance criteria of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.  The following additional variance criteria of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency must be satisfied:



      (1)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated
regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result;



      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon:



         (a)   Showing of good and sufficient cause;



         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and



         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances; and



      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.



   (D)   Regulatory flood protection elevation maintained.  No
variance shall permit a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory
flood protection elevation.



   (E)   Flood insurance notice.  The responsible person shall notify
the applicant for a variance that:



      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure
below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and



      (2)   Such construction below the 100-year or regional-flood
level increases risks to life and property.



   (F)   Record keeping.  The responsible person shall keep a record
of the notifications provided in accordance with division (E) with the record
of all variance actions.  A record of all variance actions, including
justifications for their issuance, shall be maintained by the city, and the
city will report such variances issued in its annual report submitted to the
Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program.



   (G)   Notice of decisions submitted to the Department of Natural
Resources.  A copy of all decisions granting variances shall be forwarded by
mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten days of each such
action.



(Ord. 927, passed 10-27-11)



§ 156.09  AS-BUILT CERTIFICATION AND RECORD KEEPING.



   The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a
Minnesota-licensed professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor that
the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.  The responsible person shall maintain
a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new
structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in the
floodplain.



(Ord. 927, passed 10-27-11)



§ 156.10  WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS.



   The responsible person shall require within floodplain areas, new and
replacement water supply systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the systems.



(Ord. 710, passed 3-14-02; Am. Ord. 927, passed 10-27-11)



§ 156.11  SUBSURFACE  SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEMS.



   The responsible person shall require within floodplain areas:



   (A)   New and replacement subsurface sewage treatment systems to be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; and



   (B)   On-site sewage treatment systems to be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.



(Ord. 710, passed 3-14-02; Am. Ord. 927, passed 10-27-11)



§ 156.12  FLOODPLAIN (FP) DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses.  The following uses shall be permitted uses
within the Floodplain District as delineated on the city's FIRM, provided
they are not prohibited by any other code provision:



      (1)   Agricultural uses not involving a structure, such as:
general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture,
viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.



      (2)   Any use of land which does not involve a structure, an
addition to the outside dimensions to an existing structure, or an
obstruction to flood flows such as fill, excavation, or storage of materials
or equipment.



      (3)   Loading areas and parking areas.



      (4)   Private and public recreational uses not involving a
structure, such as: tennis courts, picnic grounds, boat-launching ramps,
swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish
hatcheries, hunting and fishing areas, hiking and horseback-riding trails.



      (5)   Residential uses not involving a structure, such as:
lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas.



   (B)   Conditional uses.  The following uses shall only be permitted
by conditional use permit in the Floodplain (FP) District as delineated on
the city's FIRM, provided they are not prohibited by any other code
provisions:



      (1)   Clean earth fill to elevate the lowest floor of newly
constructed buildings, and all alterations and additions to these buildings,
in the flood fringe area above the regulatory flood protection elevation.



      (2)   Clean earth fill to elevate the lowest floor of existing
buildings, and all alterations and additions to these building, in the flood
fringe above the regulatory flood protection elevation.



      (3)   Gravel mining and other earth-material-extraction
operations.



      (4)   Storage of equipment and materials.



      (5)   Roads, bridges and associated fill, subject to meeting
minimum state standards set by the DNR and MNDOT.



   (C)   Prohibited uses. The following uses shall be prohibited in the
Floodplain (FP) District:



      (1)   The placement of new or used building structures in the
floodway area, including residential structures.  New residential
subdivisions are also prohibited in the Floodplain (FP) District.



      (2)   Travel trailer or travel vehicle parks or campgrounds
shall not be permitted in the Floodplain (FP) District.



      (3)   Manufactured homes placed on individual lots or parcels
of record and new manufactured home parks shall not be permitted in the
Floodplain (FP) District.



   (D)   Standards for floodplain uses.  The following standards shall
be met for any use in the Floodplain (FP) District:



      (1)   Storage of material and equipment.



         (a)   The storage or processing of materials that are,
in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, toxic or potentially injurious to
human, animal, or plant life is prohibited.



         (b)   The storage of other materials or equipment may be
allowed if readily removable from the area within the time available after a
flood warning.



      (2)   Obstructions.  No uses shall be permitted or issued a
conditional use permit that will adversely affect the capacity of the
channels or floodway of any main stream, or any of its tributaries, or of any
drainage ditch or any other drainage facility or system, unless it is a flood
control or conservation project approved by the DNR.



      (3)   Parking lots and public access.  Accessory land uses,
such as railroad yards, public access and parking lots, may be at elevations
lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation.  However, a
conditional use permit for such facilities, to be used by the employees or
the general public, shall not be granted in the absence of a flood warning
system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area would be
inundated to a depth greater than two feet, or would be subject to flood
velocity greater than four feet per second upon occurrence of the regional
flood.



      (4)   On-site individual sewage treatment and private water
supply systems.  Where public utilities are not provided, and in accordance
with all state and federal regulations for floodplain areas: (a) on-site
water supply systems must be designed to prevent infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems; and (b) new replacement on-site individual sewage treatment
systems must contain check valves or other devices designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from
the systems into floodwaters, and they shall not be subject to impairment or
contamination during times of flooding. Any sewage treatment system designed
in accordance with the state's current statewide standards for on-site sewage
treatment systems (Rule 7080) shall be determined to be in compliance with
this section.



      (5)   Elevation of structures on fill to the regulatory flood
protection elevation.  All structures, including accessory structures, must
be elevated on fill so that the lowest floor, including basement floor, is at
or above the regulatory flood protection elevation.  The finished fill
elevation for structures shall be no lower than one foot below the regulatory
flood protection elevation, and the fill shall extend at such elevation at
least 15 feet beyond the outside limits of the structure erected thereon



      (6)   Utilities, railroads, roads and bridges.  All utilities
and transportation facilities, including railroad tracks, roads and bridges,
shall be constructed in accordance with state floodplain management standards
contained in Minnesota Rules.



      (7)   Protection from erosion.  Fill and all other similar
materials deposited or stored in the floodplain shall be protected from
erosion by vegetative cover, mulching, riprap or other acceptable method.



(Ord. 927, passed 10-27-11)



§ 156.13  ANNEXATIONS AND EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION.



   The city shall not approve any development located in a floodplain
outside the corporate limits unless such development or plat is in the
accordance with the following:



   (A)   A floodplain ordinance legally adopted by the city that meets
the minimum federal (44 CFR 60.3), state (Minnesota Regulation Parts
6120.5000 through 6120.6200), and local requirements for development within a
floodplain.



   (B)   The floodplain of those parts of unincorporated Dakota County
that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, or that may be
annexed into the city, are generally identified as such on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) in existence on the date of the adoption of this
section, and as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).



(Ord. 710, passed 3-14-02; Am. Ord. 927, passed 10-27-11)



§ 156.14  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTION.



   (A)   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair
any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions.



   (B)   Where this chapter and other ordinances, easements, covenants,
or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.



(Ord. 710, passed 3-14-02; Am. Ord. 927, passed 10-27-11)



§ 156.15  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   This chapter does not imply that areas outside the floodplain or land
uses permitted within the floodplain will be free from flooding or flood
damages.  This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city,
or any officer or employee thereof, for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter, or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.



(Ord. 927, passed 10-27-11)



§ 156.16  NOTIFICATION TO FEMA WHEN CHANGES INCREASE OR DECREASE THE
100-YEAR FLOOD ELEVATION.



   As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date
such supporting information becomes available, the responsible person shall
notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of changes to the 100-year flood
elevation by submitting a copy of the supporting technical or scientific data
thereof.



(Ord. 927, passed 10-27-11)



§ 156.17  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Removal of areas from the floodplain. The floodplain
designation on the official zoning map shall not be removed from floodplain
areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in error, or that the
area has been filled to or above the elevation of the regulatory flood
protection elevation and is contiguous to lands outside the floodplain. 
Special exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the Commissioner of
Natural Resources if the Commissioner determines that, through other
measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended use.



   (B)   Amendments require approval in advance by the Commissioner of
the Department of Natural Resources and FEMA.  All amendments to this
chapter, including amendments to the official zoning map, must be submitted
to and approved by the Commissioner of Natural Resources prior to adoption. 
Changes in the official zoning map must meet the FEMA’s technical
conditions and criteria, and must receive prior FEMA approval before adoption.



   (C)   Notice of hearing provided to the Commissioner of the
Department of Natural Resources.  The Commissioner of Natural Resources must
be given ten days’ written notice of all public meetings to consider an
amendment to this chapter.  The notice shall include a draft of the
amendment or technical study under consideration.



(Ord. 927, passed 10-27-11)



§ 156.18  NONCONFORMITIES.



   (A)   No increase in degree of nonconformity.  No such use shall be
expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way that increases its
nonconformity.



   (B)   Structural alterations or additions.  Any structural
alteration or addition to a nonconforming structure or nonconforming use that
would result in increasing the flood damage potential of that structure or
use shall be elevated on fill to the regulatory flood protection elevation in
accordance with this chapter.



   (C)   Substantially damaged structures.  If any nonconforming use
or structure is substantially damaged, as defined in this chapter, it shall
not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter.  The applicable provisions for establishing new uses or new
structures will apply, depending upon whether the use or structure is in the
floodway or flood fringe area.



   (D)   Substantial improvements.  If a substantial improvement
occurs, as defined in this chapter, from any combination of a building
addition to the outside dimensions of the existing building or a
rehabilitation, reconstruction, alteration, or other improvement to the
inside dimensions of an existing nonconforming building, then the building
addition and the existing nonconforming building must meet the requirements
of this chapter for new structures, depending upon whether the structure is
in the floodway or flood fringe area.  If a substantial improvement occurs
only from a building addition, then the building addition must meet the
elevation on fill requirements for new structures, and the existing structure
must also meet the elevation on fill requirements for new structures if any
alteration is made to the common wall in excess of installing a standard
doorway.



(Ord. 927, passed 10-27-11)



§ 156.19  RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.



   (A)   Elevation requirement.  Recreational vehicles that do not
meet the exemption criteria specified below shall be deemed as a new
structure and shall be elevated on fill to the regulatory flood protection
elevation.



   (B)   Certain recreational vehicles exempt.  



      (1)   A recreational vehicle is exempt from the provisions of
this chapter if it meets the following criteria:



         (a)   Has a current license required for highway use.



         (b)   Is HIGHWAY READY, meaning it is on wheels or an
internal jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick,
disconnect-type utilities commonly used in campgrounds and recreational
vehicle parks, and has no permanent, structural-type additions attached to it.



         (c)   The recreational vehicle and associated use must
be permissible in any preexisting, underlying zoning use district.



      (2)   There shall be no additions or attachments to the
recreational vehicle, such as rooms, decks, patios, gazebos, or other similar
items, and there shall be no development on the site that would hinder the
removal of the recreational vehicle to a flood-free location should flooding
occur.



(Ord. 927, passed 10-27-11)



§ 156.99  PENALTY.



   Violations of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor,
punishable as provided in § 10.99 and/or subject to the revocation of all
pertinent permits. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during which a violation occurs or continues.



(Ord. 710, passed 3-14-02; Am. Ord. 927, passed 10-27-11)



CHAPTER 157:  INTERIM USE



Section



   157.01   Interim use study: industrial property located in the City
of Apple Valley



§ 157.01  INTERIM USE STUDY: INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY LOCATED IN THE CITY OF
APPLE VALLEY.



   (A)   Pursuant to M.S. § 462.355, subd. 4, the City Council has
directed a study to be conducted for the purpose of reviewing and/or
evaluating the amount, desirability and location of industrial use activity
within the city (the “Study”).  The Study may include recommendations to
amend the existing Comprehensive Guide Plan and zoning ordinances.



   (B)   The Study affects all land located within the City of Apple
Valley which is:



      (1)   Designated as mix-mixed use, on the 2020 Land Use Map,
as adopted as part of the city’s Comprehensive Guide Plan; and



      (2)   Zoned Limited Industrial (I-1), General Industrial (I-2)
or Sand and Gravel (S and G) under the city’s zoning ordinance (the
“Property”).



   (C)   The City Council adopted Ordinance No. 791 on May 25, 2006,
establishing the Study and the terms thereof applicable to the Property for
the purpose of protecting the planning process and the health, safety, and
welfare of the residents.



   (D)   Ordinance No. 791 set a termination date of November 30, 2006,
which was extended by Ordinance No. 799 to January 31, 2007.



   (E)   The Study is not complete and it is necessary and in the best
interest of the city to extend the termination date to May 31, 2007.  The
Property shall be subject to the following pending the termination date of
May 31, 2007:



      (1)   No building permit for the construction, reconstruction
or alteration of any structure shall be issued for the Property, except for
permits for the necessary repair of existing buildings, as determined by the
City Council.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, a building permit may be
issued for construction of an addition, not to exceed 625 square feet in
area, to the existing building located on real property legally described as
Lot 1, Block 1, Magellan Addition, according to the recorded plat thereof,
Dakota County, Minnesota.



      (2)   No proposal for rezoning or amending the comprehensive
plan shall be recommended for approval or approved by the City Council.



      (3)   No portion of the Property shall be replatted or
subdivided, except for consolidation of parcels of land into single ownership.



   (4)   No conditional use permits (CUPs) or variances shall be
recommended for approval or approved by the Planning Commission or the City
Council, except that the City Council may renew existing CUPs or approve
amendments, modifications or revisions thereto.




(Ord. 791, passed 5-25-06; Am. Ord. 799, passed 11-21-06; Am. Ord. 802,
passed 12-27-06; Am. Ord. 803, passed 1-11-07




PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Minnesota Statutes





References to 1981 Code





References to Resolutions





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES



 

M.S. Cite
 
Code Section




6.50
 
111.05


9.034
 
10.99


12.25
 
33.01


12.31
 
33.07


Ch. 13
 
119.40


15.0418—15.0426
 
117.15


18G.13
 
152.45


35.67 et seq.
 
91.04


35.69
 
91.18


35.71
 
91.18


Ch. 80A
 
117.02


Ch. 84
 
72.01, 72.04


84.92, subd. 8
 
95.16


86B.005, subd. 9
 
95.16


97B.045
 
130.01


97B.051
 
130.01


97B.091
 
130.01


97B.205
 
130.01


97.81
 
130.24


103F
 
156.01


Ch. 103G
 
152.02


103G.005, subd. 14
 
156.02


105.37, subd. 6
 
155.003


115.55
 
51.56, 51.57


115.56
 
51.56, 51.58


144.391
 
115.01


Ch. 147
 
123.03


Ch. 148
 
123.03


Ch. 152
 
111.30, 130.01, 130.06


161.46
 
119.04, 119.48


161.441
 
90.01—90.08, 90.99


Ch. 168
 
70.01, 72.01, 96.06


168.002
 
71.17


168.12(2b)
 
93.02


Ch. 169A
 
70.01


Ch. 168B
 
35.05, 90.01—90.08, 90.99


168B.04
 
90.01


168B.011
 
90.01


Ch. 169
 
70.01, 72.01


169.01
 
71.03, 90.01, 155.003


169.041
 
90.01


169.80—169.89
 
70.04


Ch. 171
 
70.01, 72.01


Ch. 201
 
31.01


201.061, subd. 2
 
31.01


216D.04
 
119.09, 119.53


237.01 et seq.
 
119.40


237.163, subd. 3a
 
97.05


237.163, subd. 3c
 
97.05


238.01 et seq.
 
119.22, 119.23


238.02, subd. 3
 
119.22


238.08
 
119.40


238.081
 
119.40


238.083
 
119.40


238.084
 
119.27, 119.40


238.084, subd. 1(c)
 
119.40


238.084, subd. 1(s)
 
119.40


238.084, subd. 1(w)
 
119.40


239.08
 
117.11


243.166
 
130.08


243.167
 
130.08


245.812
 
155.051; 155.052; 155.076; 155.078; Ch. 155, Appendix F: §§ A3-2, A3-3,
A4-2, A4-3, A7-2, A7-3, A8-2, A8-3, A11-2, A11-3, A12-2, A12-3, A13-2, A13-3,
A14-2, A14-3, A15-2, A15-3, A17-2, A17-3, A18-2, A18-3, A21-2, A21-3, A22-2,
A22-3, A23-2, A23-3, A25-2, A25-3, A26-2, A26-3, A28-2, A28-3, A29-2, A29-3,
A30-2, A30-3, A31-4, A31-5, A32-2, A32-3, A33-2, A33-3, A34-3, A35-2, A35-3,
A36-2, A36-3


253B
 
130.08


260.195
 
130.85


Ch. 278
 
111.29, 117.10, 117.15


299F.011
 
93.20, 93.21


299F.452
 
130.05


Ch. 300
 
97.02


300.06
 
97.21


303.06
 
110.17, 123.04


309.52
 
114.03, 114.07


309.515
 
114.03, 114.07


325F.731—325F.744
 
117.03


325F.733
 
117.02


325F.734—325F.742
 
117.02


326B.148
 
150.04


327.10
 
151.27


327.15
 
151.04


327.16
 
151.04


327.16, subd. 4
 
151.20


327.20, subd. 1(1)
 
151.27


327.27, subd. 2
 
151.25


327.28
 
151.03


327.31—327.35
 
155.078


327.32, subd. 6
 
151.20


327C.07, subd. 3a
 
151.31


327C.095
 
150.50


Ch. 329
 
114.03


333.01
 
110.17, 123.04


333.02
 
123.04


340.38
 
111.99


Ch. 340A
 
111.03, 111.20, 111.21, 111.29, 111.39—111.42, 111.52


340A.101, subd. 7
 
111.23


340A.101, subd. 25
 
111.22


340A.301, subd. 1
 
111.22


340A.301, Subd. 6(a)
 
111.42


340A.301, subd. 6,(c), (I) or (j)
 
111.40, 111.41


340A.301, subd. 6(d)
 
111.40


340A.301, subd. 8
 
111.22


340A.404, subd. 1
 
111.22, 111.23


340A.408, subd. 5
 
111.26


340A.414
 
111.50


340A.503, subd. 6
 
130.83


340A.510
 
111.22


340A.601—340A.604
 
111.01, 111.03


340A.801
 
111.28


Ch. 345 
 
35.01


346.20 et seq.
 
91.01—91.05, 91.15—91.21


346.26
 
91.21


346.35—346.44
 
91.05


347.04
 
91.19


347.14
 
91.18


347.23
 
91.15


347.32
 
91.05


347.34
 
91.05


347.50 et seq.
 
91.20


347.50—347.565
 
91.20


349.11—349.22
 
112.20, 112.31—112.33


349.214
 
112.36


364.03, subd. 2
 
110.30, 117.10


364.03, subd. 3
 
110.30, 117.10


412.151(2)
 
31.03


412.221, subd. 21
 
91.01—91.05, 91.15—91.21


412.221, subd. 23
 
94.17


412.221, subd. 24
 
130.02


412.221, subd. 25
 
112.01


412.231
 
10.99


412.591(2)
 
31.03


415.02
 
Adopting Ordinance


415.021
 
Adopting Ordinance


415.11
 
30.05


Ch. 429
 
51.10 , 96.01, 152.19, 155.385


429.021, subd. 1(8)
 
130.70


429.101
 
94.01, 96.01, 96.07, 130.73, 152.42, 152.45


429.101, subd. 1(c)
 
130.70, 130.73


444.16 - 444.21
 
52.01


Ch. 462
 
35.27, 153.29, 156.01


444.075
 
51.05—51.07


444.075, subd. 3
 
51.40


461.20
 
115.14


Ch. 466
 
119.49


462.354, subd. 2
 
Ch. 155, Appendix G, § 17.2


462.355, subd. 4
 
157.01


462.357, subd. 3
 
155.401


462.358
 
153.23


462.358, subd. 3B
 
153.77


462.359
 
155.292; Ch. 155, Appendix G, § 17.1


462.359, subd. 4
 
Ch. 155, Appendix G, § 17.2


462.3593
 
155.500


462.3593, subd. 9
 
155.500


463.15—463.26
 
94.01


Ch. 466
 
119.05, 119.40, 119.49


471.62
 
70.01, 95.01, 130.01


471.195
 
35.01


471.924
 
117.03


473.121, subd. 24
 
51.40


473.501 et seq.
 
51.04


525.14
 
92.19


541.05
 
119.40


Ch. 609
 
130.01


609.02(3)
 
10.99


609.02(4)(a)
 
10.99


609.66
 
130.25


609.72
 
130.02


609.342
 
130.08


609.343
 
130.08


609.344
 
130.08


609.345
 
130.08


609.352
 
130.08


609.365
 
130.08


617.23
 
130.01, 130.08


617.241—617.299
 
110.30


617.246
 
130.08


617.247
 
130.08


617.293
 
130.08


624.20—624.25
 
130.07


624.711—624.717
 
130.23


624.711—624.7181
 
130.22


629.34
 
10.18


838.35
 
119.23




 



REFERENCES TO 1981 CODE



 

1981 Code Section
 
2001 Code Section




1-21
 
35.25


1-2
 
235.26


1-23
 
35.27


1-24
 
35.28


2-1
 
31.01


2-2
 
31.03


2-3
 
31.04


2-22
 
30.02


2-23
 
30.02


2-27
 
30.05


3-20
 
111.01


3-21
 
111.02


3-22
 
111.99


3-23
 
111.03


3-24
 
111.04


3-25
 
111.05


3-30
 
111.20


3-31
 
111.21


3-32
 
111.22


3-33
 
111.22


3-34
 
111.23


3-35
 
111.23


3-36
 
111.24


3-37
 
111.24


3-38
 
111.25


3-39
 
111.25


3-40
 
111.26


3-41
 
111.27


3-42
 
111.28


3-43
 
111.29


3-44
 
111.29


3-45
 
111.30


3-46
 
111.31


3-47
 
111.32


3-48
 
111.33


3-49
 
111.34


3-50
 
111.30


3-51
 
111.35


3-52
 
111.36


3-53
 
111.36


3-54
 
111.37


3-55
 
111.34


3-56
 
111.38


3-110
 
111.51


3-111
 
111.52


3-112
 
111.52


3-113
 
111.50


3-114
 
111.53


3-115
 
111.54


4-30
 
110.01


4-31
 
110.02


4-32
 
110.15


4-33
 
110.16


4-34
 
110.17


4-35
 
110.18


4-36
 
110.18


4-37
 
110.19


4-38
 
110.20


4-39
 
110.21


4-40
 
110.22


4-41
 
110.23


4-42
 
110.24


4-43
 
110.25


4-44
 
110.26


4-45
 
110.27


4-46
 
110.28


4-47
 
110.29


4-48
 
110.30


4-49
 
110.99


5-1
 
91.01


5-2
 
91.02


5-3
 
91.03


5-4
 
91.03


5-5
 
91.04


5-6
 
91.15


5-7
 
91.16


5-8
 
91.18


5-10
 
91.19


5-11
 
91.20, 91.21


5-12
 
91.05


6-1
 
150.01


6-3
 
150.02


6-5
 
150.99


6-22
 
150.16


6-23
 
150.17


6-24
 
150.17


6-25
 
150.18


6-26
 
150.19


6-27
 
150.20


6-102
 
154.01


6-103
 
154.02


6-104
 
154.03; Ch. 154, Appendix A; Ch. 154, Appendix B


6-105
 
154.04; Ch. 154, Appendix C


6-106
 
154.05


6-107
 
154.06; Ch. 154, Appendix D


6-108
 
154.07


8-1
 
112.01


8-2
 
112.02


8-3
 
112.03


8-4
 
112.03


8-5
 
112.03


8-6
 
112.04


8-7
 
112.04


8-8
 
112.05


8-9
 
112.06


8-10
 
112.99


9-2
 
35.01


9-3
 
35.02


9-4
 
35.03


9-5
 
35.04


9-20
 
113.01


9-21
 
113.02


9-22
 
113.03


9-23
 
113.04


9-24
 
113.05


9-25
 
113.06


9-26
 
113.06


9-27
 
113.07


9-28
 
113.10


9-29
 
113.10


9-30
 
113.08


9-31
 
113.09


10-1
 
93.01


10-2
 
93.02


10-3
 
93.03


10-4
 
93.04


10-5
 
32.15


10-7
 
93.05


10-8
 
93.06


10-9
 
93.99


10-11
 
32.15


10-40
 
116.01


10-41
 
116.02


10-42
 
116.02


10-43
 
116.02


10-44
 
116.02


10-45
 
116.02


10-46
 
116.03


10-47
 
116.04


10-50
 
93.06


10-51
 
93.21


10-52
 
93.22


10-53
 
93.23


10-54
 
93.99


11-1
 
50.01


11-2
 
50.02


11-3
 
50.02


11-4
 
50.02


11-5
 
50.03


11-6
 
50.04


11-7
 
50.04


11-8
 
50.05


11-11
 
50.07


11-12
 
50.08


13-1
 
151.01


13-2
 
151.02


13-3
 
151.03


13-20
 
151.04


13-21
 
151.04


13-22
 
151.04


13-23
 
151.04


13-24
 
151.04


13-25
 
151.99


13-26
 
151.05


13-27
 
151.05


13-28
 
151.06


13-29
 
151.07


13-30
 
151.07


13-31
 
151.20


13-32
 
151.20


13-33
 
151.20


13-34
 
151.21


13-35
 
151.22


13-36
 
151.23


13-37
 
151.23


13-38
 
151.20


13-39
 
151.24


13-40
 
151.25


13-41
 
151.26


13-42
 
151.20


13-43
 
151.20


13-44
 
151.28


13-45
 
151.29


13-46
 
151.20


13-48
 
151.30


13-49
 
151.31


13-50
 
151.32


13-51
 
151.33


13-52
 
151.34


13-53
 
151.35


13-54
 
151.36


13-55
 
151.99


13-451
 
151.27


14-1
 
130.01


14-2
 
130.02


14-3
 
130.03


14-4
 
130.03


14-5
 
130.03


14-6
 
94.17, 130.04


14-9
 
115.03


14-10
 
115.04


14-11
 
115.06, 115.12


14-12
 
115.10


14-13
 
115.09, 115.13


14-14
 
115.07


14-15
 
130.05


14-17
 
130.06


14-18
 
130.06


14-19
 
130.06


14-19.1
 
130.06


14-19.2
 
130.07


14-20
 
130.20


14-21
 
130.21


14-22
 
130.22


14-23
 
130.23


14-24
 
130.24


14-25
 
130.25


14-26
 
130.26


14-30
 
112.20


14-50
 
112.30


14-51
 
112.31


14-52
 
112.32


14-53
 
112.33


14-54
 
112.34


14-55
 
112.35


14-56
 
112.36


14-70
 
130.40


14-71
 
130.41


14-72
 
130.42


14-73
 
130.43


14-74
 
130.44


14-80
 
130.55


14-81
 
130.56


14-82
 
130.57


14-83
 
130.58


14-84
 
130.59


14.5-1
 
95.01


14.5-2
 
95.02


14.5-3
 
95.03


14.5-4
 
95.04


14.5-10
 
95.15


14.5-11
 
95.16


14.5-12
 
95.17


14.5-13
 
95.18


14.5-15
 
95.19


15-20
 
114.20


15-21
 
114.20


15-22
 
114.21


15-23
 
114.22


15-25
 
117.01


15-26
 
117.02


15-27
 
117.03


15-28
 
117.04


15-29
 
117.05


15-30
 
117.06


15-31
 
117.07


15-32
 
117.08


15-33
 
117.09


15-34
 
117.10


15-35
 
117.11


15-36
 
117.12


15-37
 
117.13


15-38
 
117.14


15-39
 
117.15


15-40
 
117.99


15-41
 
118.01


15-42
 
118.02


15-43
 
118.03


15-44
 
118.04


15-45
 
118.05


15-46
 
118.06


15-47
 
118.07


15-48
 
118.08


15-49
 
118.09


15-50
 
118.10


15-51
 
118.11


15-52
 
118.12


17-5
 
Ch. 155, Appendix G, § 17.1


17-6
 
Ch. 155, Appendix G, § 17.2


17-7
 
Ch. 155, Appendix G, § 17.3


18-1
 
96.01


18-2
 
96.01


18-3
 
96.01


18-6
 
96.02


18-7
 
96.03, 96.99


18-8
 
96.04


18-9
 
96.05


19-3
 
70.02


19-4
 
70.03


19-17
 
70.01


19-18
 
71.01


19-19
 
71.02


19-20
 
71.21


19-22
 
71.16


19-23
 
71.17


19-24
 
71.18


19-25
 
71.20


19-26
 
71.19


19-27
 
70.05


19-40
 
72.01


19-41
 
72.02


19-42
 
72.03


19-43
 
72.04


19-44
 
72.05


19-70
 
90.01


19-71
 
90.02


19-72
 
90.03


19-74
 
90.04


19-75
 
90.04


19-76
 
90.06


19-77
 
90.07


19-78
 
90.07


19-79
 
90.99


19-90
 
70.15


19-91
 
70.16


19-92
 
70.16


19-93
 
70.18


19-94
 
70.19


19-95
 
70.20


21-1
 
51.01


21-2
 
51.01


21-3
 
51.02


21-5
 
51.03


21-7
 
51.20


21-8
 
51.04


21-9
 
51.21


21-10
 
51.22


21-11
 
51.23


21-12
 
51.41


21-13
 
51.41


21-14
 
51.05


21-15
 
51.05


21-16
 
51.05


21-17
 
51.35


21-18
 
51.36


21-19
 
51.39


21-20
 
51.38


21-21
 
51.37


21-23
 
51.40


21-24
 
51.10


21-25
 
51.08


21-26
 
51.09


21-31
 
51.06


21-32
 
51.06


21-35
 
51.06


A1-1
 
155.001


A1-2
 
155.002


A1-3
 
155.003


A1-4
 
155.004


A1-6
 
155.330


A1-7
 
155.331


A1-8
 
155.332


A1-9
 
155.333; Ch. 155, Appendix E


A1-10
 
155.334


A1-11
 
155.335


A1-12
 
155.336


A1-13
 
155.338


A1-14
 
155.337


A1-15
 
155.398


A1-16
 
155.339


A1-17
 
155.340


A1-18
 
155.341


A1-19
 
155.342


A1-20
 
155.397


A1-21
 
155.343


A1-22
 
155.380


A1-23
 
155.401


A1-24
 
155.402


A1-26
 
155.005


A1-27
 
155.006


A1-28
 
155.020—155.022, 155.066


A1-29
 
155.035—155.038


A1-30
 
155.050—155.053


A1-31
 
155.065


A1-32
 
Ch. 155, Appendix A


A1-33
 
155.075—155.079; 155.080; 155.091; Ch. 155, Appendix B


A1-34
 
155.090, 155.092, 155.093


A1-34.1
 
155.094


A1-35
 
155.105—155.115


A1-36
 
155.125—155.128


A1-36.1
 
155.140—155.144


A1-37
 
155.155—155.158


A1-38
 
155.170—155.173


A1-39
 
155.185—155.188


A1-40
 
155.129; Ch. 155, Appendix C


A1-41
 
155.200—155.205


A1-42
 
155.215—155.220


A1-42.5
 
155.230—155.234


A1-43
 
155.235; Ch. 155, Appendix C


A1-44
 
155.245—155.248


A1-45
 
155.249


A1-46
 
155.260—155.267


A1-47
 
155.268—155.271


A1-48
 
155.285—155.293; 155.999; Ch. 155, Appendix D


A1-49
 
155.305—155.318; Ch. 155, Appendix D


A1-50
 
155.344


A1-52
 
155.395


A1-53
 
155.346


A1-54
 
155.347


A1-55
 
155.348


A1-56
 
155.349


A1-57
 
155.350


A1-58
 
155.351


A1-59
 
155.352


A1-60
 
155.353


A1-61
 
155.370—155.377


A1-62
 
155.378


A1-63
 
155.379


A1-64
 
155.354


A1-65
 
155.355


A1-66
 
155.356


A1-67
 
155.357


A1-68
 
155.358


A1-69
 
155.395


A1-70
 
155.396


A1-71
 
155.397


A1-72
 
155.399


A1-73
 
155.400


A1-74
 
155.401


A1-75
 
155.402


A1-76
 
155.403


A1-77
 
155.404


A1-78
 
155.359


A1-151
 
155.345


A2-1
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A2-1


A2-2
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A2-2


A2-3
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A2-3


A2-4
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A2-4


A2-5
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A2-5


A3-1
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A3-1


A3-2
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A3-2


A3-3
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A3-3


A3-4
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A3-4


A3-5
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A3-5


A4-1
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A4-1


A4-2
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A4-2


A4-3
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A4-3


A4-4
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A4-4


A4-5
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A4-5


A5-1
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A5-1


A5-2
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A5-2


A5-3
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A5-3


A5-4
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A5-4


A5-5
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A5-5


A6-1
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A6-1


A6-2
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A6-2


A6-3
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A6-3


A6-4
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A6-4


A6-5
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A6-5


A7-1
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A7-1


A7-2
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A7-2


A7-3
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A7-3


A7-4
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A7-4


A7-5
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A7-5


A8-1
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A8-1


A8-2
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A8-2


A8-3
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A8-3


A8-4
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A8-4


A8-5
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A8-5


A9-1
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A9-1


A9-2
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A9-2


A9-3
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A9-3


A9-4
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A9-4


A9-5
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A9-5


A10-1
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A10-1


A10-2
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A10-2


A10-3
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A10-3


A10-4
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A10-4


A10-5
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A10-5


A10-6
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A10-6


A11-1
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A11-1


A11-2
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A11-2


A11-3
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A11-3


A11-4
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A11-4


A11-5
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A11-5


A12-1
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A12-1


A12-2
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A12-2


A12-3
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A12-3


A12-4
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A12-4


A12-5
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A12-5


A13-1
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A13-1


A13-2
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A13-2


A13-3
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A13-3


A13-4
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A13-4


A13-5
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A13-5


A13-6
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A13-6


A13-7
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A13-7


A14-1
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A14-1


A14-2
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A14-2


A14-3
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A14-3


A14-4
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A14-4


A14-5
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A14-5


A15-1
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A15-1


A15-2
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A15-2


A15-3
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A15-3


A15-4
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A15-4


A15-5
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A15-5


A16-1
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A16-1


A16-2
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A16-2


A16-3
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A16-3


A16-4
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A16-4


A16-5
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A16-5


A17-1
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A17-1


A17-2
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A17-2


A17-3
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A17-3


A17-4
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A17-4


A17-5
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A17-5


A18-1
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A18-1


A18-2
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A18-2


A18-3
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A18-3


A18-4
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A18-4


A18-5
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A18-5


A18-6
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A18-6


A19-1
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A19-1


A19-2
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A19-2


A19-3
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A19-3


A19-4
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A19-4


A19-5
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A19-5


A19-6
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A19-6


A20-1
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A20-1


A20-2
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A20-2


A20-3
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A20-3


A20-4
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A20-4


A20-5
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A20-5


A20-6
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §  A20-6


B1-1
 
153.01


B1-2
 
153.02


B1-4
 
153.20


B1-5
 
153.04, 153.05


B1-9
 
153.06


B1-10
 
153.20


B1-11
 
153.21


B1-12
 
153.22


B1-13
 
153.23


B1-14
 
153.24


B1-15
 
153.36


B1-16
 
153.25, 153.99


B1-17
 
153.26


B1-18
 
153.26


B1-19
 
153.27


B1-20
 
153.28


B1-21
 
153.29


B1-22
 
153.30


B1-23
 
153.31


B1-24
 
153.32


B1-25
 
153.32


B1-26
 
153.33


B1-27
 
153.64


B1-28
 
153.34


B1-30
 
153.50


B1-31
 
153.22


B1-32
 
153.23


B1-33
 
153.24


B1-34
 
153.51


B1-35
 
153.52


B1-36
 
153.53


B1-37
 
153.54


B1-38
 
153.55


B1-39
 
153.56


B1-40
 
153.57


B1-41
 
153.58


B1-42
 
153.59


B1-43
 
153.60


B1-44
 
153.61


B1-45
 
153.62


B1-46
 
153.63


B1-47
 
153.62


B1-48
 
153.75


B1-49
 
153.76


B1-50
 
153.77


B1-51
 
153.78


B1-52
 
153.79




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section


—
 
6-25-69
 
31.02


1988-232
 
12-29-98
 
30.01—30.04



 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




12
 
11-20-63
 
31.01


27
 
1-17-66
 
94.17, 96.02


33
 
11-14-66
 
130.05


43
 
9-14-67
 
151.01—151.07, 151.20—151.34, 151.99


49
 
2-7-68
 
35.01—35.04


60
 
4-30-69
 
31.03


76
 
5-27-70
 
111.01—111.02, 111.04, 111.05, 111.99


77
 
6-9-70
 
Chapter 155, Appendix G, §§ 17-1—17-3


84
 
9-23-70
 
150.15—150.20


91
 
4-14-71
 
130.01


97
 
7-14-71
 
111.03


145
 
6-24-74
 
91.01—91.05, 91.15—91.16, 91.18, 91.19, 91.21


152
 
11-13-74
 
51.01, 51.03, 51.05, 51.08—51.10, 51.20—51.22, 51.35—51.39, 51.41


173
 
12-10-75
 
130.02


178
 
6-30-76
 
51.04


181
 
9-8-76
 
130.03


182
 
11-10-76
 
72.02—72.04


191
 
6-6-77
 
91.02


197
 
3-9-78
 
70.01, 70.02, 71.01, 71.15—71.18, 71.21


202
 
6-15-78
 
51.40


204
 
7-27-78
 
30.05


210
 
9-28-78
 
96.01


211
 
10-26-78
 
71.15


228
 
8-27-79
 
90.01—90.04, 90.06, 90.07, 90.99


230
 
10-11-79
 
96.03, 96.99


233
 
1-10-80
 
71.01, 71.15—71.18, 71.21


237
 
5-8-80
 
130.06


240
 
6-9-80
 
130.07


241
 
6-9-80
 
71.20


242
 
6-9-80
 
95.01—95.04


243
 
6-9-80
 
71.17


245
 
8-28-80
 
130.20—130.26


257
 
8-13-81
 
111.50—111.52


260
 
10-22-81
 
91.16


261
 
11-12-81
 
91.04, 91.15


265
 
1-28-82
 
94.17


266
 
1-28-82
 
96.03, 96.99


291
 
4-21-82
 
155.333


278
 
11-9-82
 
95.03


280
 
11-23-82
 
130.40—130.44


281
 
12-9-82
 
71.19, 71.20


291
 
4-21-83
 
155.001—155.006; 155.020—155.022; 155.035—155.038; 155.050—155.053;
155.065; 155.066; 155.075—155.080; 155.090—155.093; 155.105—155.115;
155.125—155.129; 155.155—155.158; 155.170—155.173; 155.185—155.188;
155.200—155.205; 155.215—155.219; 155.235; 155.245—155.249;
155.260—155.271; 155.285—155.293; 155.305—155.318; 155.330—155.358;
155.370—155.380; 155.395—155.404; 155.999; Ch. 155, Appendices A, B, C,
D, E; Ch. 155, Appendix F: §§ A2-1—A2-5, A3-1—A3-5, A4-1—A4-5,
A5-1—A5-5, A6-3—A6-5, A7-1—A7-5, A8-1—A8-5, A9-1—A9-5,
A10-1—A10-6, A11-1—A11-5


291, § 2
 
4-21-83
 
155.220


293
 
4-21-83
 
153.01, 153.02, 153.04—153.06, 153.21—153.34, 153.36, 153.50—153.64,
153.75—153.79


293, § 1
 
4-21-83
 
153.20


294
 
4-28-83
 
150.16, 150.18 


295
 
5-12-83
 
111.50, 111.54


300
 
6-23-83
 
72.01—72.05


303
 
10-13-83
 
70.05


304
 
10-13-83
 
35.25—35.27; 91.05; 91.15; 91.16; 91.18


308
 
10-27-83
 
95.03


309
 
11-8-83
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A3-1; Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A3-3


314
 
3-8-84
 
130.25


317
 
4-12-84
 
51.35, 51.37, 51.39, 111.52, 130.42, 150.17, 151.04, 151.06, 153.79, 155.404


315
 
4-26-84
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A12-1—A12-5


318
 
5-10-84
 
155.332


325
 
7-26-84
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A4-2—A4-5


326
 
8-9-84
 
111.53


331
 
12-27-84
 
32.15, 93.01—93.05


333
 
1-10-85
 
31.03


334
 
2-22-85
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A2-2—A2-5


338
 
3-14-85
 
112.20


343
 
5-23-85
 
112.01—112.06, 112.99


341
 
9-26-85
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A13-1—A13-7


342
 
9-26-85
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A14-1—A14-5


400
 
8-27-87
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A15-1


351
 
11-14-85
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A9-2—A9-3


352
 
11-26-85
 
116.01—116.04


363
 
6-12-86
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A4-2—A4-5


368
 
9-25-86
 
91.01, 91.05


372
 
10-9-86
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A8-2—A8-5


373
 
11-25-86
 
96.03, 96.99


379
 
3-12-87
 
150.01, 150.02, 150.99


385
 
4-23-87
 
155.005, 155.094


397
 
8-13-87
 
112.30—112.36


401
 
8-27-87
 
70.15—70.20


406
 
12-10-87
 
91.19


407
 
12-10-87
 
91.03, 93.99, 150.99


408
 
12-22-87
 
51.06


409
 
1-14-88
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A16-1—A16-5


410
 
1-14-88
 
91.15


412
 
1-28-88
 
30.05


413
 
2-11-88
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A15-2—A15-5


414
 
4-28-88
 
95.03


415
 
5-5-88
 
95.15—95.18


416
 
5-5-88
 
71.19


418
 
5-26-88
 
90.01


419
 
6-30-88
 
155.305—155.318; 155.331; Ch. 155, Appendix D


422
 
8-25-88
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A3-2—A3-5


424
 
9-22-88 
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A13-2—A13-6


309
 
11-8-88
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A3-2


432
 
2-9-89
 
Ch. 155, Appendix G, §§ 17-1—17-2


436
 
2-23-89
 
155.075—155.080; 155.090—155.094; 155.105—155.112; 155.114; 155.115;
155.125—155.129; 155.155—155.158; 155.170—155.173; 155.185—155.188;
155.235; 155.268—155.271; 155.346; 155.349; 155.402; Ch. 155, Appendices B,
C


440
 
3-23-89
 
50.01, 50.02, 50.04, 50.05, 50.07, 50.08


441
 
4-13-89
 
95.04


443
 
5-18-89
 
155.370—155.377


444
 
6-1-89
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A17-1—A17-5


446
 
6-22-89
 
155.235


447
 
6-22-89
 
155.129; 155.140—155.144; Ch. 155, Appendix C


448
 
7-13-89
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A9-1—A9-5


449
 
7-13-89
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A3-1—A3-2


452
 
7-13-89
 
153.34


455
 
7-27-89
 
155.370—155.379


458
 
9-21-89
 
111.20—111.38


459
 
9-21-89
 
111.53


460
 
9-21-89
 
114.20—114.22


462
 
10-12-89
 
155.105—155.115


465
 
10-26-89
 
155.005, 155.020—155.022, 155.035—155.038; 155.050—155.053; 155.065;
155.066; 155.075—155.080; Ch. 155, Appendices A, B


468
 
12-21-89
 
111.28


469
 
12-21-89
 
155.155—155.158


470
 
12-28-89
 
111.21, 111.22


471
 
1-11-90
 
155.005; 155.105—155.115; 155.129; Ch. 155, Appendix C


472
 
1-25-90
 
155.285—155.293; 155.999; Ch. 155, Appendix D


473
 
2-22-90
 
71.19, 93.05


475
 
3-8-90
 
35.28, 153.79


476
 
3-8-90
 
150.15, 150.16, 150.18


479
 
4-12-90
 
155.370—155.379


480
 
4-12-90
 
155.404


489
 
6-7-90
 
93.06, 93.99


491
 
7-26-90
 
94.17, 96.04, 96.05


492
 
8-9-90
 
155.333; Ch. 155, Appendix E


494
 
9-20-90
 
155.155—155.158, 155.170—155.173


495
 
9-20-90
 
154.01—154.07; Ch. 154, Appendix A—D


500
 
12-13-90
 
50.01, 50.04


501
 
12-13-90
 
154.03; 154.05; 154.06; Ch. 154, Appendices A, B, D


503
 
2-14-91
 
96.01


504
 
2-28-91
 
154.02, 154.05, Ch. 154 Appendix C


505
 
3-14-91
 
155.379


507
 
4-25-91
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F,§§ A18-1—A18-6


508, § 1
 
4-25-91
 
117.01—117.15, 117.99


509
 
4-25-91
 
111.30


510
 
5-9-91
 
130.55—130.57


512
 
5-9-91
 
155.399


514
 
5-23-91
 
155.003, 155.245—155.248, 155.336, 155.340


515
 
5-23-91
 
151.01, 151.20, 151.21, 151.23, 151.25, 151.31, 151.35, 151.36 , 151.99


519
 
9-12-91
 
50.02


520
 
9-12-91
 
71.01, 71.02


521
 
10-10-91
 
150.15, 153.06, 153.23, 153.25, 153.99


522
 
10-24-91
 
91.04, 91.18, 91.21


523
 
10-24-91
 
91.01, 91.05


524
 
12-5-91
 
72.03, 72.04


525
 
12-5-91
 
71.02


526
 
12-19-91
 
30.05


528
 
12-19-91
 
51.35, 51.39


529
 
12-30-91
 
150.17, 150.18


533
 
2-13-92
 
95.15—95.19


534
 
2-13-92
 
35.28, 153.79, 155.404


535
 
2-27-92
 
155.230—155.235


536
 
2-27-92
 
154.04; Ch. 154, Appendix C


537
 
3-26-92
 
93.06, 93.21—93.23, 93.99


532.1
 
4-23-92
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A19-1—A19-6


538
 
5-28-92
 
50.03—50.05, 50.07, 50.08


539
 
6-9-92
 
50.01, 50.04


541
 
7-23-92
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A20-1—A20-6


542
 
8-27-92
 
116.01, 116.02


545
 
10-22-92
 
94.17


522
 
10-24-92
 
91.19


279
 
11-23-92
 
71.18


547
 
12-22-92
 
90.02, 90.04


551
 
2-25-93
 
130.03


555
 
5-13-93
 
154.03; 154.04; 154.06; Ch. 154, Appendix A—D


558
 
7-22-93
 
50.02


561
 
9-23-93
 
111.22, 111.30, 111.31


562
 
9-23-93
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A8-2


565
 
1-13-94
 
90.07


566
 
1-13-94
 
31.04


573
 
4-28-94
 
91.04


574, § 3
 
5-12-94
 
118.01—118.12


577
 
6-16-94
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A18-3


578
 
6-30-94
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A9-2; Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A9-5


580
 
7-14-94
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A21-1—A21-5


583
 
9-8-94
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A5-2, A5-4, A5-5


588
 
11-22-94
 
A13-5


590
 
12-20-94
 
70.03


592
 
2-9-95
 
111.31


596
 
4-13-95
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A2-2


597
 
5-11-95
 
130.22


601
 
6-22-95
 
150.01, 150.02


606
 
9-28-95
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A9-3


611
 
1-11-96
 
130.04


612
 
2-22-96
 
150.17


613
 
3-14-96
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A11-2, A11-3, A11-5


614
 
4-25-96
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A19-2, A19-3, A19-5


615
 
5-9-96
 
130.58, 130.59


616
 
6-6-96
 
91.01, 91.21


617
 
6-27-96
 
155.203


618
 
6-27-96
 
113.01—113.10


619
 
9-26-96
 
110.01, 110.15—110.30, 110.99


620
 
9-26-96
 
155.359


622
 
12-12-96
 
71.17


623
 
12-12-96
 
150.01, 150.02


624
 
1-23-97
 
111.03, 111.21—111.24, 111.28—111.31, 111.35—111.37, 111.50, 111.52,
111.53


625
 
3-27-97
 
155.090—155.093


628
 
6-26-97
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A18-1—A18-6


629
 
8-21-97
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A22-1—A22-6


630
 
8-21-97
 
155.332


631
 
8-21-97
 
112.33


632
 
9-25-97
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A23-1—A23-5


633
 
10-9-97
 
150.15, 150.16, 152.01, 152.02, 152.15—152.24, 152.40—152.45,
152.55—152.57


634
 
10-9-97
 
50.01


636
 
10-23-97
 
72.03


637
 
11-25-97
 
155.230—155.234


638
 
11-25-97
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A21-2—A21-5


639
 
12-11-97
 
130.70—130.74


640
 
12-23-97
 
130.42


641
 
2-26-98
 
51.55—51.63


644
 
3-12-98
 
155.003, 155.401


645
 
4-9-98
 
154.03—154.05


646
 
5-28-98
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A24-1—A24-6


647
 
6-25-98
 
91.21


649
 
8-27-98
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A16-2


652
 
10-22-98
 
110.02


653
 
12-10-98
 
92.01, 92.15—92.19


654
 
12-10-98
 
111.21, 155.003, 155.357


656
 
1-14-99
 
A2-2—A2-5


658
 
2-25-99
 
150.01, 150.02, 150.99


660
 
4-22-99
 
119.20—119.33, 119.99


657
 
6-10-99
 
115.01—115.18, 115.99


669
 
3-23-00
 
150.50—151.59


671
 
4-27-00
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A22-2, A22-3, A22-5


672
 
5-11-00
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A23-1—A23-6


691
 
5-15-00
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A9-5


673
 
5-25-00
 
155.232


695
 
6-14-00
 
111.21


674
 
7-13-00
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A23-5


676
 
7-13-00
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A24-2, A24-3


679
 
7-27-00
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A25-1—A25-5


680
 
7-27-00
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A24-4


681
 
8-24-00
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A26-1—A26-5


682
 
9-28-00
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A13-2


684
 
10-12-00
 
155.113


685
 
10-12-00
 
30.05


687
 
11-21-00
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A13-3


694
 
6-14-01
 
155.360


695
 
6-14-01
 
111.37


697
 
7-26-01
 
130.56


698
 
8-9-01
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A11-2


699
 
9-13-01
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A24-2


700
 
9-25-01
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A23-5


703
 
11-8-01
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A28-1 —  A28-5


704
 
12-13-01
 
155.003, 155.351


707
 
2-14-02
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A25-1 — A25-6


708
 
2-14-02
 
Adopting Ordinance


710
 
3-14-02
 
156.01, 156.02, 156.05, 156.06, 156.10, 156.11, 156.13, 156.14, 156.99


711
 
4-25-02
 
154.03, 154.04


712
 
4-25-02
 
152.01, 152.15, 152.16, 152.45, 152.55, 152.57


713
 
5-9-02
 
32.15


714
 
5-23-02
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A29-1 — A29-6


715
 
5-23-02
 
96.06, 97.01 - 97.21


716
 
6-27-02
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A30-1 — A30-6


717
 
6-27-02
 
91.20


719
 
7-11-02
 
90.01, 90.04 — 90.06, 90.08


720
 
7-25-02
 
52.01, 52.02


722
 
1-23-03
 
110.02


723
 
4-24-03
 
A28-2—A28-5


724
 
4-24-03
 
150.01, 150.02


725
 
5-22-03
 
110.27, 110.30, 110.40


727
 
6-12-03
 
A24-4, A24-6


728
 
6-26-03
 
A30-5


729
 
6-26-03
 
155.052, 155.066, 155.373, 155.382


730
 
7-10-03
 
155.379


731
 
7-24-03
 
A30-5, A30-6


733
 
8-14-03
 
130.41, 130.42, 130.45


734
 
9-25-03
 
A30-2—A30-6


735
 
9-25-03
 
111.22, 111.28, 111.31, 111.53


737
 
10-23-03
 
119.45—119.55


738
 
11-13-03
 
71.19, 155.375


739
 
12-8-03
 
A31-1—A31-9


740
 
12-8-03
 
A30-1, A30-1.1, A30-5, A30-6


746
 
2-26-04
 
A32-1—A32-5


747
 
2-26-04
 
A30-3


749
 
4-22-04
 
155.092


750
 
5-27-04
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A25-2


751
 
6-10-04
 
50.02, 50.04


752
 
6-10-04
 
94.36, 152.44


753
 
6-24-04
 
119.01 - 119.11


755
 
6-24-04
 
155.352


756
 
7-8-04
 
155.003, 155.352


760
 
10-14-04
 
155.003, 155.052, 155.053, 155.078, 155.092, 155.093, 155.127, 155.157,
155.203, 155.204, 155.218, 155.232, 155.248, 155.350, 155.385, Ch. 155,
Appendix A


761
 
10-14-04
 
30.05


763
 
12-9-04
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A28-2, A28-5


765
 
1-27-05
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A31-4


766
 
1-27-05
 
153.29


767
 
1-27-05
 
71.19


768
 
2-24-05
 
155.352


770
 
4-14-05
 
130.07


771
 
4-14-05
 
120.01 - 120.05


772
 
4-14-05
 
155.330, 155.346, 155.353


774
 
5-12-05
 
150.01


781
 
7-28-05
 
96.04


782
 
7-28-05
 
96.05


783
 
9-22-05
 
154.04


790
 
4-27-06
 
154.02, 154.04


791
 
5-25-06
 
157.01


794
 
8-24-06
 
155.093, 155.158, 155.204, 155.383, Ch. 155, Appendix F


795
 
9-14-06
 
92.18, 92.20


796
 
9-28-06
 
155.385


797
 
9-28-06
 
30.05


799
 
11-21-06
 
157.01


800
 
12-14-06
 
150.04


802
 
12-27-06
 
157.01


803
 
1-11-07
 
157.01


804
 
2-22-07
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A28-1—A28-6


805
 
3-22-07
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A13-5


806
 
3-22-07
 
155.203


807
 
4-26-07
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A-22-2, A-22-5


808
 
4-26-07
 
155.232


810
 
5-10-07
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A13-6


812
 
5-24-07
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A5-2


813
 
6-14-07
 
96.06


814
 
6-14-07
 
111.01, 111.04


816
 
7-12-07
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A28-6


817
 
7-12-07
 
150.01


818
 
7-12-07
 
152.40, 152.43, 152.45


820
 
8-23-07
 
150.01


821
 
10-11-07
 
155.231, 155.232


822
 
10-11-07
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A30-5


823
 
10-25-07
 
155.003, 155.156, 155.157


824
 
10-25-07
 
93.20, 93.21, 93.30—93.32, 93.40—93.47


825
 
11-20-07
 
91.01, 91.15, 91.20


826
 
11-20-07
 
122.01—122.06, 122.99


829
 
1-24-08
 
91.01, 91.03


830
 
1-24-08
 
94.01


831
 
1-24-08
 
130.42


833
 
2-14-08
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A28-5


834
 
2-28-08
 
71.03, 71.17, 71.19, 155.003, 155.373, 155.378


835
 
2-28-08
 
51.05—51.07, 51.09, 51.10, 51.21—51.23, 51.35, 51.37—51.39, 51.56, 51.60


837
 
5-22-08
 
35.01


838
 
6-5-08
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A28-2—A28-4


839
 
6-26-08
 
94.01


840
 
6-26-08
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A28-6


841
 
7-24-08
 
90.03, 90.04


842
 
8-14-08
 
117.01—117.15, 117.99


844
 
8-28-08
 
30.05


845
 
9-11-08
 
91.20


847
 
10-9-08
 
91.01, 91.20, 91.21


848
 
11-6-08
 
130.10—130.13


851
 
12-11-08
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A31-4, A31-5, A31-7, A31-8


853
 
12-23-08
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A18-2—A18-6


854
 
2-12-09
 
155.360


855
 
3-26-09
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A28-2, A28-5, A28-6


856
 
3-26-09
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A33-1—A33-5


857
 
3-26-09
 
155.003


858
 
4-23-09
 
130.07


859
 
5-14-09
 
95.03


860
 
5-28-09
 
150.01


861
 
6-11-09
 
155.03, 155.379, Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A10-2


862
 
6-11-09
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A28-5


863
 
6-11-09
 
50.01, 50.02, 50.04


864
 
6-11-09
 
152.01, 152.02, 152.15—152.25, 152.40—152.46, 152.55—152.57


865
 
8-13-09
 
155.006


866
 
8-13-09
 
155.006


867
 
8-13-09
 
155.006


868
 
8-13-09
 
155.006


869
 
10-22-09
 
116.01—116.04


870
 
11-5-09
 
114.05


871
 
12-10-09
 
30.05


872
 
12-10-09
 
111.31, 111.53


874
 
12-22-09
 
155.003, 155.333


875
 
12-22-09
 
155.349


876
 
12-22-09
 
154.02


877
 
12-22-09
 
150.01, 150.04


878
 
2-11-10
 
155.378


879
 
2-11-10
 
155.006


880
 
2-11-10
 
32.01—32.04


883
 
3-25-10
 
155.006


884
 
3-25-10
 
155.006


885
 
4-8-10
 
10.99


886
 
4-8-10
 
70.01, 70.05, 71.15—71.21


887
 
4-8-10
 
91.04, 91.05, 91.16, 91.17, 91.19, 93.43, 94.36, 95.03, 96.03


888
 
5-13-10
 
155.360


889
 
5-27-10
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A16-2


890
 
7-8-10
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A24-5


891
 
8-26-10
 
155.385


892
 
8-26-10
 
155.006


893
 
8-26-10
 
155.006


894
 
8-26-10
 
155.006


895
 
8-26-10
 
155.006


896
 
8-26-10
 
155.006


897
 
8-26-10
 
155.006


898
 
8-26-10
 
155.006


899
 
8-26-10
 
155.006


900
 
9-23-10
 
155.246


901
 
9-23-10
 
155.006


902
 
9-23-10
 
111.28


903
 
9-23-10
 
115.02, 115.13—115.15


904
 
10-28-10
 
30.05


905
 
11-23-10
 
51.55 - 51.65


907
 
12-21-10
 
35.27


909
 
12-21-10
 
150.06


911
 
3-24-11
 
Ch. 155, Appendix G, § 17.1


912
 
3-24-11
 
123.01—123.07


914
 
4-14-11
 
71.17


915
 
4-14-11
 
96.07


917
 
5-12-11
 
111.04


918
 
6-9-11
 
155.006


919
 
6-9-11
 
Chapter 155, Appendix F, § A2-2


920
 
6-23-11
 
155.397


921
 
7-14-11
 
155.006


922
 
7-28-11
 
113.03, 113.10


923
 
8-11-11
 
90.03, 90.04, 90.06, 90.07


924
 
8-11-11
 
130.58


925
 
8-25-11
 
150.07


926
 
10-27-11
 
155.006


927
 
10-27-11
 
156.01—156.19, 156.99


929
 
2-9-12
 
96.01


930
 
4-12-12
 
152.45


931
 
4-26-12
 
32.15


932
 
4-12-12
 
155.006


933
 
8-9-12
 
111.24, 111.28


934
 
8-9-12
 
117.05, 117.09


935
 
8-23-12
 
155.006


936
 
8-23-12
 
155.006


938
 
1-24-13
 
Chapter 155, Appendix F, §§ A31-4, A31-5, A31-7, A31-8


939
 
2-28-13
 
154.04


940
 
3-28-13
 
Chapter 155, Appendix F, § A31-8


941
 
3-28-13
 
155.003, Chapter 155, Appendix F, § A2-3


942
 
3-28-13
 
71.17


943
 
3-28-13
 
70.04


944
 
4-25-13
 
111.23, 111.34


945
 
5-23-13
 
Chapter 155, Appendix F , § A28-5


946
 
5-23-13
 
155.006


947
 
5-23-13
 
155.006


949
 
9-12-13
 
155.006


950
 
10-10-13
 
155.006


951
 
10-24-13
 
Chapter 155, Appendix F , §§ A33-2 —A33-5


953
 
11-26-13
 
30.05


954
 
12-12-13
 
111.24 , 111.25


956
 
12-26-13
 
51.08 , 51.10


957
 
12-26-13
 
155.003 , 155.246 —155.248


958
 
12-26-13
 
154.02 , 154.04 —154.06


959
 
1-23-14
 
155.006


960
 
1-23-14
 
130.40 —130.45


961
 
2-27-14
 
91.01 , 91.04 , 91.06


962
 
2-27-14
 
155.053


963
 
4-24-14
 
153.24, 153.26, 153.32, 153.78


964
 
4-24-14
 
154.02, 154.04


965
 
5-8-14
 
155.333, 155.346, 155.400


966
 
6-12-14
 
155.006


967
 
6-12-14
 
Chapter 155, Appendix F, § A28-2


968
 
6-12-14
 
96.06


969
 
6-26-14
 
111.04


970
 
6-26-14
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A18-2


971
 
6-26-14
 
Ch. 154, Appendix C


972
 
6-26-14
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A2-2, A2-3


974
 
7-10-14
 
115.02, 115.19


975
 
7-10-14
 
155.006, Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A34-1—A34-5


976
 
10-9-14
 
130.04


977
 
11-13-14
 
155.006


978
 
11-13-14
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A2-5


979
 
12-11-14
 
155.006


981
 
2-12-15
 
155.006


982
 
2-12-15
 
155.006


983
 
2-12-15
 
115.14


984
 
2-12-15
 
150.01


985
 
3-26-15
 
35.26


986
 
3-26-15
 
123.03


987
 
4-23-15
 
155.006


988
 
5-14-15
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A32-2; A32-3, A32-5


990
 
6-11-15
 
155.006


991
 
6-11-15
 
111.29, 111.31


992
 
7-9-15
 
155.006


993
 
7-9-15
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A31-4


994
 
7-9-15
 
155.006


995
 
8-13-15
 
155.006


996
 
8-27-15
 
155.204, 155.219, 155.233


997
 
9-24-15
 
155.266, 155.269


998
 
10-22-15
 
155.003, 1555.201, 155.203, 155.204, 155.216, 155.218, 155.219


999
 
10-22-15
 
111.01, 111.21, 111.38—111.42


1001
 
11-24-15
 
35.27


1002
 
12-22-15
 
155.216—155.219


1003
 
12-22-15
 
30.06


1004
 
1-28-16
 
155.006


1005
 
2-25-16
 
30.05


1006
 
3-24-16
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A28-2


1007
 
3-24-16
 
91.01


1008
 
4-28-16
 
155.006


1009
 
5-12-16
 
35.26


1010
 
5-26-16
 
111.23, 111.30


1011
 
6-23-16
 
155.006


1012
 
7-14-16
 
155.006


1013
 
7-28-16
 
155.500


1014
 
8-11-16
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A35-1—A35-5


1015
 
8-25-16
 
155.006


1016
 
8-25-16
 
155.006


1017
 
8-25-16
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A28-2


1018
 
8-25-16
 
155.006


1019
 
9-22-16
 
91.05


1020
 
9-22-16
 
119.40


1021
 
9-22-16
 
91.01


1022
 
12-8-16
 
71.17


1023
 
12-8-16
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A28-2—A28-5


1024
 
12-22-16
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A35-5


1025
 
12-22-16
 
155.006, Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§ A36-1—A36-5


1026
 
2-23-17
 
130.08, 130.99


1027
 
4-13-17
 
155.006


1028
 
5-11-17
 
95.04


1029
 
7-13-17
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A28-5


1030
 
7-27-17
 
155.006


1031
 
7-27-17
 
155.006


1032
 
7-27-17
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A31-8


1034
 
10-26-17
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A18-2


1035
 
11-9-17
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A28-2


1036
 
12-14-17
 
152.22, 152.24


1037
 
12-28-17
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, §§  A31-4, A31-8


1038
 
2-8-18
 
97.02, 97.04—97.06, 97.11


1039
 
2-8-18
 
155.003, 155.052, 155.078, 155.385


1040
 
2-22-18
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A25-6


1041
 
3-22-18
 
155.006


1042
 
3-22-18
 
Ch. 155, Appendix F, § A34-5


1043
 
4-12-18
 
123.03, 123.04, 123.06


 
 
 
 
 




 


