
Brooklyn Park, MN Code of Ordinances


BROOKLYN PARK, MN
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2019 S-78 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through March 31, 2019










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet:  www.amlegal.com




ADOPTING ORDINANCES



ORDINANCE #2000-930B



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCE FOR THE CITY OF BROOKLYN PARK,
MINNESOTA, AMENDING, RESTATING, REVISING, UPDATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING
CERTAIN ORDINANCES OF THE CITY DEALING WITH THE SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN THE CODE
OF ORDINANCES, AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES.



   WHEREAS Minnesota Statutes Sections 415.02 and 415.021, and the
Brooklyn Park City Charter Section 3.11 authorize the city to cause its
ordinances to be codified and printed in a book,



   NOW THEREFORE the City Council of the City of Brooklyn Park, Minnesota,
does ordain:



Section 1.  The general ordinances of the City as amended, restated,
revised, updated, codified and compiled in book form, including penalties for
the violations of various provisions thereof, are hereby adopted and shall
constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Brooklyn Park,
Minnesota."  This Code of Ordinances also adopts by reference certain
statutes and administrative rules of the State of Minnesota as named in the
Code of Ordinances.  It is intended that any future amendments to a statute
or administrative rule of the State of Minnesota, and any federal law, rule
or regulation be included in the Code of Ordinances as if the amended
statute, law, rule or regulation had been in existence at the time the code
was adopted.



Section 2.  The Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following titles:



Title I:  General Provisions



Title III: Administration



Title VII: Traffic Code



Title IX: General Regulations



Title XI: Business Regulations



Title XIII: General Offenses



Title XV: Land Usage



Table of Special Ordinances



Appendix: Fee Resolution



Parallel References



Section 3.  All prior ordinances, pertaining to the subjects treated in the
Code of Ordinances, shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective
date of this ordinance, except as they are included and re-ordained in whole
or in part in the Code of Ordinances; provided, this repeal shall not affect
any offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to
the effective date of this ordinance, nor shall this repeal affect the
provisions of ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or
detaching territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to
certain persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of
bonds or borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or
personal property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of
land to public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other
public places; nor shall this repeal affect any other ordinance of a
temporary or special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or
covered by the Code of Ordinances.  All fees established in prior ordinances
codified in this Code shall remain in effect unless amended in this code or
until an ordinance or resolution adopting a fee schedule is adopted or
amended.



Section 4.  This ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances shall be a
sufficient publication of any ordinance included in it and not previously
published in the City's official newspaper.  The Clerk of the City shall
cause a substantial quantity of the Code of Ordinances to be printed for
general distribution to the public at actual cost and shall furnish a copy of
the Code of Ordinances to the County Law Library or its designated
depository.  The official copy of this Code of Ordinances shall be marked
and kept in the office of the City Clerk.



Section 5.  The Code of Ordinances is declared to be prima facie evidence of
the law of the City and shall be received in evidence as provided by
Minnesota Statutes by the Courts of the State of Minnesota.



Section 6.  This ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances, and the Code of
Ordinances itself, shall take effect 30 days after publication of this
ordinance in the City's official newspaper.



___________________________



GRACE ARBOGAST, MAYOR



ATTEST:



___________________________



JOAN SCHMIDT, CITY CLERK



Approved as to Form by City Attorney



Passed on First Reading 08-14-00



Passed on Second Reading 08-28-00



Published in Official Newspaper 09-06-00 and 09-13-00



   This book publication is correct and this book so published shall be
received in evidence in all courts for the purpose of providing the
ordinances therein contained, the same as though the original ordinances were
produced in court.



___________________________



GRACE ARBOGAST, MAYOR



ATTEST:



___________________________



JOAN SCHMIDT, CITY CLERK



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



      Chapter



         10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



   CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Rules of interpretation



   10.03   Captions



   10.04   Definitions



   10.05   Severability



   10.06   Reference to other sections or laws



   10.07   Reference to offices



   10.08   Errors and omissions



   10.09   Official time



   10.10   Reasonable time



   10.11   Ordinances repealed



   10.12   Ordinances unaffected



   10.13   Effective date of ordinances



   10.14   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.15   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.16   Section histories; statutory references



   10.17   Chapter, section and subdivision headings



   10.18   Copies of code



   10.19   Adoption by reference



   10.20   City Council Districts



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Brooklyn Park,
Minnesota is designated as the Brooklyn Park City Code and may be so cited.



§ 10.02  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Generally.  Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or
implication required, the same rules of construction, definition, and
application must govern the interpretation of this code as those governing
the interpretation of state law.



   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation.  The construction of all
ordinances of this municipality must be by the following rules, unless such
construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of
the context of the same ordinance:



      (1)    AND or OR.  Either conjunction includes the other as
if written “and/or,” if the context requires.



      (2)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute, code provisions or
ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as
well may do as the principal, such requisition shall be satisfied by the
performance of such act by an authorized agent or deputy.



      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting
the masculine gender are deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



      (4)   General term.  A general term following specific
enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless
expressly so limited.



§ 10.03  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.04  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule.  Words and phrases may be taken in their plain,
or ordinary and usual sense.  However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law must be understood according to their
technical import.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY.  The City of Brooklyn
Park, Minnesota.



   CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.



   COUNTY.  Hennepin County, Minnesota.



   MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



   MONTH.  A calendar month.



   MUST.  The act referred to is mandatory.



   OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN
shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.  All terms shall mean
a pledge taken by the person and administered by an individual authorized by
state law.



   OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT.  An officer,
office, employee, commission, or department of this municipality unless the
context clearly requires otherwise.



   PENAL OFFENSE.  The violation of an ordinance, code, or other
legislative action of the Council for which fines or imprisonment are
prescribed and shall have the meanings set forth in § 10.99 and Chapter 70
of this code.  PENAL OFFENSES, even though the word misdemeanor is
erroneously used, shall be distinguished from violations of state law called
misdemeanors which are defined in state law as crimes.



   PERSON.  Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver.  Whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.



   PETTY OFFENSE.  The violation of an ordinance, code, or other
legislative action of the Council for which a sentence of a fine of not more
than $200 may be imposed and no sentence of imprisonment may be imposed and
shall have the meanings set forth in § 10.99 and Chapter 70 of this code. 
PETTY OFFENSE, even though the word misdemeanor or term petty misdemeanor may
be erroneously used, shall be distinguished from violations of state law
called misdemeanors which are defined in state law as crimes, and further
distinguished from violations of state law called petty misdemeanors which
are described in state law as not constituting a crime.



   PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person cannot
write.



   STATE.  The State of Minnesota.



   SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the
chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of
the heading.  Not all chapters have subchapters.



   WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.



   YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



('72 Code, § 1400:00)



§ 10.05  SEVERABILITY.



   Every section, provision or part of the code is declared separable from
every other section, provision or part, and if any section, provision of part
of the code shall be held invalid, it shall not affect another section,
provision or part thereof.



(‘72 Code, § 1200:00)



§ 10.06  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS OR LAWS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
Whenever a provision in this code adopts the provisions of another portion of
this code, state or federal law or state or federal regulations by reference
it also adopts by reference any subsequent amendments of such code provision,
law, or regulation, except where there is a clearly stated intention to the
contrary.



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this municipality exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.08  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and
such word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of such error.



§ 10.09  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
must be the official time within this municipality for the transaction of all
municipal business.



§ 10.10  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice is deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, is computed by excluding the first day and including the last.  If
the last day is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.11  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code.



§ 10.12  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.13  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   Ordinances are effective in accordance with Section 3.08 of the City
Charter.



§ 10.14  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   If any ordinance or part of an ordinance is repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance
thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication
of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to
give effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.15  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter
or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.16  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending
ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section.




   Example:   (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. passed 1-1-70; Am.
Ord. passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. passed 1-1-85)




   (B)   (1)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.




   Example:   (M.S. § 609.034)  (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord.
passed 1-1-85)




      (2)   A statutory cite set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section indicates that the reader
should refer to that statute for further information.



   Example:




      § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.




         This municipality shall make available to any person for
inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state
law.



      Statutory reference:




         For provisions concerning the inspection of public records,
see M.S. §§ 138.163 et seq.




§ 10.17  CHAPTER, SECTION AND SUBDIVISION HEADINGS.



   All chapter, section, subsection and subdivision headings of this code
are to be construed as not part of the subject mater of the code, but are
intended for convenience only and not as comprehensive titles.



§ 10.18  COPIES OF CODE.



   Copies of this code are kept in the office of the City Clerk for public
inspection and sale for a reasonable charge.



§ 10.19  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   Statutes or administrative rules or regulations of the State of
Minnesota, codes and ordinances adopted by reference in this code are adopted
pursuant to authority granted by M.S. § 471.62.  At least one copy of any
item so adopted, but not less than the number of copies required by law, must
be kept in the office of the City Clerk for use by the public.



§ 10.20  CITY COUNCIL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   West District. That part of Brooklyn Park west of a line
described as follows:  commencing at the point of intersection of the
Brooklyn Park-Champlin corporate limits and the centerline of Winnetka Avenue
North (CSAH 103); thence south along the centerline of Winnetka Avenue North
(CSAH 103) to the centerline of West Broadway (CSAH 103); thence south along
the centerline of West Broadway (CSAH 103) to the centerline of 85th Avenue
North (CSAH 109); thence East along the centerline of 85th Avenue North (CSAH
109) to the centerline of Zane Avenue North (CSAH 14); thence south along the
centerline of Zane Avenue North (CSAH 14) to the centerline of Brooklyn
Boulevard (CSAH 152) thence south along the centerline of Zane Avenue North
to the centerline of 73rd Avenue North; thence East along the centerline of
73rd Avenue North to the centerline of Unity Avenue North; thence south along
the centerline of Unity Avenue North to the Brooklyn Park-Brooklyn Center
corporate limits.



   (B)   Central District.  That part of Brooklyn Park described as
follows:  commencing at the point of intersection of the Brooklyn
Park-Champlin corporate limits and the centerline of Noble Parkway North
(CSAH 12); thence south along the centerline of Noble Parkway North (CSAH 12)
to the centerline of 85th Avenue North (CSAH 109); thence East along the
centerline of 85th Avenue North (CSAH 109) to the centerline of Xerxes Avenue
North; thence south along the centerline of Xerxes Avenue North to the
centerline of 74th Avenue North; thence south along a line to the southeast
corner of the northeast 1/4 of Section 27.  Said line intersects the
Brooklyn Park-Brooklyn Center corporate limits; thence west along the
Brooklyn Park-Brooklyn Center corporate limits to the intersection of the
Brooklyn Park-Brooklyn Center corporate limits and the centerline of Unity
Avenue North; thence north along the centerline of Unity Avenue North to the
centerline of 73rd Avenue North; thence west along the centerline of 73rd
Avenue North to the centerline of Zane Avenue North; thence north along the
centerline of Zane Avenue North to the centerline of Brooklyn Boulevard (CSAH
152); thence north along the centerline of Zane Avenue North (CSAH 14) to the
centerline of 85th Avenue North (CSAH 109); thence west along the centerline
of 85th Avenue North (CSAH 109) to the centerline of West Broadway (CSAH
103); thence north along the centerline of West Broadway (CSAH 103) to the
centerline of Winnetka Avenue North (CSAH 103); thence north along the
centerline of Winnetka Avenue North (CSAH 103) to the intersection of
Winnetka Avenue North (CSAH 103) and the Brooklyn Park-Champlin corporate
limits; thence east along the Brooklyn Park-Champlin corporate limits to the
point of commencement and there terminating.



   (C)   East District. That part of Brooklyn Park east of a line
described as follows:  commencing at the point of intersection of the
Brooklyn Park-Brooklyn Center corporate limits and the southeast corner of
the northeast 1/4 of Section 27; thence north along a line to the
intersection of the centerline of 74th Avenue North and the centerline of
Xerxes Avenue North; thence north along the centerline of Xerxes Avenue North
to the centerline of 85th Avenue North (CSAH 109); thence west along the
centerline of 85th Avenue North (CSAH 109) to the centerline of Noble Parkway
North (CSAH 12); thence north along the centerline of Noble Parkway North
(CSAH 12) to the intersection of Noble Parkway North (CSAH 12) and the
Brooklyn Park-Champlin corporate limits.



(Ord. 2003-994, passed 3-24-03; Am. Ord. 2012-1137, passed 4-2-12)



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this code for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor.  The penalty which may be imposed
for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference,
which is designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a petty misdemeanor.  The penalty which may be imposed for any
petty offense which is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of
not more than $300.



   (C)   In either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor,
the costs of prosecution may be added.  A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.



   (D)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform
any official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or
employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.



Cross-reference:



   Administrative penalties, see Ch. 37



   Definitions for penal offense and petty offense, see § 10.04



Statutory reference:



   Ordinance violations and penalties, see M.S. §§ 412.231 and 609.034



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



      Chapter



         30.   CITY COUNCIL



         31.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS



         32.   FIRE DEPARTMENT



         33.   POLICE DEPARTMENT



         34.   FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION



         35.   ELECTIONS



         36.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



         37.   ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES



         38.   CITY POLICIES



         39.   DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT



         40.   OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE DEPARTMENT



         41.   BACKGROUND CHECKS



CHAPTER 30:  CITY COUNCIL



Section




General Provisions




   30.01   Salary of Mayor and Council members




Rules and Procedures




   30.15   Meetings



   30.16   Mayor to preside



   30.17   Agenda



   30.18   Mayor duties and rights



   30.19   Speaking



   30.20   In writing



   30.21   Question under debate



   30.22   Voting



   30.23   Boards and commissions



   30.24   Ordinances



   30.25   Ordinance book



   30.26   Petitions, papers and agenda



   30.27   Limitation to public



   30.28   Robert's Rules of Order



   30.29   Compliance



   30.30   Special meetings



   30.31   Minutes



   30.32   Council vacancy application and appointment procedure



   30.39   Appointment of boards and commissions



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 30.01  SALARY OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.



   (A)   The monthly salary of each Council member shall be $950 per
month until January 1, 2019, at which time it shall be $969 per month until
January 1, 2020, at which time it shall be $988 per month, and the monthly
salary for the Mayor shall be $1425 per month until January 1, 2019, at which
time it shall be $1454 per month until January 1, 2020, at which time it
shall be $1483 per month.



   (B)   The salary schedule referred to in division (A) of this
section is established on the basis that the offices of Mayor and Council
member in this city are part-time positions. The Mayor and/or Council members
are sometimes required to attend municipal functions or to take time from
their regular employment to perform services beneficial to the city.
Additional compensation is paid to the Mayor or Council members in those
cases subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   The activity and number of days for which a Council
member is to be engaged must be approved by the City Council prior to
member’s participation.



      (2)   The Mayor and Council member will be paid $50 per day as
supplemental compensation for each day approved and for which the member is
in attendance at the approved activity.



   (C)   The City Manager shall biennially prepare a compensation
report that contains an analysis of the compensation paid to elected
officials of the Minneapolis-St. Paul area metropolitan cities similar to the
City of Brooklyn Park.  The report shall be provided to the City Council for
review.



('72 Code, § 115:00)  (Am. Ord. 1996-817, passed 5-13-96; Am. Ord.
1998-880, passed 5-11-98; Am. Ord. 2000-923, passed 4-10-00; Am. Ord.
2002-976, passed 6-10-02; Am. Ord. 2006-1054, passed 1-23-06; Am. Ord.
2018-1233, passed 7-9-18)



RULES AND PROCEDURES



§ 30.15  MEETINGS.



   The Council has regular meetings on the first, second and fourth
Mondays of each month commencing at 7:00 p.m. If any of the Mondays falls on
a holiday, the Council will have its regular meeting on the following day and
adjourned special meetings at any other time the Council may deem proper. 
All meetings are held in the City Hall or elsewhere as designated by the
Council.



('72 Code, § 100:00)  (Am. Ord. 1978-265(A), passed 5-22-78; Am. Ord.
1988-588(A), passed 1-25-88; Am. Ord. 1998-878, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord.
2003-988, passed 2-3-03; Am. Ord. 2005-1031, passed 1-18-05; Am. Ord.
2015-1187, passed 2-17-15)



§ 30.16  MAYOR TO PRESIDE.



   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Council.  In the
absence of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem must preside.  In the absence of
both, the Council members must elect one of their number as a temporary
Chair.  The Mayor Pro Tem and temporary Chair, when occupying the place of
the Mayor, have the same privileges as other members.



('72 Code, § 100:03)



§ 30.17  AGENDA.



   At the hour appointed for meetings, the members shall be called to
order by the Mayor and in the absence of the Mayor by the Mayor Pro Tem, and
in the absence of both by the City Clerk.  The City Clerk shall call the
roll, note the absentees and announce whether a quorum is present.  In the
absence of the City  Clerk, the Mayor shall appoint a Secretary Pro Tem. 
Upon the appearance of a quorum, the Council must proceed to business which
shall be conducted as established by the City Council by resolution.



('72 Code, § 100:09)  (Am. Ord. 1998-878, passed 4-13-98)



§ 30.18  MAYOR DUTIES AND RIGHTS.



   The Mayor shall preserve order and decorum and shall decide questions
of order subject to appeal to the Council.  The Mayor may make motions,
second motions or speak on any question, provided however, that in order to
do so upon demand of any one Council member, the Mayor may vacate the Chair
and designate the Mayor Pro Tem, if the Mayor Pro Tem is present, or if the
Mayor Pro Tem is not present, a Council member to preside temporarily.  The
Mayor may vote on any matter before the Council.



('72 Code, § 100:12)



§ 30.19  SPEAKING.



   A member may not speak more than twice on any question, nor more than
five minutes each time, without the consent of a majority of the Council.



('72 Code, § 100:15)



§ 30.20  IN WRITING.



   Resolutions and motions, except a motion to adjourn, postpone,
reconsider, commit, lay on the table, or for the previous question, must be
in writing, if the Mayor or any member so requests; when made and seconded it
shall be stated by the Mayor, or being written, shall be read by the City
Clerk, and may be withdrawn before decision or amendment or any disposition
thereof has been made or a vote taken thereon.



('72 Code, § 100:21)



§ 30.21  QUESTION UNDER DEBATE.



   When a question is under debate no motion shall be entertained unless
to adjourn, to lay on the table, to act on the previous question, to
postpone, to commit or to amend, which several motions shall have precedence
in the order in which they are named and the first three shall be decided
without debate.



('72 Code, § 100:24)



§ 30.22  VOTING.



   (A)   When a question is put by the Mayor, every member present must
vote unless excused by the Council, but if interested the member shall not
vote.  In doubtful cases, the Mayor may direct or any member call for a
division.  It is assumed that every vote is unanimous and it must be
recorded accordingly unless a poll of the members is called upon a
requisition of the Mayor or any member, in which case the names of the
members voting are required to be recorded in the minutes and whether each
has voted yea or nay.



   (B)   Votes of the members on any business coming before the Council
may be by voice vote, standing vote, or in such other manner of voting as may
signify the intention of the members.



('72 Code, § 100:30)



§ 30.23  BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.



   Boards and commissions are appointed by the Council.



('72 Code, § 100:33)  (Am. Ord. 2018-1228, passed 2-5-18)



§ 30.24  ORDINANCES.



   An ordinance except an emergency ordinance must receive two readings by
the City Clerk before the Council previous to its passage unless the reading
is dispensed with by unanimous consent, but may not be read twice at the same
meeting.  An ordinance introduced or considered must be recorded in the
minutes by title.



('72 Code, § 100:42)



§ 30.25  ORDINANCE BOOK.



   Ordinances must be signed by the Mayor and deposited with the City
Clerk, who must attest, seal, number, file and record, or place the same
permanently in the ordinance book.  The affidavit of publication of the
ordinance must be permanently inserted in the ordinance book after each
ordinance.



('72 Code, § 100:51)



§ 30.26  PETITIONS, PAPERS AND AGENDA.



   Petitions and other papers addressed to the Council must be in writing
and filed with the City Clerk not later than 3:00 p.m. the Wednesday prior to
any regular meeting at which it will be presented.  At the time of the
meeting, such papers must be read by the City Clerk unless the reading is
dispensed by unanimous consent of the Council.  All matters heard by the
Council must be according to a written agenda prepared prior to the
meeting.  The City Clerk must be notified by 3:00 p.m. the Wednesday prior
to the regular meetings of all matters to be placed on the agenda, except
that matters carried over from a previous meeting may be placed on the agenda
without further notice.



('72 Code, § 100:54)



§ 30.27  LIMITATION TO PUBLIC.



   Only the Mayor and other members of the Council and city officials are
admitted within the bar of the Council.  Persons other than Council members
may not address the Council except by a vote of a majority of the members
present. Persons addressing the Council may speak for no more than ten
minutes, unless additional time is granted by the Mayor.



('72 Code, § 100:57)



§ 30.28  ROBERT'S RULES OF ORDER.



   Matters not covered by the City Charter and by these rules are governed
in its procedure by Robert's Rules of Order, Latest Revised Edition.



('72 Code, § 100:69)



§ 30.29  COMPLIANCE.



   The rules in this chapter are adopted to facilitate the transaction of
Council business and functions.  Informal compliance and substantial
performance are sufficient under the foregoing rules in the absence of
objection seasonably taken by a Council member.  Objection is hereby
declared not to have been seasonably taken as to procedural matters provided
for herein if a Council member present at a meeting fails to object during
the meeting in compliance with these rules, and such objection is not
seasonably taken if taken by an absent member later than the next regular
meeting after the proceedings to which objection is made.



('72 Code, § 100:72)



§ 30.30  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   (A)   Special meetings may be called by the Mayor or any three
members of the Council upon at least 72 hours notice is given to each member
of the Council. The notice must be delivered personally to each member or
left at the member's usual place of residence with some responsible person.



   (B)   Special meetings may be held without notice when all members
are present and take part in the meeting or consent in writing to hold such
special meeting without other notice.  The written consent must be filed
with the City Clerk prior to the commencement of the meeting.  A special
meeting attended by all members is a regular meeting for the transaction of
any business that may come before it.



('72 Code, § 100:78)



§ 30.31  MINUTES.



   (A)   Minutes of meetings must be kept by the City Clerk.  Minutes
must be signed by the City Clerk, and constitute an official record of the
Council proceedings.  Upon approval of the minutes at a subsequent meeting
of the Council, the Mayor must sign the minutes.  Lack of such Mayor's
signature or Council approval does not invalidate the minutes as official
records.



   (B)   In the event the City Clerk fails or declines to amend or
change the minutes, upon informal request, at the time they are submitted for
approval, the Council may by motion carried by majority vote amend the
minutes.  The amending motion becomes a part of the minutes of the
subsequent meeting.



('72 Code, § 100:81)



§ 30.32  COUNCIL VACANCY APPLICATION AND APPOINTMENT PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to establish an
application and appointment procedure as required by Section 2.06 of the City
Charter for filling a vacancy in the office of Mayor or City Council member.



   (B)   Procedure.  In those situations where Section 2.06 of the
City Charter requires the City Council to appoint an eligible person to fill
a vacancy in the office of Mayor or City Council member, the following
procedure will be followed:



      (1)   Announcement of the vacancy must be published in the
city's official newspaper and posted on the city's website as soon as
possible after the City Council has declared the vacancy to exist. The
announcement must advise interested persons of the process for applying for
the vacancy and the procedure that the City Council will follow in filling
the vacancy.



      (2)   Eligible persons desiring to fill the vacancy must
submit an application to the City Clerk within the time frame established by
the City Council.



      (3)   If there are multiple applicants, the City Council must
select at least two of them to be interviewed by the City Council. The
interviews must take place at a regular or special Council meeting. If there
is only one applicant, the recruitment period shall be extended provided that
the deadline established in Section 2.06 of the City Charter for making an
appointment is not jeopardized.



      (4)   At the first Council meeting after all of the interviews
have been completed, the City Council must vote on filling the vacancy in the
manner set forth in Section 2.06 of the City Charter.



   (C)   Exception.  If the declaration date of the vacancy occurs 60
days or less before the next regular city election, the City Council may,
without going through the process set forth in this section, fill the vacancy
by appointing the person who is elected at that election to serve the new
four-year term of office for the vacated Council seat.



(Ord. 2017-1224, passed 11-27-17)



§ 30.39  APPOINTMENT TO BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.



   Notwithstanding any provisions of this Code to the contrary, if there
are no applicants for an appointment to a board or commission residing in the
district from which the appointment is required to be made, an applicant
residing in any district of the city may be appointed to such board or
commission.  An individual who is serving on a board or commission and who
does not reside in the appropriate district is eligible for reappointment to
the same seat even if other individuals who reside in the appropriate
district apply for the seat.



(Ord. 2000-932, passed 9-11-00; Am. Ord. 2018-1228, passed 2-5-18)



CHAPTER 31:  DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS



Section




Recreation and Park Department




   31.01   Establishment



   31.02   Duties




Board of Appeals and Adjustments




   31.15   Establishment of Board



   31.16   Advisory board



   31.17   Duties of Board



   31.18   Notice of hearing



   31.19   Reports




Health Officer; Board of Health




   31.30   Health Officer; appointment and duties



   31.31   Board of Health



   31.32   Enforcement provisions




Recreation and Parks Advisory Commission




   31.45   Establishment



   31.46   Compensation



   31.47   Duties



   31.48   Reports



   31.49   Reports to be advisory



Planning Commission



   31.60   Establishment; composition



   31.61   Duties



   31.62   Preparation and maintenance of comprehensive plan




Human Rights Commission




   31.75   Establishment



   31.76   Composition and representation



   31.77   Initial appointments



   31.78   Organization



   31.79   Duties




The Budget Advisory Commission




   31.90   Establishment



   31.91   Duties



   31.92   Composition and representation



   31.93   Desired qualifications



Cross-reference:



   Department of Community Development, see Chapter 39



   Department of Engineering and Building Inspections, see Chapter 40



   Fire Department, see Chapter 32



   Police Department, see Chapter 33



RECREATION AND PARK DEPARTMENT



§ 31.01  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is hereby continued as heretofore created a Recreation and Park
Department.  The Department and all its employees operate under the
jurisdiction and control of the City Manager and the Department Director.



('72 Code, § 240:00)  (Am. Ord. 1997-863, passed 11-24-97)



§ 31.02  DUTIES.



   The Recreation and Park Department, supervised by the Department
Director, responsible to the City Manager, is responsible for all programs
relating to parks and public recreation and is responsible for planning
improvements and operation of all public parks, playgrounds and public
recreation programs of the city.



('72 Code, § 240:05)  (Am. Ord. 1997-863, passed 11-24-97)



BOARD OF APPEALS AND ADJUSTMENTS



§ 31.15  ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD.



   There is hereby created within the City of Brooklyn Park a Board of
Appeals and Adjustments as required by state statutes.  The Board consists
of the City Planning Commission.  All members serve without compensation,
but are entitled to reimbursement for expenses incurred by performing their
duties.  The Chair of the Planning Commission serves as Chair of the Board
of Appeals and Adjustments and must appoint a Secretary, who may be but need
not be a member of the Board.  Staff services are furnished by the City
Manager or designee.



('72 Code, § 205:00)



§ 31.16  ADVISORY BOARD.



   The Board of Appeals and Adjustments is advisory to the Council and all
decisions made by the Board must be transmitted to the Council in writing in
the form of recommendations.  The Council makes the final determination on
all appeals.



('72 Code, § 205:05)



§ 31.17  DUTIES OF BOARD.



   The Board of Appeals and Adjustments is charged with the following
duties:



   (A)   To hear and make recommendations with respect to appeals from
any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the administrative
officer of the city in the enforcement of the zoning code.



   (B)   To hear requests for variances from the literal provisions of
the zoning code in instances where their strict enforcement would cause undue
hardship because of circumstances unique to the individual property under
consideration and to recommend such variances only when it is demonstrated
that such actions will be in keeping with the spirit and intent of the zoning
code.  Provided, however, that neither the Board nor the Council may permit
as a variance any use which is prohibited under the zoning ordinance for
property in the zones where the affected persons' land is located.  The
Board or Council, as the case may be, may impose conditions in the granting
of variances to insure compliance and to protect adjacent properties.



('72 Code, § 205:10)



§ 31.18  NOTICE OF HEARING.



   No matter may be heard by the Board unless and until the applicant has
been given ten days notice in writing of the date and place of the hearing. 
Notice is deemed to have been given when deposited in the United States mail,
addressed to the appellant at the appellant’s last known address.



('72 Code, § 205:15)



§ 31.19  REPORTS.



   All recommendations to the Council must be reduced to writing and a
copy thereof must be mailed to appellant.  The mailing of the minutes of the
meetings of the Board is sufficient to satisfy this requirement.



('72 Code, § 205:20)



HEALTH OFFICER; BOARD OF HEALTH



§ 31.30  HEALTH OFFICER; APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Health Officer is appointed by the  City Manager, with
the approval of the Council. 



('72 Code, § 230:00)  (Am. Ord. 1977-245(A), passed  - -  )



   (B)   The Health Officer serves in an advisory capacity to the
Council and the Board of Health. The Health Officer must see that all health
laws and regulations are obeyed. The Health Officer must take such legal
steps as are necessary to control communicable disease, and must advise the
City Council and the Board of Health of any health regulations or directions
of the State Board of Health that are not being carried out. The Health
Officer must advise the Council and Board of Health in a medical way as to
diagnosis for the purpose of quarantine, release of quarantine, details of
necessary control methods, and other technical preventive measures. The
Health Officer is responsible for the duties placed upon local health
officers by the statutes of the State of Minnesota. 



('72 Code, § 230:05)



§ 31.31  BOARD OF HEALTH.



   (A)   Policy. The Board of Health, the Health Officer, or their duly
authorized representatives have and must exercise all powers to make such
investigations and reports and to obey such directions concerning
communicable diseases as the State Board of Health may require or give; and,
under the general supervision of the State Board of Health, must cause all
statutes of the State of Minnesota, Regulations of the Board of Health, and
ordinances of the City to be obeyed and enforced. The actual enforcement of
these laws, regulations, and ordinances  is the duty and responsibility of
the City Manager or the City Manager’s duly authorized representative.



   (B)   Membership. The Board of Health for the city consists of eight
members. Seven members must be the members of the City Council. One member
must be a physician, licensed to practice in the State of Minnesota, who must
be the City Health Officer appointed pursuant to § 31.30(A) and who must
also be the executive officer of the Board of Health. The Health Officer must
serve until his resignation or until a successor is appointed.



   (C)   Duties of Board. The duties of the Board of Health and the
Health Officer are as defined in the statutes of the State of Minnesota and
the regulations of the State Board of Health. The Board of Health serves in
an advisory capacity to the Health Officer and the City Manager in making
recommendations concerning the general health program within the city.



   (D)   Meetings of the Board. The Board of Health meets at such times
as it may deem necessary. A majority of the members constitutes a quorum. The
Board must make such regulations as they deem necessary for their meetings
and for the conduct of their business.



   (E)   Administration. The City Manager, or his duly authorized
representative, must make  investigations and reports, and obey directions
concerning communicable diseases as the Board of Health may require or give;
and, under the general supervision of the Board of Health, they must cause
all statutes of the State of Minnesota, regulations of the State Board of
Health, ordinances of the city relating to public health, and all lawful
orders of the City Council to be obeyed and enforced.



   (F)   Right of entry. For the purposes of performing their official
duties, all members, officers, and employees of the Board of Health, the
Health Officer and their duly authorized representatives have the right to
enter any building, conveyance or place where contagion, infection, filth,
nuisance, or source or cause of preventable disease exists or is reasonably
suspected.



('72 Code, § 230:10)



§ 31.32  ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS.



   The City Manager may employ an Environmental Health Specialist and
Assistant Environmental Health Specialist or other health officials who must
enforce all statutes, ordinances and codes relating to public health and
sanitation, and may achieve compliance through the issuance of notices,
warning tickets, citations and abatement in lieu of arrest or detention.



('72 Code, § 230:15)  (Ord. 1987-570(A), passed 8-24-87)



RECREATION AND PARKS ADVISORY COMMISSION



§ 31.45  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is hereby continued as heretofore created a Recreation and Parks
Advisory Commission.  All 12 members must be lawful residents of the City of
Brooklyn Park.  Members are appointed by the Council for terms of three
years, excepting the ex-officio members, who serve a one-year term. 
Vacancies are to be filled for the remainder of the original term of office
in the same manner as provided for original appointments.  One member, who
is an ex-officio member must be a member of the Council, and there must be
one member who is an ex- officio member who must be a member of the Planning
Commission.



('72 Code, § 245:00)  (Am. Ord. 1973-139(A), passed 2-26-73; Am. Ord.
1008-1086, passed 4-7-08; Am. Ord. 2018-1228, passed 2-5-18)



§ 31.46  COMPENSATION.



   The members of the Commission serve without pay but may be reimbursed
for actual expenses if funds therefor are provided in the adopted budgets of
the Recreation and Park Department Fund.



('72 Code, § 245:05)



§ 31.47  DUTIES.



   It is the duty of the Commission to hold meetings of its members at
least once a month on a regular scheduled meeting date, and to meet from time
to time with the City Manager, the Council, and the Director of Recreation
and Park to consider such matters pertaining to parks and public recreation
programs in the city as are referred to the Commission by the Council, the
City Manager, the Director of Recreation and Park, or as the members of the
Commission deem proper.



('72 Code, § 245:10)



§ 31.48  REPORTS.



   The Commission must make an annual report to the City Manager and the
Council containing such details as the Council requires, concerning its
estimate of financial needs and its recommendations for the ensuing year. 
The Commission must report quarterly on its activities to the Council.



('72 Code, § 245:15)



§ 31.49  REPORTS TO BE ADVISORY.



   The Commission's reports, conclusions and recommendations must be made
to the Council, City Manager and the Director of Recreation and Park as may
be requested, or to any or all of them as the Commission deems appropriate in
the light of the matter under consideration.  Its reports, conclusions and
recommendations are purely advisory, and the final determination and
responsibility is with the Council.  It shall be aided and assisted in every
way possible by the Director of Recreation and Park, who is appointed by the
City Manager.



('72 Code, § 245:20)



PLANNING COMMISSION



§ 31.60  ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION.



   There is hereby continued as heretofore created a Planning Commission
for the City of Brooklyn Park to have all the powers provided by state law
and as set forth in this subchapter.



   (A)   There are nine members of the Commission to be appointed by
the Council in the manner hereinafter set forth.



   (B)   All members of the Commission must be lawful residents of the
City of Brooklyn Park. 



   (C)   The nine members are appointed to serve for terms of three
years each, except that any vacancy occurring among the members of the
Planning Commission during an unexpired term must be filled for the rest of
the term by vote of the Council.  Any members of said Commission may be
removed for cause by the Council upon notice, written charges, and after a
public hearing.  Appointments must be made as soon after the first of each
year as practicable.



   (D)   The members of the Commission must take the usual oath of
office and the Commission must appoint its own Chair and Secretary and may
provide its own rules of procedure.  It must determine regular dates and
times of meetings, which are to be held at least once a month, and it must
call public hearings when appropriate.  No member of the Commission shall
pass or vote upon any question in which the member is directly or indirectly
interested.



   (E)   The Commission must prepare all reports as the Council shall
request.



('72 Code, § 250:00)  (Am. Ord. 1973-154(A), passed 2-26-73; Am. Ord.
2008-1086, passed 4-7-08)



§ 31.61  DUTIES.



   The Planning Commission must hear and review all petitions to amend the
zoning classifications of this code or to obtain a special permit.  The
Planning Commission must then report its recommendations to the Council for
action.



('72 Code, § 250:10)



§ 31.62  PREPARATION AND MAINTENANCE OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.



   The Planning Commission must prepare and maintain comprehensive plans
and maps for the future development of the city and make recommendations from
time to time of such changes or amendments it deems necessary.  Public
notice and hearings must be as required by this code and applicable
ordinances and laws.  Nothing herein prevents the Council from initiating
any proposal concerning comprehensive planning, zoning, platting, changes in
streets and other matters of general planning nature, provided, however, that
any proposal must first be referred to the Planning Commission for any
hearings required by law and for their recommendations.



('72 Code, § 250:15)



HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION



§ 31.75  ESTABLISHMENT.



   A Human Rights Commission comprised of nine members is established for
the purpose of securing for all residents equal opportunity in employment,
housing, public accommodations, public services, education, and full
participation in the affairs of the city by assisting the Minnesota
Department of Human Rights in implementing state laws against discrimination
and by advising the City Council in long-range programs to ensure human
service needs are met.



('72 Code, § 290:00)  (Ord. 1993-726, passed 7-12-93; Am. Ord. 2007- 1078,
passed 10-15-07; Am. Ord. 2018-1228, passed 2-5-18)



§ 31.76  COMPOSITION AND REPRESENTATION.



   All nine members of the Commission must be lawful residents of the
city.  All members are appointed by the Council and serve staggered
three-year terms.  Any vacancy occurring among the members during an
unexpired term must be filled for the rest of term by vote of the Council. 
Members of the Commission may be removed for cause by the Council upon notice
and written charges and after a public hearing.  Members of the Commission
serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed personal expenses in the
performance of their duties.



('72 Code, § 290:05)  (Ord. 1993-726, passed 7-12-93; Am. Ord. 1998-870,
passed 3-23-98; Am. Ord. 2008-1086, passed 4-7-08)



§ 31.77  INITIAL APPOINTMENTS.



   One member from each district must serve a one-year term; one member
from each district must serve a two-year term; and one member from each
district must serve a three-year term.



('72 Code, § 290:10)  (Ord. 1993-726, passed 7-12-93)



§ 31.78  ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   The Commission must elect from its membership a Chair, and a
Vice Chair, each of whom must serve for a period of not more than three
years.  The Chair must preside at all meetings of the Commission.  In the
absence of the Chair, the Vice Chair must preside.



   (B)   The Commission must appoint a Secretary from its membership or
at its election request that a staff secretary be furnished by the city.



   (C)   All meetings of the Commission must be open to the public, be
governed by Roberts Rules of Order and otherwise held pursuant to the by-laws
adopted by the Commission.  It is the duty of the Secretary of the
Commission to record the minutes of all meetings and transmit a copy thereof
to each member of the Commission, City Council and City Manager.



('72 Code, § 290:15)  (Ord. 1993-726, passed 7-12-93; Am. Ord. 2018-1228,
passed 2-5-18)



§ 31.79  DUTIES.



   Duties of the Human Rights Commission are to:



   (A)   Adopt by-laws for the conduct of its affairs.



   (B)   Receive complaints and determine if the complaint is to be
forwarded to the State Department of Human Rights for the purpose of
investigation, or to North Hennepin Mediation Services for alternative
dispute resolution.



   (C)   Improve the home, family, and human relations climate in the
community.



   (D)   Enlist the cooperation of the Minnesota League of Human Rights
Commission and other agencies, organizations and individuals in the community
in an active program directed to create equal opportunity and to educate the
community in order to eliminate discrimination and inequalities.



   (E)   Advise the Mayor, the Council and other city agencies on human
relations and civil rights issues and problems.  Act in an advisory capacity
to the city on issues of civil and human rights.  Recommend the adoption of
specific policies or actions as are needed to ensure equal opportunity in the
community.



   (F)   Assist in the development, formulation, and implementation of
a comprehensive plan to serve as a guideline to ensure that the human
relations needs of the community are defined and met.



('72 Code, § 290:20)  (Ord. 1993-726, passed 7-12-93; Am. Ord. 2007-1078,
passed 10-15-07)



THE BUDGET ADVISORY COMMISSION



§ 31.90  ESTABLISHMENT.



   The Budget Advisory Commission is an ongoing, citizen-led commission
called to design and propose budgetary suggestions to the City Council
reflecting the input and priorities of residents in the City of Brooklyn
Park.  The Commission will make use of previous budget information, review
current and projected city service levels, analyze priorities from citizen
input, consider long and short-term anticipated capital and operating
expenditures, and identify revenue sources with consideration to projected
expenditures.  The Commission may also be asked to perform specific studies
or present recommendations based on City Council requests.



(Ord. 2003-992, passed 3-17-03)



§ 31.91  DUTIES.



   Duties of The Budget Advisory Commission are to:



   (A)   Review all budgets of the city, such as city, EDA and the
like, and long range plans, such as CIP/CEP and the like.



   (B)   Review results of previous citizen surveys, City Council goals
and prioritization of city services. 



   (C)   Recommend any necessary or reasonable survey or information
gathering process to gain current resident preferences.



   (D)   Review historical and future trends of revenues and
expenditures, both capitol and operating.



   (E)   Review budget challenges and recommend solutions.



   (F)   Formulate suggestions to the City Council on prioritized
budget programs and choices between competing demands with citizen input.



   (G)   By May 31, the Commission shall present a recommendation for
future funding along with comments on the city's overall trends and provide
suggestions for any specific requests made by the City Council.



   (H)   Through objective measures of department performance,
determine if the city is efficiently managing and allocating the community's
resources.



   (I)   Complete a self-evaluation of the commission and make
recommendations to the City Council on how to improve the process.



(Ord. 2003-992, passed 3-17-03)



§ 31.92  COMPOSITION AND REPRESENTATION.



   (A)   Residents shall be appointed to the Budget Advisory Commission
by the Council.



   (B)   Membership shall consist of nine lawful residents.



   (C)   Members shall serve staggered terms of three years.  No
member shall serve more than two consecutive three-year terms. 



   (D)   The Mayor shall initially appoint members with the following
staggered term length:  Three members shall be appointed for one year; three
members shall be appointed for two  years; and three members shall be
appointed for three years.  Thereafter, all appointments or re-appointments
shall be for a three-year term.



   (E)   Terms shall expire on the first of April of the last year of
their appointed term.



   (F)   A Chairperson is to be chosen from among the appointed
Commission members.



   (G)   A non-voting representative of the Finance Department shall
staff the Budget Advisory Commission.  The Commission shall be provided with
any requested information, data, or materials and shall be able to discuss
any matters with the appropriate staff.  Staff members may also have the
ability to address the Commission as a whole with matters of concern.



   (H)   There shall be a non-voting representative of the City Council
assigned to act as liaison to the Budget Advisory Commission.



(Ord. 2003-992, passed 3-17-03; Am. Ord. 2008-1086, passed 4-7-08; Am. Ord.
2018-1228, passed 2-5-18)



§ 31.93  DESIRED QUALIFICATIONS.



   Members of the Budget Advisory Commission must have the ability to
translate survey data to priorities and outcomes; evaluate financial
information; have familiarity with the needs and challenges of Brooklyn Park;
and the willingness to commit to weekend and/or evening meetings.



(Ord. 2003-992, passed 3-17-03)



CHAPTER 32:  FIRE DEPARTMENT



Section



   32.01   Department established



   32.02   Fire Chief; duties



   32.03   Appointment of Assistant/Deputy Fire Chiefs



   32.04   Fire Marshal



   32.05   Equipment and reports



   32.06   Discipline



   32.07   Record of fires



   32.08   Authority of Assistant/Deputy Fire Chiefs



   32.09   Qualifications of personnel



   32.10   Rules and regulations



   32.11   Board of Officers



   32.12   Absence



   32.13   Relief Association



§ 32.01  DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.



   There is continued, as established in the city, a Fire Department
consisting of a full-time Chief, a minimum of two Assistant/Deputy Fire
Chiefs, and no less than 30 firefighters.



('72 Code, § 225:00)  (Am. Ord. 1995-784, passed 7-10-95)



§ 32.02  FIRE CHIEF; DUTIES.



   The Chief is the executive head of the Fire Department and serves as
Fire Marshal for the city.  The Chief is appointed by the City Manager
subject to the approval of the City Council.  The Fire Chief is also the
head of the Bureau of Fire Prevention of the city and has full authority to
execute all laws, ordinances and rules relating to fire prevention, fire
fighting and the Fire Department of the city.  The Chief is responsible for
the training and discipline of members of the department and for the
organization thereof as an effective firefighting unit; the Chief keeps
records of all fires and fire calls, determines the cause of all fires and
reports the same monthly in writing to the City Manager; the Chief is
responsible for compliance by the Fire Department and members thereof with
all the laws, ordinances and rules established by the City Council and for
directions received from the City Manager relating to the Fire Department. 
The Fire Chief must be selected based on training, experience, executive and
administrative qualifications and overall merit and fitness.



('72 Code, § 225:05)  (Am. Ord. 1972-120(A), passed - -; Am. Ord.
1982-395(A), passed 7-26-82; Am. Ord. 1999-894, passed 2-22-99)



§ 32.03  APPOINTMENT OF ASSISTANT/DEPUTY FIRE CHIEFS.



   The positions of Assistant/Deputy Fire Chiefs are appointed by the Fire
Chief based on merit and fitness and approved by the City Manager.



('72 Code, § 225:10)  (Am. Ord. 1985-505(A), passed 12-2-85; Am. Ord.
1995-784, passed 7-10-95)



§ 32.04  FIRE MARSHAL.



   The office of the Fire Marshal is held by the Fire Chief. The Fire
Chief may appoint investigators/inspectors to assist and carry out the
functions or responsibilities of the position under the direction of the Fire
Marshal.  The Fire Marshal is charged with the enforcement of all ordinances
aimed at fire prevention and has full authority to inspect all premises and
cause the removal or abatement of all fire and life safety hazards.



('72 Code, § 225:15)  (Am. Ord. 1985-505(A), passed 12-2-85)



§ 32.05  EQUIPMENT AND REPORTS.



   The Fire Chief has control over all of the firefighting apparatus and
is responsible for its care and condition.  The Fire Chief must make a
report annually to the City Manager as to the condition of the equipment and
as to the needs of the Fire Department.  The Fire Chief may submit
additional reports and recommendations to the City Manager as the Fire Chief
deems necessary.



('72 Code, § 225:20)  (Am. Ord. 1982-395(A), passed 7-26-82)



§ 32.06  DISCIPLINE.



   The Fire Chief shall have the authority to suspend any member for
refusal to obey orders or for neglect in the member’s duties or for cause
and the suspensions shall be made with the approval of the City Manager.



('72 Code, § 225:25)



§ 32.07  RECORD OF FIRES.



   The Chief must keep in convenient form a complete record of all
fires.  The record must include the time of the alarm, location of fire,
cause of fire (if known), type of building, name of owner and tenant, purpose
for which occupied, value of building and contents, members of the department
responding to the alarm and such other information as the Fire Chief may deem
advisable or as may be required from time to time by the Council or State
Insurance Department.



('72 Code, § 225:30)



§ 32.08  AUTHORITY OF ASSISTANT/DEPUTY FIRE CHIEFS.



   In the absence or disability of the Fire Chief, the Senior
Assistant/Deputy Fire Chief must perform all the functions and exercise all
of the authority of the Fire Chief.



('72 Code, § 225:40)  (Am. Ord. 1985-505(A), passed 12-2-85; Am. Ord.
1995-784, passed 7-10-95)



§ 32.09  QUALIFICATIONS OF PERSONNEL.



   Each firefighter must be not less than 18 years of age and
able-bodied.  They  become members of the Fire Department only after a one
year probationary period and meeting Fire Department requirements.  The
Council must require that each candidate, before becoming a probational
firefighter, complete and pass an ability test, physical examination, and
criminal background check.  All firefighters are selected by the Board of
Officers with approval by the Fire Chief and their appointment made by the
City Manager in accordance with the provisions of applicable ordinances of
the city.



('72 Code, § 225:45)  (Am. Ord. 1982-395(A), passed 7-26-82; Am. Ord.
1985-505(A), passed 12-2-85; Am. Ord. 1995-784, passed 7-10- 95)



§ 32.10  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Board of Officers must promulgate policies, procedures, rules and
regulations for its members and for the operations of the Fire Department in
accordance with the provisions of applicable ordinances of the city.  The
Fire Chief and the Board of Officers have authority to execute these
policies, procedures, rules, and regulations.



('72 Code, § 225:46)  (Am. Ord. 1995-784, passed 7-10-95)



§ 32.11  BOARD OF OFFICERS.



   The Board of Officers is comprised of the Fire Chief, Assistant/Deputy
Fire Chiefs, the Station/District Officers, and the Fire Marshal.



('72 Code, § 225:47)  (Am. Ord. 1995-784, passed 7-10-95)



§ 32.12  ABSENCE.



   Firefighters absent from drills, meetings or calls as required by the
department rules and regulations, unless excused by the Chief, shall be
subject to disciplinary action including suspension or forfeiture of
membership as specified in department rules and regulations.



('72 Code, § 225:50)  (Am. Ord. 1982-395(A), passed 7-26-82)



§ 32.13  RELIEF ASSOCIATION.



   The members and officers of the Fire Department shall organize
themselves into a Firefighter's Relief Association.



('72 Code, § 225:55)



CHAPTER 33:  POLICE DEPARTMENT



Section




General Provisions




   33.01   [Reserved]



   33.02   Service of process



   33.03   Enforcement




Police Reserve Force




   33.15   Composition



   33.16   Duties of Police Chief



   33.17   Command



   33.18   Duties of special police officers



   33.19   Expenses and disbursements



   33.20   Uniforms



   33.21   Civil defense duties



Cross-reference:



   Disposition of unclaimed property, see §§ 38.15 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 33.01  [RESERVED].



§ 33.02  SERVICE OF PROCESS.



   The Chief of Police of the city and any police officers are designated
as the officers of the city for the service of process.



('72 Code, § 265:00)



§ 33.03  ENFORCEMENT.



   The City Manager may employ community service officers or youth
resource specialists to work at the direction of the Chief of Police in the
enforcement of statutes, codes and city ordinances pertaining to animals,
parking, junk vehicles, youth related matters, and park regulations, who may
achieve compliance by issuing notices, warning tickets and citations in lieu
of arrest or detention.



('72 Code, § 265:05)  (Am. Ord. 1987-570(A), passed 8-24-87)



POLICE RESERVE FORCE



§ 33.15  COMPOSITION.



   The Police Reserve Force consists of the Chief of Police and as many
other police reserve officers as the Council may from time to time
authorize.  The police reserve officers are chosen by the City Manager based
on merit and fitness and upon recommendation of the Chief of Police.



('72 Code, § 270:00)



§ 33.16  DUTIES OF POLICE CHIEF.



   The Chief of Police shall:



   (A)   Train and equip the police reserve officers in accordance with
the rules and regulations of the Police Department.



   (B)   Assign the duties of the police reserve officers.



   (C)   Make periodic inspections to see that the duties of the police
reserve officers are carried out properly.



   (D)   Appoint a full-time police officer of the city to the position
of Reserve Coordinator to assist in training and to oversee the activities of
the police reserve officers.



('72 Code, § 270:05)



§ 33.17  COMMAND.



   The Chief of Police is the commander of the Police Reserve Force. The
Police Reserve Force is  subject to this command and control at all times
when on duty.



('72 Code, § 270:10)



§ 33.18  DUTIES OF SPECIAL POLICE OFFICERS.



   When, and only when, assigned duties by the City Manager or the Chief
of Police or their designee, each police reserve officer shall perform duties
as assigned.



('72 Code, § 270:15)



§ 33.19  EXPENSES AND DISBURSEMENTS.



   The police reserve officers may be assigned to perform the duties of
the Police Department or may be assigned to do special duty at a fixed place
at the expense of the person for whom the duty is performed.  The funds so
collected become part of the Police Reserve Fund which must be used and
disbursed in accordance with the usual requirements for the receipt, custody,
and disbursement of funds of the city by the City Manager and the Council, as
the City Manager and Council determine from time to time.



('72 Code, § 270:20)



§ 33.20  UNIFORMS.



   The police reserve officers wear a special police badge and uniform or
other insignia to identify them as police reserve officers.



('72 Code, § 270:25)



§ 33.21  CIVIL DEFENSE DUTIES.



   In event of nuclear attack or natural disaster the police reserve
officers may be assigned by the Emergency Management Director and will be
under this jurisdiction and control until the situation is under control, at
which time they revert back to the jurisdiction and control of the Police
Department.



('72 Code, § 270:30)



CHAPTER 34:  FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION



Section




Heritage Infrastructure Fund




   34.01   History and purpose



   34.02   Fund created



   34.03   Fund purposes



   34.04   Investment of Heritage Infrastructure Fund monies



   34.05   Expenditure limitation



   34.06   Planning capital projects



   34.07   Fund allocations



   34.08   Administrative expenditures



   34.09   Amendments




Lodging Tax




   34.20   Purpose



   34.21   Definitions



   34.22   Imposition of tax



   34.23   Collections



   34.24   Exceptions and exemptions



   34.25   Advertising no tax



   34.26   Payment and returns



   34.27   Examination of return adjustments, notices and demands



   34.28   Refunds



   34.29   Failure to file a return



   34.30   Delinquent taxes



   34.31   Administration of tax



   34.32   Examine records



   34.33   Contract with state



   34.34   Violations



   34.35   Use of proceeds



   34.36   Appeals



HERITAGE INFRASTRUCTURE FUND



§ 34.01  HISTORY AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   The City of Brooklyn Park has been a rapidly developing and
growing community which growth has required extensive public improvements.
The Heritage Fund was created in 1991 from surplus special assessment funds
and such funds continue to be deposited in the fund.



   (B)   The City Council believes that these funds should be preserved
and managed for the benefit of all our citizens.  The purpose of this
subchapter is to establish and continue a special fund to be called the
Heritage Infrastructure Fund which is to be administered to preserve the
principal and continue additional growth of the fund.  This subchapter
establishes a program which will benefit current and future citizens and is
intended to assist future generations as well. It is the intent of this
section that the Heritage Infrastructure Fund be preserved and maintained for
future generations.



('72 Code, § 130:00)  (Ord. 1991-685(A), passed  11-25-91; Am. Ord.
1999-901, passed 6-28-99)



§ 34.02  FUND CREATED.



   There is created and continued a separate fund designated as the
Heritage Infrastructure Fund.  The fund is to be maintained in the official
city records and administered by the Finance Director in accordance with the
provisions of this section and state law. Into the fund are to be deposited:



   (A)   The collections of special assessments and taxes levied for
the payment of the costs of an assessable public improvement that are
received after the improvement costs including debt service on bonds issued
for the improvement have been fully paid.



   (B)   Investment earnings generated by the monies in the Fund.



   (C)   Other monies appropriated by the Council or donated for the
purposes of the fund.



   (D)   Monies in the Debt Service Fund after all debt obligations for
the improvement have matured and been paid.



('72 Code, § 130:05)  (Ord. 1991-685(A), passed 11-25-91; Am. Ord.
1999-901, passed 6-28-99)



§ 34.03  FUND PURPOSES.



   The fund is to be used solely to pay the capital costs of projects of
general benefit to the city except as modified by this section.



('72 Code, § 130:10)  (Ord. 1991-685(A), passed 11-25-91; Am. Ord.
1999-901, passed 6-28-99)



§ 34.04  INVESTMENT OF HERITAGE INFRASTRUCTURE FUND MONIES.



   Investment of monies must be made in accordance with the official
investment policy adopted by the City Council.



(Ord. 1999-901, passed 6-28-99)



§ 34.05  EXPENDITURE LIMITATION.



   No more than 15% of the investment earnings of the fund may be spent in
any calendar year for current operations or current programs that are funded
by the general fund and included in the budget.



('72 Code, § 130:15)  (Ord. 1991-685(A), passed 11-25-91; Am. Ord.
1999-901, passed 6-28-99)



§ 34.06  PLANNING CAPITAL PROJECTS.



   (A)   Capital improvement projects must be included in the adopted
Long-Range Infrastructure Plan (Plan) in order to receive funding from the
fund.



   (B)   A capital project that is to be funded by the Fund must be
shown on the City's Five Year Capital Improvement Plan for a minimum of two
successive years prior to being funded.  Exceptions to this requirement may
be made by the City Council in the following circumstances:



      (1)   The City Council may determine that an emergency project
is needed immediately to protect and preserve the public health, safety, and
general welfare, or



      (2)   Two-thirds of the City Council may after a public
hearing determine that (i) no other funding source is available or (ii) that
other funding sources for the project are more costly and the Heritage
Infrastructure Fund resources are necessary to provide the most efficient
method of funding the capital project.



      (3)   The Plan shall be updated at least every two years.



('72 Code, § 130:25)  (Ord. 1991-685(A), passed 11-25-91; Am. Ord.
1999-901, passed 6-28-99)



§ 34.07  FUND ALLOCATIONS.



   Decisions for expenditures of Heritage Infrastructure Fund must be made
during the city's annual budget process. The Heritage Infrastructure Fund
must be included in budget resolutions as a funding source.  Annual fund
allocations must be considered as a part of the public hearing on the annual
budget.



   (A)   Reports. The City Manager must annually submit, prior to July
1, a report to the Council which must show such detail about the fund as may
be requested by the Council.



   (B)   Temporary borrowing.  The Council may by resolution authorize
loans from the fund for any capital purpose. The term of such a loan may not
exceed three years and it must bear interest payable to the fund at a rate of
interest not less than the average annual percentage yield on all investments
of the fund for the fiscal year in which the loan is made.



('72 Code, § 130:30)  (Ord. 1991-685(A), passed 11-25-91; Am. Ord.
1999-901, passed 6-28-99)



§ 34.08  ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENDITURES.



   Reasonable expenses necessary for the administration of the Heritage
Infrastructure Fund are to be paid from the fund.



('72 Code, § 130:35)  (Ord. 1991-685(A), passed 11-25-91; Am. Ord.
1999-901, passed 6-28-99)



§ 34.09  AMENDMENTS.



   An amendment to this section must be adopted by affirmative vote of at
least six members of the City Council after a public hearing preceded by ten
days published notice.



('72 Code, § 130:40)  (Ord. 1991-685(A), passed 11-25-91; Am. Ord.
1999-901, passed 6-28-99)



LODGING TAX



§ 34.20  PURPOSE.



   The State Legislature has authorized the imposition of a tax upon
lodging at a hotel, motel, rooming house, tourist court or other use of space
by a transient; and, the imposition of such a tax would provide funding for a
convention and tourism bureau to promote the city as a tourist and convention
center.



('72 Code, § 285:00)  (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)



§ 34.21  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.  When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words
in the singular number include the plural number.  The word MUST is always
mandatory and not merely directory.



   CITY.  The City of Brooklyn Park.



   DIRECTOR.  The Finance Director of the city.



   LODGER.  The person obtaining lodging from an operator.



   LODGING.  The furnishing for a consideration of lodging by a hotel,
motel or rooming house except where the lodging is for a continuous period of
30 days or more to the same lodger(s).  The furnishing of rooms by
religious, educational or non-profit organizations must not constitute
LODGING for purposes of this subchapter.



   OPERATOR.  A person who provides lodging to others or any officer,
agent or employee of the person.



   PERSON.  Any individual, corporation, partnership, association,
estate, receiver, trustee, executor, administrator, assignee, syndicate, or
any other combination of individuals.  Whenever the term PERSON is used in
any provision of this chapter prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as
applied to a corporation, association or partnership, means the officers, or
partners thereof as the case may be.



   RENT.  The total consideration valued in money charged for lodging
whether paid in money or otherwise, but does not include any charges for
services rendered in connection with furnishing lodging other than the room
charge itself.



('72 Code, § 285:00)  (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)



§ 34.22  IMPOSITION OF TAX.



   There is imposed a tax of 3% on the rent charged by an operator for
providing lodging to any person on and after August 1, 1986.  The tax must
be stated and charged separately and must be collected by the operator from
the lodger.  The tax collected by the operator is a debt owed by the
operator to the city and is extinguished only by payment to the city.  In no
case shall the tax imposed by this section upon an operator exceed the amount
of tax which the operator is authorized and required by this chapter to
collect from a lodger.



('72 Code, § 285:05)  (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)



§ 34.23  COLLECTIONS.



   Each operator must collect the tax imposed by this subchapter at the
time the rent is paid.  The tax collections are deemed to be held in trust
by the operator for the city.  The amount of tax must be separately stated
from the rent charged for the lodging.



('72 Code, § 285:10)  (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)



§ 34.24  EXCEPTIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Exceptions.  No tax is to be imposed on rent for lodging paid
by any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of
express provisions of federal law or international treaty.



   (B)   Exemptions.  An exemption is granted to any person as to whom
or whose occupancy it is beyond the power of the city to tax.  No exemption
is to be granted except upon a claim therefore made at the time the rent is
collected and such a claim must be made in writing and under penalty of
perjury on forms provided by the city.  All such claims must be forwarded to
the city when the returns and collections are submitted as required by this
subchapter.



('72 Code, § 285:15)  (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)



§ 34.25  ADVERTISING NO TAX.



   It is unlawful for an operator to advertise or hold out or state to the
public or any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part
thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be
added to the rent or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be
refunded.  In computing the tax to be collected, amounts of tax less than
one cent are considered an additional cent.



('72 Code, § 285:20)  (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 34.26  PAYMENT AND RETURNS.



   (A)   The taxes imposed by this subchapter must be paid by the
operator to the city monthly not later than 25 days after the end of the
month in which the taxes were collected.  At the time of payment the
operator must submit a return upon such forms and containing such information
as the director may require.  The return must contain the following minimum
information:



      (1)   The total amount of rent collected for lodging during
the period covered by the return.



      (2)   The amount of tax required to be collected and due for
the period.



      (3)   The signature of the person filing the return or that of
the agent duly authorized in writing.



      (4)   The period covered by the return.



      (5)   The amount of uncollectible rental charges subject to
the lodging tax.



   (B)   The operator may offset against the taxes payable with respect
to any reporting period, the amount of taxes imposed by this subchapter
previously paid as a result of any transaction the consideration for which
became uncollectible during such reporting period, but only in proportion to
the portion of such consideration which became uncollectible.



('72 Code, § 285:25)  (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)



§ 34.27  EXAMINATION OF RETURN ADJUSTMENTS, NOTICES AND DEMANDS.



   The Director may rely upon the Minnesota sales tax return filed by the
operator with the State of Minnesota in determining the accuracy of a return
filed under this subchapter.  The Director may after a return is filed,
examine the same and make any investigation or examination of the records and
accounts of the person making the return deemed necessary for determining its
correctness.  The tax computed on the basis of such examination is the tax
to be paid.  If the tax due is found to be greater than that paid, such
excess must be paid to the city within ten days after receipt of a notice
thereof given either personally or sent by registered mail to the address
shown on the return.  If the tax paid is greater than the tax found to be
due, the excess must be refunded to the person who paid the tax to the city
within ten days after determination of such refund.



('72 Code, § 285:30)  (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)



§ 34.28  REFUNDS.



   The person may apply to the Director for a refund of taxes paid for a
prescribed period in excess of the amount legally due for that period,
provided that no application for refund will be considered unless filed
within one year after such tax was paid, or within one year from the filing
of the return, whichever period is the longer.  The Director must examine
the claim and make and file written findings thereon denying or allowing the
claim in whole or in part and must mail a notice thereof by registered mail
to the person at the address stated upon the return.  If the claim is
allowed in whole or in part, the Director must credit the amount of the
allowance against any taxes due under this subchapter from the claimant and
the balance of the allowance, if any, must be paid by the Director to the
claimant.



('72 Code, § 285:35)  (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)



§ 34.29  FAILURE TO FILE A RETURN.



   (A)   If an operator required by this subchapter to file a return
fails to do so within the time prescribed, or makes, willfully or otherwise,
an incorrect, false, or fraudulent return, the operator must, upon written
notice and demand, file the return or corrected return within five days of
receipt of written notice and must at the same time pay any tax due on the
basis thereof.  If the person fails to file a return or corrected return,
the Director must make a return or corrected return, for the person from the
knowledge and information as the Director can obtain, and assess a tax on the
basis thereof, which tax (less any payments theretofore make on account of
the tax for the taxable period covered by such return) must be paid upon
within five days of the receipt of written notice and demand for such
payment.  Any such return or assessment made by the Director must be prima
facie correct and valid, and the person has the burden of establishing its
incorrectness or invalidity in any action or proceeding in respect thereto.



   (B)   If any portion of a tax imposed by this subchapter, including
penalties thereon, is not paid within 30 days after it is required to be
paid, the City Attorney may institute such legal action as may be necessary
to recover the amount due plus interest, penalties, the costs and
disbursements of any action.



   (C)   Upon a showing of good cause, the Director may grant an
operator one 30 day extension of time within which to file a return and make
payment of taxes as required by this subchapter provided that interest during
such period of extension must be added to the taxes due at the rate of 10%
per annum.



('72 Code, § 285:40)  (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)



§ 34.30  DELINQUENT TAXES.



   (A)   If any tax imposed by this subchapter is not paid within the
time herein specified for the payment, or any extension thereof, there is to
be added thereto a specific penalty equal to 10% of the amount remaining
unpaid.



   (B)   In case of any failure to make and file a return within the
time prescribed by this subchapter, unless it is shown that such failure is
not due to willful neglect, there is to be added to the tax in addition to
the 10% specific penalty provided in division (A) above, 10% if the failure
is for not more than 30 days with an additional 5% for each additional 30
days or fraction thereof during which such failure continues, not exceeding
25% in the aggregate.  If the penalty as computed does not exceed $10, a
minimum penalty of $10 must be assessed.  The amount so added to any tax
must be collected at the same time and the same manner and as a part of the
tax unless the tax has been paid before the discovery of the negligence, in
which case the amount so added must be collected in the same manner as the
tax.



   (C)   If any person willfully fails to file any return or make any
payment required by this subchapter, or willfully files a false or fraudulent
return or willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any such a tax
or payment thereof, there must also be imposed as a penalty an amount equal
to 50% of any tax (less any amounts paid on the basis of such false or
fraudulent return) found due for the period to which such return related. 
The penalty imposed by this division must be collected as part of the tax,
and is in addition to any other penalties provided by this subchapter.



   (D)   All payments received must be credited first to penalties,
next to interest, and then to the tax due.



   (E)   The amount of tax not timely paid, together with any penalty
provided by this section, bears interest at the rate of 8% per annum from the
time such tax should have been paid until paid.  Any interest and penalty
must be added to the tax and be collected as part thereof.



('72 Code, § 285:45)  (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)



§ 34.31  ADMINISTRATION OF TAX.



   The Director administers and enforces the assessment and collection of
the taxes imposed by this subchapter.  The Director shall cause to be
prepared blank forms for the returns and other documents required by this
subchapter and must distribute the same throughout the city and furnish them
on application, but failure to receive or secure them does not relieve a
person from any obligation required of the person under this subchapter
unless it can be established that the required forms were not available from
the city.



('72 Code, § 285:50)  (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)



§ 34.32  EXAMINE RECORDS.



   The Director and those persons acting on behalf of the Director
authorized in writing by the Director may examine the books, papers and
records of any operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made,
or if no return was made, to ascertain the tax as provided in this
subchapter.  Every such operator is directed and required to give to the
Director or to the Director’s duly authorized agent or employee the means,
facilities and opportunity for such examinations and investigations as are
hereby authorized.



('72 Code, § 285:55)  (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)



§ 34.33  CONTRACT WITH STATE.



   The City Manager is authorized to confer with the Minnesota
Commissioner of Taxation to the end that an agreement between the city and
the Commissioner of Taxation may be entered into for the purpose of providing
for the administration and collection of the taxes imposed by this
subchapter.  Such an agreement shall not become effective until presented to
the Council for its approval and when so approved the tax imposed by this
subchapter shall be collected and administered pursuant to the terms of the
agreement.



('72 Code, § 285:60)  (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)



§ 34.34  VIOLATIONS.



   A person who willfully fails to make a return required by this
subchapter; or who fails to pay the tax after written demand for payment, or
who fails to remit the taxes collected or any penalty or interest imposed by
this subchapter after written demand for such payment or who refuses to
permit the Director or any duly authorized agents or employees to examine the
books, records and papers under the person’s control, or who willfully
makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent return is guilty of a misdemeanor.



('72 Code, § 285:65)  (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 34.35  USE OF PROCEEDS.



   The 95% proceeds obtained from the collection of taxes pursuant to this
subchapter must be used in accordance with M.S. § 477A.018 as the same may
be amended from time to time to fund a local convention or tourism bureau for
the purpose of marketing and promoting the city as a tourist or convention
center.



('72 Code, § 285:70)  (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)



§ 34.36  APPEALS.



   (A)   An operator aggrieved by any notice, order or determination
made by the Director under this subchapter may file a petition for review of
such notice, order or determination detailing the operator's reasons for
contesting the notice, order or determination.  The petition must contain
the name of the petitioner, the petitioner's address and the location of the
lodging subject to the order, notice or determination.



   (B)   The petition for review must be filed with the City Clerk
within ten days after the notice, order or determination for which review is
sought has been mailed or served upon the person requesting review.



   (C)   Upon receipt of the petition the City Manager, or the City
Manager’s designee, must set a date for a hearing and give the petitioner
at least five days prior written notice of the date, time and place of the
hearing.



   (D)   At the hearing, the petitioner must be given an opportunity to
show cause why the notice, order or determination should be modified or
withdrawn.  The petitioner may be represented by counsel of petitioner's
choosing at petitioner's own expense.



   (E)   The hearing must be conducted by the City Manager or the City
Manager’s designee, provided only that the person conducting the hearing
must not have participated in the drafting of the order, notice or
determination for which review is sought.



   (F)   The person conducting the hearing must make written findings
of fact and conclusions based upon the applicable sections of this chapter
and evidence presented.  The person conducting the hearing may affirm,
reverse or modify the notice, order or determination made by the director.



   (G)   Any decision rendered by the City Manager pursuant to this
section may be appealed to the City Council.  A petitioner seeking to appeal
a decision must file a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within
ten days after the decision has been mailed to the petitioner.  The matter
will thereupon be placed on the Council agenda as soon as is practical.  The
Council must then review the findings of fact and conclusions to determine
whether they were correct.  Upon a determination by the Council that
findings and conclusions were incorrect, the Council may modify, reverse or
affirm the decision of the City Manager or the City Manager’s designee upon
the same standards as set forth in division (F) of this section.



('72 Code, § 285:75)  (Ord. 1986-536(A), passed 7-28-86)



CHAPTER 35:  ELECTIONS



Section




   35.01   Date of regular elections





   35.02   Notice of election




§ 35.01  DATE OF REGULAR ELECTIONS.



   The regular city election is held on the first Tuesday after the first
Monday in November of each even-numbered year.



('72 Code, § 110:00)



§ 35.02  NOTICE OF ELECTION.



   The City Clerk must cause at least 15 days notice of the annual city
election by posting a notice thereof in at least one public place in each
precinct and by publishing a notice thereof at least once in the official
newspaper of the city specifying the time and place thereof, the offices to
be filled, and the questions, if any, to be determined by vote.



('72 Code, § 110:05)



CHAPTER 36:  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



Section



   36.01   Emergency Management Act adopted



   36.02   Definitions



   36.03   Establishment of an Emergency Management Division



   36.04   Local emergencies



   36.05   Powers and duties of Emergency Management Director



   36.06   Appointment of coordinator



§ 36.01  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ACT ADOPTED.



   The “Minnesota Emergency Management Act,” M.S. Chapter 12, as
amended, insofar as it relates to cities, is hereby adopted by reference as
part of this chapter, as fully as if set forth explicitly herein.  One copy
of the code as adopted is to be marked as the “Official Copy” and is on
file in the City Clerk's Office for use and examination by the public.



('72 Code, § 215:00)  (Am. Ord. 1985-504(A), passed 12-2-85; Am. Ord.
1991-677(A), passed 8-12-91; Am. Ord. 1997-846, passed 5-12- 97)



§ 36.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DISASTER.  A situation which creates an actual or immediate and
serious threat to the health and safety of any person, or a situation that
has resulted or is likely to result in catastrophic loss to property or the
environment, and for which traditional sources of relief and assistance
within the affected area are unable to repair or prevent the injury or loss.



   EMERGENCY.  An unforeseen combination of circumstances that calls for
immediate action to prevent a disaster from developing or occurring.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.  The preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage
resulting from disasters.



('72 Code, § 215:05)  (Am. Ord. 1985-504(A), passed 12-2-85; Am. Ord.
1991-677(A), passed 8-12-91; Am. Ord. 1997-846, passed 5-12- 97)



§ 36.03  ESTABLISHMENT OF AN EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIVISION.



   There is created within the City of Brooklyn Park an Emergency
Management Division, which is under the supervision of the City Manager. 
The City Manager appoints a Director of Emergency Management.  The Director
of Emergency Management has direct responsibility for the organization,
administration and operations of the Emergency Management Division, as
outlined by Brooklyn Park's Emergency Operations Plan as approved by the
Brooklyn Park City Council.



('72 Code, § 215:10)  (Am. Ord. 1985-504(A), passed 12-2-85; Am. Ord.
1991-677(A), passed 8-12-91; Am. Ord. 1997-846, passed 5-12- 97)



§ 36.04  LOCAL EMERGENCIES.



   A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or designated legal
successor.  Such an emergency is not to be continued for a period in excess
of three days except by or with the consent of the City Council.



('72 Code, § 215:15)  (Am. Ord. 1985-504(A), passed 12-2-85; Am. Ord.
1991-677(A), passed 8-12-91; Am. Ord. 1997-846, passed 5-12- 97)



§ 36.05  POWERS AND DUTIES OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIRECTOR.



   (A)   General operations.  The Emergency Management Director
directs and coordinates the general operation of all local efforts and the
provision of all local emergency services during an emergency, in conformity
with controlling regulations and instructions of state authorities from the
Division of Emergency Management.



   (B)   Intergovernmental arrangements.  The Emergency Management
Director represents the city on any regional or state organization on
emergency preparedness.  The Director also may develop proposed mutual aid
agreements with other political subdivisions for reciprocal aid and
assistance in an emergency too great to be dealt with unassisted, which
agreements must be presented to the City Council for approval.



   (C)   Plans and reports.  The Emergency Management Director
prepares emergency operation plans for the city and such reports of
activities as deemed appropriate or as are requested by the City Council.



   (D)   Use of city personnel.  In an emergency the Emergency
Management Director utilizes the personnel, services, equipment, supplies and
facilities of existing departments, and agencies of the city to the maximum
extent practicable.



('72 Code, § 215:20)  (Am. Ord. 1985-504(A), passed 12-2-85; Am. Ord.
1991-677(A), passed 8-12-91; Am. Ord. 1997-846, passed 5-12- 97)



§ 36.06  APPOINTMENT OF COORDINATOR.



   The Emergency Management Director is to appoint deputy directors to
assist in carrying out the functions and responsibilities of the Emergency
Management Division.



('72 Code, § 215:25)  (Am. Ord. 1985-504(A), passed 12-2-85; Am. Ord.
1991-677(A), passed 8-12-91; Am. Ord. 1997-846, passed 5-12- 97)



CHAPTER 37:  ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES



Section



   37.01   Purpose



   37.02   Administrative citations and civil penalties



   37.03   Administrative offenses; schedule of fines and fees



   37.04   Administrative citation



   37.05   Administrative hearing - automatic stay



   37.06   Administrative review



   37.07   Judicial review



   37.08   Recovery of civil penalties



   37.09   Criminal penalties



   37.10   Applicable laws



§ 37.01  PURPOSE.



   The City Council finds that there is a need for alternative methods of
enforcing the city code.  While criminal fines and penalties have been the
most frequent enforcement mechanisms, there are certain negative consequences
for both the city and the public.  The delay inherent in that system does
not ensure prompt resolution.  Citizens resent being labeled criminals for
violations of administrative regulations.  The  higher burden of proof and
the potential of incarceration do not appear appropriate for most
administrative violations.  The criminal process does not always regard city
code violations as important.  Accordingly, the City Council finds that the
use of administrative citations and the imposition of civil penalties is a
legitimate and necessary alternative method of enforcement.  This method of
enforcement is in addition to any other legal remedy which may be pursued for
city code violations.



('72 Code, § 903:10)  (Ord. 1998-881, passed 7-22-98)



§ 37.02  ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS AND CIVIL PENALTIES.



   This chapter governs administrative citations and civil penalties for
violations of the city code.



('72 Code, § 903:20)  (Ord. 1998-881, passed 7-22-98)



§ 37.03  ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES; SCHEDULE OF FINES AND FEES.



   (A)   A violation of any provision of the city code is an
administrative offense, which may be subject to an administrative citation
and civil penalties pursuant to this subchapter.  Each day a violation
exists constitutes a separate offense.



   (B)   An administrative offense may be subject to a civil penalty
not exceeding $2,000.



   (C)   The City Council must adopt by resolution a schedule of
recommended fines for offenses initiated by administration citation.  The
City Council is not bound by that schedule when a matter is appealed to it
for administrative review.



   (D)   The City Council may adopt a schedule of fees to be paid to
administrative hearing officers.



   (E)   The City Manager must adopt written procedures for
administering the administrative citation program.



('72 Code, § 903:40)  (Ord. 1998-881, passed 7-22-98)



§ 37.04  ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION.



   (A)   A person authorized to enforce provisions of the city code may
issue an administrative citation upon belief that a code violation has
occurred.  The citation must be issued in person or by first class mail to
the person responsible for the violation or attached to the motor vehicle in
the case of a vehicular offense.  The citation must state the date, time,
and nature of the offense, the identity of the person issuing the citation,
the amount of the scheduled fine, and the manner for paying the fine or
appealing the citation.



   (B)   The person responsible for the violation must either pay the
scheduled fine or request a hearing within 14 days after issuance of the
citation.  A hearing must be conducted within 30 days after a request or
within 30 days after a responsible person fails to return the automatic stay
agreement pursuant to § 37.05(F)(8).  Hearings exceeding 30 days may be
granted by the Administrative Enforcement Program Coordinator for good cause.
Payment of the fine constitutes admission of the violation.  A late payment
fee of 10% of the scheduled fine amount will be imposed in accordance with §
37.08.



('72 Code, § 903:50)  (Ord. 1998-881, passed 7-22-98; Am. Ord. 2012-1136,
passed 3-26-12)



§ 37.05  ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING - AUTOMATIC STAY.



   (A)   The City Council must periodically approve a list of persons,
from which the City Manager or designated agent will randomly select a
hearing officer to hear and determine a matter for which a hearing is
requested.  A person who has been issued a citation has the right to
request, no later than five days before the date of the hearing, that the
assigned hearing officer be removed from the case.  One such request for
each case will be granted automatically by the City Manager or designated
agent.  A subsequent request must be directed to the assigned hearing
officer who will decide whether the hearing officer can fairly and
objectively review the case.  The person issuing the citation may request
the removal of a hearing officer only if the hearing officer cannot fairly
and objectively review the case.  If such a finding is made, the officer
must remove that officer from the case, and the City Manager or designated
agent must assign another hearing officer.  The hearing officer is not a
judicial officer but is a public officer as defined by M.S. § 609.415.  The
hearing officer must not be an employee of the city.  The City Manager or
designated agent must establish a procedure for evaluating the competency of
the hearing officers, including comments from citizens and city staff. 
These reports must be provided to the City Council.



   (B)   Upon the hearing officer’s own initiative or upon written
request of an interested party demonstrating the need, the officer may issue
a subpoena for the attendance of a witness or the production of books,
papers, records or other documents that are material to the matter being
heard.  The party requesting the subpoena is responsible for serving the
subpoena in the manner provided for civil actions and for paying the fees and
expenses of any witness.  A person served with a subpoena may file an
objection with the hearing officer promptly but no later than the time
specified in the subpoena for compliance.  The officer may cancel or modify
the subpoena if it is unreasonable or oppressive.  A person who, without
just cause, fails or refuses to attend and testify or to produce the required
documents in obedience to a subpoena is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Alternatively, the party requesting the subpoena may seek an order from
district court directing compliance.



   (C)   Notice of the hearing must be served in person or by mail on
the person responsible for the violation at least ten days in advance, unless
a shorter time is accepted by all parties.  At the hearing, the parties will
have the opportunity to present testimony and question any witnesses, but
strict rules of evidence do not apply.  The hearing officer must record the
hearing and receive testimony and exhibits.  The officer must receive and
give weight to evidence, including reliable hearsay evidence, which possesses
probative value commonly accepted by reasonable and prudent people in the
conduct of their affairs.



   (D)   The hearing officer has the authority to determine that a
violation occurred, to dismiss a citation, to impose the scheduled fine, and
to reduce, stay, or waive a scheduled fine either unconditionally or upon
compliance with appropriate conditions.  When imposing a penalty for a
violation, the hearing officer may consider any or all of the following
factors:



      (1)   The duration of the violation;



      (2)   The frequency or recurrence of the violation;



      (3)   The seriousness of the violation;



      (4)   The history of the violation;



      (5)   The violator’s conduct after issuance of the notice of
hearing;



      (6)   The good faith effort by the violator to comply;



      (7)   The economic impact of the penalty on the violator;



      (8)   The impact of the violation upon the community; and



      (9)   Any other factors appropriate to a just result.



   (E)   The hearing officer may exercise discretion to impose a fine
for more than one day of a continuing violation, but only upon a finding that
the violation caused a serious threat of harm to the public health, safety,
or welfare or that the accused intentionally and the unreasonably refused to
comply with the code requirement.  The hearing officer’s decision and
supporting reasons must be in writing.



      (1)   The failure to pay the fine or request a hearing within
seven days after the citation, or the failure to attend the hearing,
constitutes a waiver of the violator’s rights to an administrative hearing
and is an admission of the violation.  A hearing officer may waive this
result upon good cause shown.  Examples of “good cause”:  death or
incapacitating illness of the accused; a court order requiring the accused to
appear for another hearing at the same time; and lack of proper service of
the citation or notice of the hearing.  “Good cause” does not include: 
forgetfulness and intentional delay.



      (2)   The decision of the hearing officer is final without any
further right of administrative appeal, except for matters subject to
administrative review under § 37.06.  In a matter subject to administrative
review under § 37.06, the hearing officer’s decision may be appealed to
the City Council by submitting a request in writing to the City Manager or
designated agent within seven days after the hearing officer’s decision.



   (F)   If a person who receives an administrative citation requests
an administrative hearing, the Administrative Enforcement Program Coordinator
will grant an automatic stay of the fine for one year if the following
conditions are met:



      (1)   No same or similar code violations have occurred at the
property within the previous 24 months.



      (2)   No code violations currently exist at the property as
determined by city staff.



      (3)   The code violation does not constitute an immediate
health or safety hazard.



      (4)   The responsible party agrees to allow city staff to
enter all areas of the property for which the administrative citation was
issued for purposes of inspecting the property to ensure compliance.



      (5)   The responsible party admits that the code violation(s)
existed and agrees to have the administrative citation fine stayed for a
period of one year from the date issued.



      (6)   If there are no same or similar code violations within
one year, the Administrative Enforcement Program Coordinator will dismiss the
administrative fine.



      (7)   If there are same or similar code violations within one
year as determined by city staff,  the stayed administrative citation fine
will be re-imposed and the amount will be due and payable within 14 days.



      (8)   The responsible party must complete and return to City
Hall the approved automatic stay agreement form within 14 days after
receiving it from the Administrative Enforcement Program Coordinator.  A
responsible party who fails to return the signed agreement within the 14-day
period will no longer be eligible to participate in the automatic stay
process and an administrative hearing will then be scheduled.



      (9)   If the property for which the administrative citation
was issued is sold to a new owner during the period of the automatic stay,
all stayed fines will be dismissed.



      (10)   Automatic stays will not be granted for tobacco and
alcohol compliance, false alarm or ruptured gas line citations. 



('72 Code, § 903:60)  (Ord. 1998-881, passed 7-22-98; Am. Ord. 2012-1136,
passed 3-26-12)



§ 37.06  ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   (A)   The hearing officer’s decision in any of the following
matters may be appealed by a party to the City Council for administrative
review:



      (1)   An alleged failure to obtain a permit, license, or other
approval from the City Council as required by an ordinance;



      (2)   An alleged violation of a permit, license, other
approval, or the conditions attached to the permit, license, or approval,
which was granted by the City Council; and



      (3)   An alleged violation of regulations governing a person
or entity, who has received a license granted by the City Council.



   (B)   The appeal must be heard by the City Council after notice
served in person or by registered mail at least ten days in advance.  The
parties to the hearing must have an opportunity to present oral or written
arguments regarding the hearing officer’s decision.



   (C)   The City Council must consider the record, the hearing
officer’s decision, and any additional arguments before making a
determination.  The Council is not bound by the hearing officer’s
decision, but may adopt all or part of the officer’s decision.  The
Council’s decision must be in writing.



   (D)   If the Council makes a finding of a violation, it may impose a
civil penalty not exceeding $2,000 per day per violation, and may consider
any or all of the factors contained in § 37.05(D).  The Council may also
reduce, stay, or waive a fine unconditionally or based on reasonable and
appropriate conditions.



   (E)   In addition to imposing a civil penalty, the Council may
suspend or revoke any city issued license, permit, or other approval
associated with the violation, if the procedures in the city code have been
followed.  Any hearing required in the city code for such suspension or
revocation is deemed satisfied by the hearing before the hearing officer with
the right of appeal to the City Council.



('72 Code, § 903:70)  (Ord. 1998-881, passed 7-22-98)



§ 37.07  JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   An aggrieved party may obtain judicial review of the decision of the
hearing officer or the City Council in accordance with state law.



('72 Code, § 903:80)  (Ord. 1998-881, passed 7-22-98)



§ 37.08  RECOVERY OF CIVIL PENALTIES.



   (A)   If a civil penalty is not paid within the time specified, it
constitutes:



      (1)   A personal obligation of the violator; and



      (2)   A lien upon the real property upon which the violation
occurred if the property or improvements on the property were the subject of
the violation and the property owner was found responsible for that violation.



   (B)   A lien may be assessed against the property and collected in
the same manner as taxes.  The lien may include the administrative and legal
costs incurred by the city in connection with collecting the unpaid
administrative penalty.  Prior to assessing the lien against the property,
the city must attempt to obtain voluntary payment of the administrative
penalty and provide the property owner listed on the tax record with notice
and an opportunity to be heard.



   (C)   A personal obligation may be collected by any appropriate
legal means.



   (D)   A late payment fee of 10% of the fine will be assessed for
each 30-day period, or part thereof, that the fine remains unpaid after the
due date.



   (E)   During the time that a civil penalty remains unpaid, no city
approval will be granted for a license, permit, or other city approval sought
by the violator or for property under the violator’s ownership or control.



   (F)   Failure to pay a fine is grounds for suspending, revoking,
denying, or not renewing a license or permit associated with the violation.



('72 Code, § 903:90)  (Ord. 1998-881, passed 7-22-98; Am. Ord. 2009-1103,
passed 9-8-09)



§ 37.09  CRIMINAL PENALTIES.



   The following are misdemeanors, punishable in accordance with state law:




   (A)   Failure, without good cause, to pay a fine or request a
hearing within 30 days after issuance of an administrative citation.




   (B)   Failure, without good cause, to appear at a hearing which was
scheduled under § 37.05.



   (C)   Failure to pay a fine imposed by a hearing officer within 30
days after it was imposed, or such other time as may be established by the
hearing officer, unless the matter is appealed under § 37.06.



   (D)   Failure to pay a fine imposed by the City Council within 30
days after it was imposed, or such other time as may be established by the
City Council.



('72 Code, § 903:100)  (Ord. 1998-881, passed 7-22-98)



§ 37.10  APPLICABLE LAWS.



   Where differences occur between provisions of this chapter and other
applicable code sections, this chapter applies.



('72 Code, § 903:110)  (Ord. 1998-881, passed 7-22-98)



CHAPTER 38:  CITY POLICIES



Section




General Provisions




   38.01   Charges for services and supplies




Unclaimed Property




   38.15   Custody of found property other than bicycles and animals



   38.16   Claims by owner



   38.17   Claim by finder



   38.18   Transfer to general fund



   38.19   Sale or appropriation of unclaimed property



   38.20   Disposition of proceeds



   38.21   Claim by owner after auction



   38.22   Summary disposal



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 38.01  CHARGES FOR SERVICES AND SUPPLIES.



   The City Council may by resolution from time to time adopt and
establish a schedule of rates for miscellaneous services provided by the city
employees or for supplies or materials sold by the city.  It is the
responsibility of the Director of Finance to collect the charges and to
allocate the monies collected to the proper fund.



('72 Code, § 220:10)  (Ord. 1972-121(A), passed 8-28-72)



UNCLAIMED PROPERTY



§ 38.15  CUSTODY OF FOUND PROPERTY OTHER THAN BICYCLES AND ANIMALS.



   The City Manager shall make provisions for receiving and safekeeping
found property and money delivered to the City Manager and coming into the
City Manager’s  possession in the course of municipal operations.  A
receipt shall be issued to the person delivering the property or money to the
city.  The property must be stored in a safe place and the money deposited
with the Director of Finance in a special account for found money for a
period of six months unless claimed by the true owner.  It will then be
subject to disposal as unclaimed property or money.



('72 Code, § 120:00)



§ 38.16  CLAIMS BY OWNER.



   During the six-month period, the City Manager may deliver the property
or order the money paid to the true owner upon proof of ownership
satisfactory to the City Manager after ten days notice by mail to any person
who has asserted a claim of ownership.  No order for the disbursement of
such money is to be made without the written order of the City Manager.  If
ownership cannot be determined to the City Manager’s satisfaction, the City
Manager may refuse to deliver the property or order the payment of the money
to anyone until ordered to do so by a court.



('72 Code, § 120:05)



§ 38.17  CLAIM BY FINDER.



   If the true owner does not claim the property or money during the
six-month period, the City Manager may deliver the property or order the
money to be paid to the person who delivered it to the City Manager if at the
time of delivery the person indicated in writing that the person wished to
assert a claim to the property or money as a finder.



('72 Code, § 120:10)



§ 38.18  TRANSFER TO GENERAL FUND.



   If any such money is not claimed by the true owner or finder within the
six-month period, the City Manager must then notify the City Clerk and the
money must then be transferred to the general fund of the city.



('72 Code, § 120:15)



§ 38.19  SALE OR APPROPRIATION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.



   After the six-month period, property not delivered to the true owner or
finder must be sold by the City Manager at a public auction or appropriated
to the use of the city.  The City Manager or designee must give ten days
published notice of the auction in the official newspaper.  The notice must
describe the article to be disposed of and announce the date, time and place
of the auction.  Instead of being sold at auction, any article or property
not delivered to the true owner or finder may be appropriated to the use of
the city by any department in need thereof upon approval of such
appropriation by the Council.



('72 Code, § 120:20)



§ 38.20  DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.



   After the auction has been completed, the City Manager must remit the
proceeds thereof to the Director of Finance for deposit in the general
fund.  Property offered for sale but not sold and not suitable for
appropriation to the use of the city is deemed worthless and is to be
disposed of in such manner as the City Manager directs.



('72 Code, § 120:25)



§ 38.21  CLAIM BY OWNER AFTER AUCTION.



   The true owner of property sold at auction hereunder must, upon
application to the City Clerk within six months of the auction and upon
satisfactory proof of ownership, be paid the sale price from the general fund.



('72 Code, § 120:30)



§ 38.22  SUMMARY DISPOSAL.



   The City Manager may without notice and in such manner as the City
Manager determines to be in the public interest dispose summarily of any
property coming into the City Manager’s  possession which the City Manager
determines to be dangerous or perishable.  The City Manager shall make a
record of the pertinent facts of the receipt and disposal of the property and
must remit any funds to the Director of Finance.



('72 Code, § 120:35)



CHAPTER 39:  DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT



Section



   39.01   Establishment



   39.02   Duties



§ 39.01  ESTABLISHMENT.



   The Department of Planning and Development, which was previously
established by Ordinance 2001-945, is renamed the Department of Community
Development. The Department and all of its employees operate under the
jurisdiction of the City Manager and Department Director.



(Ord. 2001-945, passed 1-8-01; Am. Ord. 2002-964, passed 2-25-02)



§ 39.02  DUTIES.



   The Community Development Department, supervised by the Department
Director, responsible to the City Manager, is responsible for comprehensive
planning, current planning, zoning administration, neighborhood and economic
development, general nuisance, zoning,  health code enforcement, and
building safety and building maintenance inspections.



(Ord. 2001-945, passed 1-8-01; Am. Ord. 2002-964, passed 2-25-02; Am. Ord.
2009-1106, passed 10-5-09)



CHAPTER 40:  OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE DEPARTMENT



Section



   40.01   Establishment



   40.02   Duties



§ 40.01  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is hereby created an Operations and Maintenance Department. The
Department and all of its employees operate under the jurisdiction of the
City Manager and Department Director.



(Ord. 2001-946, passed 1-8-01; Am. Ord. 2009-1106, passed 10-5-09)



§ 40.02  DUTIES.



   The Operations and Maintenance Department, supervised by the Department
Director, who shall also serve as the city's Director of Public Works and be
responsible to the City Manager, is responsible for planning and managing all
programs for the operation and maintenance of all city transportation
facilities, park facilities, forestry system, water utility, sanitary sewer
utility, recycling utility, storm sewer utility, street and signal lighting
utility, general public and recreational buildings, vehicles/equipment,
design and construction of public improvements, and traffic engineering.



(Ord. 2001-946, passed 1-8-01; Am. Ord. 2009-1106, passed 10-5-09)



CHAPTER 41:  BACKGROUND CHECKS



Section



   41.01   Purpose



   41.02   Applicants for city employment/volunteers/committees



   41.03   Access to data



   41.04   Rental properties



§ 41.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to establish regulations that
will allow law enforcement personnel access to Minnesota's computerized
criminal history information for purposes of conducting criminal history
background checks for prospective tenants of rental properties in the city
and for prospective employment and volunteer positions described in § 41.02.



(Ord. 2010-1115, passed 6-7-10)



§ 41.02  APPLICANTS FOR CITY EMPLOYMENT/VOLUNTEERS/COMMITTEES.



   Related to criminal history employment background investigations, the
Police Department is authorized, as the exclusive entity within the city, to
conduct a criminal history background investigation on the applicants for the
following employment and volunteer positions in the city:



   (A)   Administration;



   (B)   Community development;



   (C)   Municipal utilities;



   (D)   Finance (including IT);



   (E)   Parks and recreation;



   (F)   Public safety;



   (G)   Operations and maintenance;



   (H)   Any regular part-time, full-time, and seasonal employees of
the city and other positions that will be working with cash, including
volunteers that work with children and/or vulnerable adults;



   (I)   Any groups/individuals that will have access to PD facility,
i.e., Citizen's Academy attendees, multi-cultural committee, etc.



(Ord. 2010-1115, passed 6-7-10)



§ 41.03  ACCESS TO DATA.



   (A)   In conducting the criminal history background investigation in
order to screen employment applicants, the Police Department is authorized to
access data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension
computerized criminal history information system in accordance with BCA
policy. Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the
Police Department under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement
official or his or her designee. A summary of the results of the computerized
criminal history data may be released by the Police Department to the hiring
authority, including the City Council, the City Administrator, or other city
staff involved in the hiring process.



   (B)   Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must
give written consent for the Police Department to undertake the
investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of
the Minnesota Government Data Practices Act, M.S. §§ 13.01 et. seq.,
regarding the collection, maintenance, and use of the information.  In
making decisions with respect to employment, the city must comply with the
provisions in M.S. §§ 364.01 et. seq. relating to the rehabilitation of
criminal offenders.



(Ord. 2010-1115, passed 6-7-10)



§ 41.04  RENTAL PROPERTIES.



   The Police Department is authorized to do criminal history background
checks on prospective tenants of rental property in the city.



(Ord. 2010-1115, passed 6-7-10)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



      Chapter



         70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



         71.   TRAFFIC RULES



         72.   STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING



         73.   MOTORCYCLES, BICYCLES, AND SNOWMOBILES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   70.01   Intent of traffic code; conformance with state law



   70.02   References to violations



   70.03   Revocation of licenses



§ 70.01  INTENT OF TRAFFIC CODE; CONFORMANCE WITH STATE LAW.



   The City Council hereby expressly states that its legislative intent is
to adopt the provisions of its traffic control ordinances so they will be
identical to or in substantial agreement with state law as to all matters of
wording and meaning with respect to traffic control and to be identical with
the state law in all matters of penalty for violations thereof as required by
the authorization therefor by state statute and as incumbent upon the city by
the decision of the Supreme Court of the State of Minnesota in the Hoben
case.  Violations are referred to throughout this code as “penal
offenses” or “petty offenses.”



('72 Code, § 1105:00(1))



§ 70.02  REFERENCES TO VIOLATIONS.



   Violations of the state traffic code are referred to as
“misdemeanors” or “petty misdemeanors” as required by state law, both
in this code and in the state law.  If reference is made in this code to
“misdemeanor” when the clear intent is a reference to a violation of this
code, “misdemeanor” shall be construed to mean “penal offense,” or
“petty offense,” as the case may be.



('72 Code, § 1105:00(2))



§ 70.03  REVOCATION OF LICENSES.



   Violation by a licensee of any provision of this code or state law
regulating, prescribing conditions or establishing requirements relative to
licenses held by such a licensee shall be grounds for revocation of the
license.



('72 Code, § 1110:00)



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC RULES



Section




General Provisions




   71.01   Highway Traffic Regulation Act adopted



   71.02   Unreasonable acceleration



   71.03   Use of engine or transmission braking devices




Licenses




   71.15   Driver's license in possession



   71.16   No license




Operation on Private Property




   71.25   Definitions



   71.26   Private property regulations



   71.27   Public property regulations



   71.28   Semi-public property regulations



   71.29   Exceptions



   71.30   Signs




Weight Restrictions




   71.40   Definitions



   71.41   Weight restrictions



   71.42   No pneumatic tires



   71.43   Weighing



   71.44   Load removal



   71.45   Emergency waiver



   71.46   Truck routes



   71.47   Resolution



   71.48   Special permits



   71.49   Permit fees



   71.50   Truck traffic prohibition



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 71.01  HIGHWAY TRAFFIC REGULATION ACT ADOPTED.



   The regulatory provision of M.S. Chapter 169, as amended, including all
extra Session Laws, are hereby adopted as a traffic ordinance regulating the
use of highways, streets, and alleys within the city and three copies of said
Act are on file in the city office and marked “City of Brooklyn Park -
Official Copy.”  Said Highway Traffic Regulation Act is hereby
incorporated in and made a part of this code as completely as if set out
herein in full.



('72 Code, § 700:00)  (Ord. 1971-31(A), passed 10-26-71)



§ 71.02  UNREASONABLE ACCELERATION.



   (A)    UNREASONABLE ACCELERATION OF A MOTOR VEHICLE is hereby
defined as acceleration which unnecessarily breaks traction between a tire or
tires and the driving surface, thereby causing a prolonged squealing or
screeching sound.  Prolonged squealing or screeching sound shall constitute
prima facie evidence of unreasonable acceleration.



   (B)   Any act of unreasonable acceleration as hereinabove defined by
any motor vehicle upon any street, road, parking lot or driving way, private
or public, within the corporate limits of Brooklyn Park is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance and is prohibited.



('72 Code, §§ 720:00 - 720:05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.03  USE OF ENGINE OR TRANSMISSION BRAKING DEVICES.



   (A)   Findings.  The City Council of the City of Brooklyn Park
finds that the use of engine or transmission braking devices or methods
(a/k/a "jake braking" or "dynamic braking") within the city limits creates
unusual and excessive noise that unreasonably disturbs and annoys
residents.  The prohibition of such devices and methods is necessary to
protect the health, safety and public welfare.



   (B)   Prohibition.  No person may slow a vehicle by a device,
method or practice known as engine braking or transmission braking, also
referred to as "jake braking" or "dynamic braking," whereby rapid
downshifting of a vehicle's engine or a compression release device is used in
lieu of applying a vehicle's wheel brakes, causing loud noises to emit from
the vehicle's engine and exhaust system.  Such braking by any motor vehicle
on any public highway, street, parking lot or alley within the City of
Brooklyn Park is declared to be a public nuisance and is prohibited.



   (C)   Emergency vehicles.  The foregoing provision does not apply
to emergency vehicles.



(Ord. 2000-931, passed 9-5-00)  Penalty, see § 10.99



LICENSES



§ 71.15  DRIVER'S LICENSE IN POSSESSION.



   Every person must have his or her driver's license in his or her
immediate possession at all times when operating a motor vehicle and must
display the same upon the demand of a magistrate, peace officer, or by an
officer authorized by law to enforce the laws relating to the operation of
motor vehicles on public streets and highways.  Licensee shall upon the
request of any such officer write his or her name in the presence of such
officer in order that the identity of the licensee may be determined.



('72 Code, § 705:00)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.16  NO LICENSE.



   No person whose driver's license or driving privileges has been
canceled, suspended, or revoked as provided in Minnesota Statutes shall
operate any motor vehicle, the operation of which requires a driver's
license, upon the streets or highways of Brooklyn Park while such license or
privilege is canceled, suspended or revoked.



('72 Code, § 705:05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Revocation of licenses, see § 110.20



OPERATION ON PRIVATE PROPERTY



§ 71.25  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PRIVATE PROPERTY.  Property owned by a person, firm, voluntary
association or corporation other than a government body and is not generally
open for use by the public.



   PUBLIC PROPERTY.  Property that may be used by all the public subject
to reasonable regulations by a governmental body, but does not include public
streets and highways.



   SEMI-PUBLIC PROPERTY.  Private property generally open for use by the
public but not owned or maintained by a governmental body.  Such property
includes without limitation church property, school property, shopping
centers, and all other property generally used by patrons of a commercial or
private business establishment, but not including private streets in
residential areas.



   VEHICLE.  Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.



('72 Code, § 740:00)  (Ord. 1984-444(A), passed 1-9-84)



§ 71.26  PRIVATE PROPERTY REGULATIONS.



   It is unlawful for a person to operate or permit to be operated any
vehicle across or upon any private property, other than driveway portions
designated for vehicular use, without the written or oral permission of the
owner or occupant or lessee thereof.  Written permission may be given by a
posted notice of any kind or description that the owner, occupant or lessee
prefers as long as it specifies the kind of vehicles allowed.



('72 Code, § 740:05)  (Ord. 1984-444(A), passed 1-9-84)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 71.27  PUBLIC PROPERTY REGULATIONS.



   It is unlawful for a person to operate or permit to be operated any
vehicle upon public property other than an area designated for vehicular use
or upon a path or area designed by appropriate signs permitting such use.



('72 Code, § 740:10)  (Ord. 1984-444(A), passed 1-9-84)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 71.28  SEMI-PUBLIC PROPERTY REGULATIONS.



   It is unlawful for a person to operate or permit to be operated any
vehicle upon a portion of semi-public property which is not held open to the
public for vehicular use.



('72 Code, § 740:15)  (Ord. 1984-444(A), passed 1-9-84)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 71.29  EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions of this subchapter do not apply to emergency vehicles,
vehicles used by governmental bodies driving on such property with the
consent of the owner or the owner’s agent or a person in the lawful
possession of such real property.



('72 Code, § 740:20)  (Ord. 1984-444(A), passed 1-9-84)



§ 71.30  SIGNS.



   It is unlawful for a person to post, mutilate, or remove any notice or
sign provided in this chapter upon lands over which the person had no right,
title, interest or license.



('72 Code, § 740:25)  (Ord. 1984-444(A), passed 1-9-84)  Penalty, see §
10.99



WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS



§ 71.40  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   SINGLE AXLE.  All wheels whose centers may be included within two
parallel transverse vertical planes 40 inches apart.



   TRUCK.  Every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for
the transportation of property.



   VEHICLE.  All motor vehicles, house trailers and trailers, of all
kinds or any objects or contrivances being moved on wheels of any kind, but
excluding vehicles of public bodies.



('72 Code, § 735:00)  (Am. Ord. 1993-714, passed 2-8-93)



§ 71.41  WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   It is unlawful to operate a vehicle or combination of vehicles
equipped with pneumatic tires upon the streets or highways of Brooklyn Park
when the gross weight of any single wheel exceeds 9,000 pounds, or when the
gross weight of any single axle exceeds 18,000 pounds.  The City Engineer
may prohibit the operation of vehicles upon any public streets or impose
further restrictions as to the weight of vehicles to be operated upon the
street, whenever the street by reason of deterioration, rain, snow, or other
climate conditions will be seriously damaged or destroyed unless the use of
vehicles thereon is prohibited, or the permissible weights thereon are
reduced.



   (B)   The City Engineer is authorized to erect and maintain or cause
to be erected and maintained, signs plainly indicating the prohibition or
restriction at each end of that portion of any street affected thereby, and
the prohibition or restriction shall not be effective unless and until the
signs are erected and maintained.



('72 Code, § 735:05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.42  NO PNEUMATIC TIRES.



   A vehicle or combination of vehicles not equipped with pneumatic tires
shall be governed by the foregoing provisions, except that the gross weight
limitations shall be reduced by 40%.



('72 Code, § 735:10)



§ 71.43  WEIGHING.



   Any police officer or duly authorized person having reason to believe
that the weight of a vehicle and load is unlawful, is authorized to require
the driver to stop and submit to a weighing of the same, either by means of a
portable or stationary scale and may require that such vehicles be driven to
the nearest public scale.  For purpose of weighing, vehicles must not be
taken a greater distance than five miles, except in such cases where scales
of sufficient capacity are not available within such limits.



('72 Code, § 735:15)  (Am. Ord. 1988-591(A), passed 2-22-88)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 71.44  LOAD REMOVAL.



   An officer upon weighing a vehicle and load, as above provided,
determines that the weight is unlawful, the officer may require the driver to
stop the vehicle in a suitable place and remain standing until a portion of
the load is removed as may be necessary to reduce the gross weight to a limit
as permitted under this subchapter.  All material so unloaded shall be cared
for by the owner or driver of the vehicle at the risk of the owner or driver.



('72 Code, § 735:20)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.45  EMERGENCY WAIVER.



   In case of emergency or necessity a person may make written application
to the City Engineer for a waiver of a provision of this chapter or any
regulation imposed hereunder and the Engineer may in the Engineer’s  sound
discretion grant such waivers under terms and conditions as the Engineer may
deem advisable.



('72 Code, § 735:25)



§ 71.46  TRUCK ROUTES.



   It is unlawful to operate a vehicle or combination of vehicles upon the
streets or highways under the jurisdiction of Brooklyn Park which exceeds the
limits established in § 71.41 of this chapter, except on such routes as may
be designated as truck routes and identified as such by signs and markings to
that effect.



('72 Code, § 735:30)  (Am. Ord. 1982-386(A), passed 4-12-82)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 71.47  RESOLUTION.



   Truck routes are established by resolution to be adopted by the City
Council and the resolution must designate the route and the weight
restrictions applicable on the streets.



('72 Code, § 735:35)  (Am. Ord. 1982-386(A), passed 4-12-82)



§ 71.48  SPECIAL PERMITS.



   Vehicles prohibited by § 71.46 of this chapter may be driven over
other routes by special permit issued under authority of the City Council or
for delivery to homes or businesses in which event the vehicle shall be
driven over the shortest possible route.



('72 Code, § 735:40)



§ 71.49  PERMIT FEES.



   Under the provisions of this subchapter, other ordinances and certain
state statutes, the City Engineer has been given the responsibility for
issuing certain transportation permits for oversize and/or overweight
vehicles that wish to operate on city streets.  The processing of the
permits requires an expenditure of time by engineering personnel and other
administrative costs in processing these permits.  The City Council may
establish from time to time a permit fee for these services.



('72 Code, § 735:45)  (Am. Ord. 1986-541(A), passed 8-18-86)



§ 71.50  TRUCK TRAFFIC PROHIBITION.



   The City Council may, by resolution duly adopted, authorize that trucks
over a specified gross vehicle weight, be prohibited from operating on
certain streets or portions of streets.  The restrictions established by
City Council resolution are not to become effective until the specified
streets are posted with clearly visible and appropriate signs which inform
drivers of vehicles of the restrictions.  Any truck restrictions established
under this provision do not apply to city maintenance trucks nor to any truck
making a delivery to, or a pickup from, any lot or premises along the street.



('72 Code, § 735:50)  (Am. Ord. 1993-714, passed 2-8-93)



CHAPTER 72:  STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING



Section



   72.01   Parking prohibited



   72.02   Close to curb



   72.03   Lights



   72.04   Stopping and standing prohibited



   72.05   Unauthorized moving of parked car



   72.06   Obstruct traffic



   72.07   Alleys



   72.08   All night



   72.09   24-Hour limitations



   72.10   Commercial vehicle, equipment, and trailer parking



   72.11   Snow



   72.12   For sale or washing



   72.13   Schools



   72.14   Narrow streets



   72.15   One-way streets



   72.16   Congested places



   72.17   Parking for the handicapped



   72.18   Illegal parking



   72.19   Impound vehicles



   72.20   Notice to owner



   72.21   Owner unknown



§ 72.01  PARKING PROHIBITED.



   All on-street parking of vehicles is prohibited in this municipality
except in compliance with this chapter.



('72 Code, § 725:00)  (Am. Ord. 1975-210(A), passed 10-27-75)  Penalty,
see § 10.99



§ 72.02  CLOSE TO CURB.



   It is unlawful to  stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than
parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful
traffic movement and with the right hand wheels of the vehicle within 12
inches of the curb or edge of the roadway.



('72 Code, § 725:03)  (Am. Ord. 1993-720, passed 5-24-93)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 72.03  LIGHTS.



   (A)   If a vehicle is lawfully parked at nighttime upon a street
within a business or residence district as defined in purpose statement of
zoning districts, no lights need to be displayed upon the parked vehicle.



   (B)   If a vehicle is parked upon a street or highway outside of a
business or residence district during the hours between one-half hour after
sunset and one-half hour before sunrise, the vehicle must be equipped with
one or more lamps which must exhibit a white light on the roadway side
visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle and a red
light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear.



   (C)   A lighted headlamp upon a parked vehicle must be depressed or
dimmed.



('72 Code, § 725:15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.04  STOPPING AND STANDING PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful to stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the
directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the
places described as follows:



   (A)   On a sidewalk.



   (B)   In front of a public or private driveway or directly across
therefrom.



   (C)   Within an intersection.



   (D)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant.



   (E)   On a crosswalk.



   (F)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection.



   (G)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop
sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.



   (H)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet
of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless
the City Engineer has indicated a different length by signs or markings.



   (I)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.



   (J)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance of any fire station
and on the side of a street opposite the entrance of any fire station within
75 feet of said entrance.



   (K)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction
when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.



   (L)   On a roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street.



   (M)    Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel or underpass.



   (N)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.



   (O)   On any boulevards.



   (P)   Within 20 feet (either side) of any mailbox located on a
public right-of-way, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. until 6:00 p.m. Monday
through Saturday.  Sundays are excepted.



('72 Code, § 725:18)  (Am. Ord. 1980-320(A), passed 4-28-80; Am. Ord.
1984-467(A), passed 10-8-84)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.05  UNAUTHORIZED MOVING OF PARKED CAR.



   It is unlawful to move a vehicle not lawfully under the person’s
control into any prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is
unlawful.



('72 Code, § 725:21)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.06  OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC.



   It is unlawful to park a vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in
such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten
feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.



('72 Code, § 725:24)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.07  ALLEYS.



   It is unlawful to park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width
of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and it is unlawful
to stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley, in such position as to
block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.



('72 Code, § 725:27)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.08  ALL NIGHT.



   It is unlawful,  except for a physician on an emergency call, to park
a vehicle on a street between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any day
from October 15 in one calendar year until April 15 in the following calendar
year.



('72 Code, § 725:30)  (Am. Ord. 1983-424(A), passed 5-23-83)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 72.09  24-HOUR LIMITATIONS.



   It is unlawful to park a vehicle on a street in the city for a period
longer than 24 consecutive hours.



('72 Code, § 725:31)  (Ord. 1983-424(A), passed 5-23-83)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 72.10  COMMERCIAL VEHICLE, EQUIPMENT, AND TRAILER PARKING.



   It is unlawful to park or store on any public street, an open-bed or
enclosed trailer, boat trailer, camper trailer, utility trailer, or any other
type of trailer, farm vehicle or farm equipment, construction materials or
equipment, or commercial vehicle.



   (A)   (1)   For the purpose of this section, a COMMERCIAL VEHICLE
is defined as:



         (a)   Any vehicle with Minnesota license plates carrying
a designation of “BY” (bus, except as provided below), “CZ”
(commercial zone truck); or



         (b)   Any vehicle with Minnesota license plates carrying
a designation of “Y” (truck with Minnesota base plate) or “T” (farm
truck), and displaying on the lower right corner of the license plate any
gross vehicle weight designation of “G” through “T”; or



         (c)   Any vehicle with a gross vehicle weight in excess
of 12,000 pounds except passenger-type trucks and vans; or



         (d)   Vehicles meeting the definition of "commercial
vehicles" in § 152.008 of the City Code.



      (2)   Commercial vehicles described above shall include but
are not limited to buses, dump trucks, tow trucks, truck-tractors, step vans,
cube vans, delivery trucks and the like.



   (B)   Open-bed or enclosed trailers, boat trailers, camper trailers,
utility trailers, or any other type of trailers, farm vehicles, farm
equipment, construction equipment, and commercial vehicles are subject to all
other provisions of this section; however, the prohibitions of this section
do not apply to the following:



      (1)   If such trailers, vehicles, or equipment are actually in
the process of being loaded or unloaded, up to a maximum time period of 48
hours.



      (2)   Commercial vehicles that are directly ancillary to
construction and parked within 1,000 feet of the related construction site.



      (3)   Vehicles licensed with disability plates, or displaying
a disability parking certificate.



      (4)   One-ton passenger vans used solely for transporting
persons.



      (5)   Vehicles with Minnesota license plates carrying a
designation of “SB” (school bus).



('72 Code, § 725:32)  (Ord. 1993-720, passed 5-24-93; Am. Ord. 2003-1008,
passed 11-3-03; Am. Ord. 2009-1100, passed 5-26-09; Am. Ord. 2010-1116,
passed 7-6-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.11  SNOW.



   (A)   It is unlawful, except for a physician on an emergency call,
to park or leave a vehicle on a street when there is two inches or more of
snow on the street and snow is falling or has fallen within the previous 24
hours or snow is blowing or has been blowing within the previous 24 hours.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person, except an operator of an
emergency motor vehicle on an emergency call, to park or leave standing any
vehicle on any street after a snow emergency has been declared until that
street has been plowed curb to curb.



   (C)   The city may declare a snow emergency when the City Manager,
or his or her designated representative, determines an emergency exists in
the city, or in a section or sections thereof, because of snow, freezing
rain, sleet, ice, snowdrifts, or other natural phenomena which create, or are
likely to create, hazardous road conditions. Notice of such emergency may be
given by press, radio, television, or electronic means, such as the city's
website.



   (D)   In the event of a violation of this section, the city is
authorized to issue citations and remove violating vehicles, or cause them to
be removed, and the owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for the actual
costs of removal and storage. A removed vehicle shall not be released to the
owner or the owner's authorized agent until those costs have been paid.



('72 Code, § 725:33)  (Am. Ord. 2018-1234, passed 7-23-18)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 72.12  FOR SALE OR WASHING.



   It is unlawful to park a vehicle upon a roadway for the principal
purpose of displaying the vehicle for sale, washing, greasing or repairing
the vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency.



('72 Code, § 725:36)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.13  SCHOOLS.



   (A)   The City Engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs
indicating no parking upon either or both sides of a street adjacent to
school property when such parking would, in the City Engineer’s opinion,
interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.



   (B)   If official signs are erected indicating no parking upon
either side of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized herein,
it is unlawful to park a vehicle in any such designated place.



('72 Code, § 725:39)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.14  NARROW STREETS.



   (A)   The City Engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no
parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20
feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width
of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet or for snow removal.



   (B)   If official signs prohibiting parking are erected as
authorized herein, it is unlawful to park a vehicle upon any such street in
violation of any such sign.



('72 Code, § 725:42)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.15  ONE-WAY STREETS.



   In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and
traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, it is unlawful
to stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of the one-way roadway
unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking.  The City
Engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted
upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect signs giving
notice thereof.



('72 Code, § 725:45)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.16  CONGESTED PLACES.



   (A)   The City Engineer is authorized to determine and designate by
proper signs places not exceeding 100 feet in length in which the stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous
condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.



   (B)   If official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places
as authorized herein it is unlawful to stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any
such designated place.



('72 Code, § 725:48)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.17  PARKING FOR THE HANDICAPPED.



   It is unlawful to park in, obstruct or occupy with a motor vehicle, any
parking space, on public or private property, designated or signed as
handicapped parking, unless the vehicle prominently displays an insignia or
certificate issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles pursuant to M.S. §
169.345, Subd. 3, and the vehicle is being used by a physically handicapped
person, as defined in M.S. § 169.345, Subd. 2.  Signs designating
handicapped parking spaces shall be presumed to have been placed according to
law, unless the contrary is established by competent evidence.  Violation of
this provision is a petty offense.  Motor vehicles found in violation of
this section may be ordered removed by a member of the Police Department
under the procedures stated in §§ 72.19 through 72.21.



('72 Code, § 725:50)  (Ord. 1977-238(A), passed 2-28-77)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 72.18  ILLEGAL PARKING.



   In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation
governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular
vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or
regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was
at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, may
constitute in evidence an inference that the registered owner of such vehicle
was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for
the time during which, such violation occurred.



('72 Code, § 725:51)  (Am. Ord. 1975-210(A), passed 10-27-75)



§ 72.19  IMPOUND VEHICLES.



   Members of the Police Department are authorized to remove, or cause to
be removed, a vehicle from a street or highway to the nearest garage or other
place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the Police
Department, or otherwise maintained by this city under the circumstances set
forth as follows:



   (A)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct,
or causeway, or in any tube, tunnel or underpass where such vehicle
constitutes an obstruction to traffic.



   (B)   When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled as to constitute
an obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle
are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be
unable to provide for its custody and removal.



   (C)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so
parked illegally as to constitute a hazard or obstruction to the normal
movement of traffic, or snow plowing.



('72 Code, § 725:54)



§ 72.20  NOTICE TO OWNER.



   If an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized in this
chapter and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the registration
records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner thereof, the officer
must immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing to the owner of
the fact of removal and the reasons therefor and of the place to which the
vehicle has been removed.  In the event any such vehicle is stored in a
public garage, a copy of the notice must be given to the proprietor of the
garage.



('72 Code, § 725:57)



§ 72.21  OWNER UNKNOWN.



   If an officer removes a vehicle from a street under this chapter and
does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner, or for any
other reason is unable to give the notice to the owner as hereinbefore
provided, and in the event the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a
period of three days, then and in that event the officer must immediately
send or cause to be sent written report of removal by mail to the State
Department whose duty it is to register motor vehicles, and must file a copy
of the notice with the proprietor of any public garage in which the vehicle
may be stored.  Such notice must include a complete description of the
vehicle, the date, time and place from which removed, the reasons for such
removal, and name of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored.



('72 Code, § 725:60)



CHAPTER 73:  MOTORCYCLES, BICYCLES, AND SNOWMOBILES



Section




Motor Scooters and Motorcycles




   73.01   Definitions



   73.02   Operation of motor scooters and motorcycles



   73.03   Obedience to traffic regulations




Bicycles




   73.15   Registration



   73.16   Bicycle rentals



   73.17   Impounding of bicycles



   73.18   Sale of impounded bicycles or found property




Snowmobiles




   73.30   Intent



   73.31   Definitions



   73.32   Operation on city streets, highways or public lands



   73.33 to 73.37   [Reserved]



   73.38   Operations of snowmobiles; exceptions



   73.39   Prohibition for unprotected and protected animals



   73.40   Penalty




Go-Karts




   73.50   Definitions



   73.51   Operation on city roadways prohibited



 



   73.99   Penalty



MOTOR SCOOTERS AND MOTORCYCLES



§ 73.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MOTOR SCOOTER and MOTORCYCLE.  Every vehicle or device which is
self-propelled, which is not moved by human power, which does not derive its
power from overhead wires, and is not used exclusively upon stationary rails
or tracks, and, in, upon, or by which any person or property may be drawn
upon an alley, street or highway, having a saddle for the use of the rider
and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the
ground, including bicycles with motor attached, but excluding a farm tractor.



('72 Code, § 715:00)



§ 73.02  OPERATION OF MOTOR SCOOTERS AND MOTORCYCLES.



   It is unlawful to operate a motor scooter or motorcycle within this
municipality while doing any of the acts prohibited in the divisions which
follow:



   (A)   It is unlawful to allow any passenger to ride on the vehicle,
unless it is equipped for more than one rider.



   (B)   It is unlawful to operate a vehicle while standing on same or
perform any trick riding or operate in any manner other than in a customary
manner for operating a vehicle.



   (C)   It is unlawful to operate a vehicle upon any sidewalk or upon
any private property without the express consent of the owner.



('72 Code, § 715:05)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.03  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.



   A person operating a motor scooter or motorcycle within this
municipality must observe all traffic rules and regulations applicable
thereto, must turn only at intersections, signal for all turns, ride at the
extreme right hand side of the street or highway, and must pass to the left
when overtaking other vehicles and pedestrians that are slower moving.



('72 Code, § 715:10)  Penalty, see § 73.99



BICYCLES



§ 73.15  REGISTRATION.



   It is unlawful to ride a bicycle upon a street, sidewalk, highway or
other public property in the city unless the bicycle is registered with the
city prior to March 1, 1977, or is registered with the state on or after that
date.



('72 Code, § 405:01)  (Ord. 1979-285(A), passed 3-12-79)  Penalty, see §
73.99



§ 73.16  BICYCLE RENTALS.



   It is unlawful for a rental agency to rent or offer any bicycle for
rent unless the bicycle is registered with the State of Minnesota pursuant to
M.S. Chapter 168C, and a license is attached thereto and the bicycle is
properly equipped, in good mechanical condition and equipped with adequate
brakes.



('72 Code, § 405:40)  (Am. Ord. 1979-285(A), passed 3-12-79)  Penalty, see
§ 73.99



§ 73.17  IMPOUNDING OF BICYCLES.



   If an unregistered bicycle is found unattended on any public property,
street or alley, the bicycle is deemed to have been operated in violation of
this subchapter and is to be impounded by the Police Department.  The
impounded bicycle may be surrendered to the owner thereof upon satisfactory
proof of ownership and registration of the bicycle with the State of
Minnesota.



('72 Code, § 405:45)  (Am. Ord. 1979-285(A), passed 3-12-79)



§ 73.18  SALE OF IMPOUNDED BICYCLES OR FOUND PROPERTY.



   At the expiration of 60 days after impounding or after property has
been found, any property which has not been claimed may be sold at public
auction or at private sale.  If sold at public auction, notice containing a
description of any property to be sold shall be published in the official
newspaper at least ten days prior to the auction sale.  If the City Manager
determines that it is in the best interest of the city to dispose of the
property at a private sale, the City Manager must solicit at least two bids
for the property and establish the other terms of sale.



('72 Code, § 405:50)  (Am. Ord. 1986-531(A), passed 6-9-86)



SNOWMOBILES



§ 73.30  INTENT.



   It is the intent of this subchapter to supplement the laws of the State
of Minnesota, M.S. §§ 84.81 through 84.88, and M.S. Chapters 168 through
171, with respect to the operation of snowmobiles.  This subchapter is not
intended to allow what the state statutes prohibit nor to prohibit what the
state statutes expressly allow.



('72 Code, § 730:00)



§ 73.31  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OPERATE.  To ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile.



   OPERATOR.  Every person who operates or is in actual physical control
of a snowmobile.



   PERSON.  An individual, partnership, corporation, the state and its
agencies and subdivisions, and any body of persons, whether incorporated or
not.



   ROADWAY.  That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular traffic.



   SNOWMOBILE.  A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or
ice steered by skis or runners.



('72 Code, § 730:05)



§ 73.32  OPERATION ON CITY STREETS, HIGHWAYS OR PUBLIC LANDS.



   It is unlawful to operate a snowmobile upon the roadway, public
boulevard or on any public lands within the City of Brooklyn Park.



('72 Code, § 730:10)  (Am. Ord. 1999-912, passed 10-25-99; Am. Ord.
2001-959, passed 11-13-01)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§§ 73.33  to 73.37  [Reserved].



§ 73.38  OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Operation on private property.  It is unlawful for a person
to operate a snowmobile on private property of another without permission of
the owner of the property.  It is a sufficient defense to the prosecution
for violation of this division that the defendant has permission in writing
from the owner or lawful occupant of the land.



   (B)   Operation on publicly owned lands.  It is unlawful for a
person to operate a snowmobile on publicly owned land, including schools,
park property, playgrounds and recreation areas, except where permitted by §
73.32 and division (E) of this section.



   (C)   Noise.  It is unlawful for a person to operate a snowmobile
in a manner so as to create a loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which
disturbs, annoys, or interferes with the peace and quiet of other persons.



   (D)   Unattended snowmobiles.  It is unlawful for the owner or
operator to leave or allow a snowmobile to be or remain unattended on public
property.



   (E)   Exception.



      (1)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (B) of this
section, the Director of Recreation and Park shall have the authority to
supervise and regulate events or programs in connection with events conducted
by the City’s Recreation and Park Department in which snowmobiles are used.



      (2)   The Council upon recommendation of the Recreation and
Park Department may designate park areas or publicly owned property where
snowmobile operations will not interfere with the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood.  The Council may establish rules and regulations which will
provide a location on park or publicly owned property which will provide
recreational facilities for snowmobile users.  The Council may, from time to
time, by resolution designate city park or public areas deemed available for
such use and establish rules and regulations compatible with the site and the
use of abutting properties. 



('72 Code, §§ 730:40 - 730:65)  (Am. Ord. 1972-117(A), passed 8- 14-72;
Am. Ord. 1999-912, passed 10-25-99; Am. Ord. 2001-959, passed 11-13-01) 
Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.39  PROHIBITION FOR UNPROTECTED AND PROTECTED ANIMALS.



   M.S. § 97B.091 is adopted as a city ordinance and is incorporated in
and made a part of this subchapter as completely as if set out herein in full.



('72 Code, § 730:70) (Am. Ord. 1999-912, passed 10-25-99)  Penalty, see §
73.99



§ 73.40  PENALTY.



   A person registered as owner of a snowmobile may be fined or imprisoned
for committing a penal offense, or both, if a snowmobile bearing that
person’s registration number is operated contrary to the provisions of M.S.
§§ 84.81 to 84.88, M.S. § 97B.091 or of §§ 73.30 through 73.39, both
inclusive, of this code.  The registered owner may not be so fined if the
snowmobile was reported as stolen to the Commissioner or a law enforcement
agency at the time of the alleged unlawful act, or if the registered owner
demonstrates that the snowmobile either was stolen or was not in use at the
time of the alleged unlawful act, or if the registered owner furnishes to law
enforcement officers upon request the identity of the person in actual
physical control of the snowmobile at the time of such violation.  The
provisions of this subdivision do not apply to a person who rents or leases a
snowmobile if the person keeps a record of the name and address of the person
or persons renting or leasing the snowmobile, the registration number
thereof, the departure date and time, and expected time of return thereof. 
The record must be preserved for at least six months and is prima facie
evidence that the person named therein was the operator thereof at the time
it was operated contrary to M.S. §§ 84.81 to 84.88, M.S. § 97B.091 or of
§§ 73.30 through 73.39 of this code.  The provisions of this subdivision
do not prohibit or limit the prosecution of a snowmobile operator for
violating any of the sections referred to in this division.



('72 Code, § 730:75)  (Am. Ord. 1983-440(A), passed 11-21-83; Am. Ord.
1999-912, passed 10-25-99)



GO-KARTS



§ 73.50  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GO-KART.  Every self-propelled device or vehicle in, upon or by which
any person is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or natural
terrain or designed to travel on wheels in contact with the ground, except
automobiles, trucks, motor scooters, motorcycles, snowmobiles, and devices or
vehicles moved by human power.



   OPERATE.  To ride in or on and control the operation of a go-kart.



   OPERATOR.  Every person who operates or is in actual physical control
of a go-kart.



   PERSON.  An individual, partnership, corporation, the state and its
agencies and subdivisions, and any body of persons, whether incorporated or
not.



   ROADWAY.  That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular traffic.



('72 Code, § 710:00)



§ 73.51  OPERATION ON CITY ROADWAYS PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for a person to operate a go-kart upon the roadway of
any street or highway within the City of Brooklyn Park.



('72 Code, § 710:05)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A person who violates any provision of this chapter for which
no penalty is otherwise provided is subject to the penalty provided in §
10.99.



   (B)   A person who violates a provision of M.S. §§ 84.81 to 84.88
or §§ 73.30 through 73.39 of this chapter or any regulation of the
Commissioner of Natural Resources or of the Commissioner of Public Safety
promulgated pursuant to law is guilty of a penal offense and is to be
punished according to § 10.99 of this code.



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



      Chapter



         90.   ABANDONED PROPERTY



         91.   ALARM SYSTEMS



         92.   ANIMALS



         93.   RESERVED



         93A.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION



         94.   HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES



         95.   PARK REGULATIONS



         96.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



         97.   GRASS, WEED, AND TREE REGULATIONS



         98.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE



         99.   SEWERS



         100.   WATER



         101.   PRIVATE SEWER AND WATER SYSTEMS



         102.   RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT



         103.   BUILDING CODE



         104.   ILLICIT DISCHARGE



         105.   SWIMMING POOLS



         106.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE



         107.   GRAFFITI



         108.   STORM SEWER UTILITY



         109.   STREET/SIGNAL LIGHTING SYSTEM



CHAPTER 90:  ABANDONED PROPERTY



Section




General Provisions




   90.01   Disposition of abandoned property




Abandoned Vehicles




   90.15   Findings and purpose



   90.16   Definitions



   90.17   Violation to abandon motor vehicle



   90.18   Authority to impound vehicles



   90.19   Sale; waiting periods



   90.20   Notice of taking and sale



   90.21   Right to reclaim



   90.22   Operator's deficiency claim; consent to sale



   90.23   Disposition by impound lot



   90.24   Disposal authority



   90.25   Contracts; reimbursement by MPCA



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 90.01  DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED PROPERTY.



   (A)   Procedure.  Except for vehicles impounded pursuant to §
90.18 of this Chapter, all property lawfully coming into possession of the
city will be disposed of as provided in this section which is adopted
pursuant to M.S. § 471.195, as it may be amended from time to time. 
Vehicles impounded pursuant to § 90.18 of this Chapter will be disposed of
according to the procedures of §§ 90.15 et seq.



   (B)   Storage.  The department of the city acquiring possession of
the property will arrange for its storage.  If city facilities are
unavailable or inadequate, the department may arrange for storage at a
privately-owned facility.



   (C)   Claim by owner.  The owner may claim the property by
exhibiting satisfactory proof of ownership and paying the city any storage or
maintenance costs incurred by it.  A receipt for the property must be
obtained upon release to the owner.



   (D)   Sale.  If the property remains unclaimed in the possession of
the city for 60 days, the property will be sold to the highest bidder at a
public auction conducted by the Chief of Police or Chief’s designee after
two weeks’ published notice setting forth the time and place of the sale
and the property to be sold.  If the auction is to be held by way of an
on-line auction service on the internet, an advertisement will be published
in the city's designated newspaper two weeks prior to sale with the internet
address of the auction and a general list of the property to be sold.  The
City of Brooklyn Park will also advertise on the city's designated website
with a link to the internet auction service.



   (E)   Disposition of proceeds.  The proceeds of the sale will be
placed in the general fund of the city.  If the former owner makes
application and furnishes satisfactory proof of ownership within six months
of the sale, the former owner will be paid the proceeds of the sale of the
property less the costs of storage and the proportionate part of the cost of
published notice and other costs of the sale.



(Am. Ord. 2001-948, passed 2-12-01; Am. Ord. 2005-1047, passed 8-22-05)



ABANDONED VEHICLES



§ 90.15  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   The presence of abandoned vehicles, junk vehicles, inoperable
vehicles, and abandoned property unlawfully kept on property in the city
constitutes a public health and safety hazard because they can harbor
disease, provide harborage and breeding places for vermin, and present
physical dangers to the well-being of children and other residents.  The
presence of these vehicles and abandoned property constitutes a blight on the
landscape and therefore becomes a detriment to the environment and general
welfare of the residents.  In many instances these vehicles and abandoned
property are kept on property by the owners of the property themselves,
occupants, or by others with the consent of the property owner. It is
necessary to adopt regulations that are more stringent than those contained
in M.S. Ch. 168B for the removal of these types of vehicles and abandoned
property.



   (B)   M.S. Ch. 168B, and Minn. Rules Ch. 7035, as they may be
amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference.  Sections 90.15
through 90.25 of this code are adopted under the authority of M.S. §
168B.09, Subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to time.  If any of these
provisions are less stringent that the provisions of M.S. Ch. 168B or Minn.
Rules Ch. 7035, as it may be amended from time to time, the statute or rule
shall take precedence.



(Am. Ord. 2001-948, passed 2-12-01)



§ 90.16  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter and Chapter 152 of the City Code, the
following definitions  apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED PROPERTY.  Property which, after appropriate notification to
the property owner, the owner fails to redeem, or property to which the owner
relinquishes possession without reclaiming the property.



   DEPARTMENT.  The Minnesota Department of Public Safety.



   IMPOUND.  To take and hold a vehicle in legal custody.  There are two
types of impounds: public and nonpublic.



   IMPOUND LOT OPERATOR or OPERATOR.  A person who engages in impounding
or storing, usually temporarily, unauthorized or abandoned vehicles. 
OPERATOR includes an operator of a public or nonpublic impound lot,
regardless of whether tow truck service is provided.



   INOPERABLE VEHICLE.  A vehicle that has a missing or defective part
that is necessary for the normal operation of the vehicle; or is stored on
blocks, jacks or other supports; or has not had a current vehicle license for
at least 90 days for operation within the State of Minnesota or otherwise in
a condition which renders it unlawful to operate in the State of Minnesota.



   JUNK VEHICLE.  A vehicle that is not in operable condition, or which
is partially dismantled, or which is used for sale of parts or as a source of
repair or replacement parts for other vehicles, or which is kept for
scrapping, dismantling, or salvage of any kind, or has no substantial
potential use consistent with its usual function.



   MOTOR VEHICLE WASTE.  Solid waste and liquid wastes derived in the
operation of or in the recycling of a motor vehicle, including such things as
tires, used motor oil, lead acid batteries, and antifreeze, but excluding
scrap metal.



   MPCA or AGENCY.  The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



   NONPUBLIC IMPOUND LOT.  An impound lot that is not a public impound
lot.



   POSTED.  Placing a sign or notice in a conspicuous location on the
property or vehicle.



   PUBLIC IMPOUND LOT.  An impound lot owned by or contracting with a
unit of government under section § 90.24.



   STREET or HIGHWAY.  The entire width between the boundary lines of
every publicly maintained way when any part of it is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.



   UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE.  A vehicle that is subject to removal and
impoundment pursuant to § 90.18(B), or M.S. § 169.041 as it may be amended
from time to time, but is not a junk vehicle or an abandoned vehicle.



   UNIT OF GOVERNMENT.  Includes a state department or agency, a special
purpose district, and a county, statutory or home rule charter city, or town.



   VEHICLE.  Any vehicle, motor vehicle, semitrailer, or trailer as those
terms are defined in M.S. § 169.01, as it may be amended from time to time,
including pioneer, classic collector and street rod vehicles, or any machine
or equipment propelled by power other than human power, designed to travel
along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides, and transport
persons or property or pull machinery  It also includes, without limitation,
automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle and tractor.



   VITAL COMPONENT PARTS.  Those parts of a motor vehicle that are
essential to the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including such things
as the motor, drive train and wheels.



(Am. Ord. 2001-948, passed 2-12-01)



§ 90.17  VIOLATION TO ABANDON MOTOR VEHICLE.



   A person who abandons, parks, keeps, places or stores any junk vehicle
or inoperable vehicle on any public, or on any private property without the
consent of the person in control of the property is guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Am. Ord. 2001-948, passed 2-12-01) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.18  AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES.



   (A)   Inoperable or junk vehicles on public property.  No person
shall park, keep, place, store or abandon any junk vehicle or inoperable
vehicle on a public street, alley, or public property within the city.  The
City Manager or Manager’s designee or any peace officer employed or whose
services are contracted for by the city may take into custody and impound any
inoperable or junk vehicle.



   (B)   Unauthorized vehicles.  The City Manager or Manager’s
designee or any peace officer employed or whose services are contracted for
by the city may take into custody and impound any unauthorized vehicle under
M.S. § 169.041 as it may be amended from time to time.  A vehicle may also
be impounded after it has been left unattended in one of the following public
or private locations for the indicated period of time:



      (1)   In a public location not governed by M.S. § 169.041 as
it may be amended from time to time:



         (a)   On a highway and properly tagged by a peace
officer, four hours;



         (b)   Located so as to constitute an accident or traffic
hazard to the traveling public, as determined by a peace officer,
immediately; or



         (c)   That is a parking facility or other public
property owned or controlled by a unit of government, properly posted, four
hours.



   (C)   Vehicles on private property.  No person in charge or control
of any property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee
or otherwise, shall allow any junk vehicle or inoperable vehicle to be
parked, stored, kept, or otherwise placed on property longer than 48 hours;
and no person shall leave any such vehicle on any property within the city
for a longer time than 48 hours, except as follows:



      (1)   If the vehicle is located in an enclosed building; or



      (2)   The vehicle is located on the premises of a business
enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary to the
operation of such business enterprise; or



      (3)   The vehicle is located in an appropriate storage place
or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city.



   (D)   Illegally parked vehicles.  The City Manager, Manager’s
designee or any peace officer employed or whose services are contracted for
by the city may take into custody and impound any vehicle which is illegally
parked and the owner of which has been ordered to remove it.



   (E)   Vehicles impeding road or utility activities.  The City
Manager, Manager's designee or any peace officer employed or whose services
are contracted for by the city may take into custody and impound any vehicle
that is impeding, obstructing, or interfering with the repair, construction,
or maintenance activities of public utilities or public transportation. 
Except in an emergency situation, reasonable notice must be given to the
vehicle owner or user of such activities.



   (F)   Vehicles obstructing traffic or emergency response.  The City
Manager, Manager's designee or any peace officer employed or whose services
are contracted for by the city may take into custody and impound any vehicle,
whether occupied or not, that is: (1) found stopped,  standing, or parked in
violation of an ordinance or state statute; (2) reported stolen; or (3)
impeding firefighting or other emergency activities, snow removal or plowing,
or the orderly flow of traffic. 



   (G)   Notice and hearing.  Before impounding a junk vehicle or
inoperable vehicle, the Manager or suthorized designee must give 10 days'
written notice through service by mail, by posting a notice on the property,
or by personal delivery to the owner of or person in control of the property
on which the vehicle is located. When the property is occupied, service upon
the occupant is deemed service upon the owner.  Where the property is
unoccupied or abandoned, service may be by mail to the last known owner of
record of the property or by posting on the property. The notice must state: 



      (1)   A description of the vehicle;



      (2)   That the vehicle must be moved or properly stored within
10 days of service of the notice;



      (3)   That if the vehicle is not removed or properly stored as
ordered, the vehicle will be towed and impounded at an identified location;



      (4)   That the vehicle may be reclaimed in accordance with the
procedures contained in M.S. § 168B.07 or disposed of in accordance with
M.S. § 168B.08; and



      (5)   That the owner of the vehicle or the owner of or person
in control of the property on which the vehicle is located may in writing
request a hearing before the City Manager or authorized designee.



   (H)   Hearing, action.  If a hearing is requested during the 10-day
period, the City Manager or authorized designee must promptly schedule the
hearing, and no further action on the towing and impoundment of the vehicle
may be taken until the City Manager's decision is rendered.  At the
conclusion of the scheduled hearing, the City Manager or authorized designee
may (1) cancel the notice to remove the vehicle; (2) modify the notice; or
(3) affirm the notice to remove.  If the notice is modified or affirmed, the
vehicle must be disposed of in accordance with the city's written order.



   (I)   Impounding procedures.  The impounded vehicle will be
surrendered to the owner by the towing contractor only upon payment of the
required impound, towing and storage fees.  Vehicle impounding will be
conducted in accordance with M.S. Ch. 168B, governing the sale of abandoned
motor vehicles.



(Am. Ord. 2001-948, passed 2-12-01)



§ 90.19  SALE; WAITING PERIODS.



   (A)   Sale after 15 days.  An impounded vehicle is eligible for
disposal or sale under § 90.23, 15 days after notice to the owner, if the
vehicle is determined to be:



      (1)   A junk vehicle, except that it may have a valid, current
registration plate and still be eligible for disposal or sale under this
subdivision; or



      (2)   An abandoned vehicle.



   (B)   Sale after 45 days.  An impounded vehicle is eligible for
disposal or sale under § 90.23, 45 days after notice to the owner, if the
vehicle is determined to be an unauthorized vehicle.



§ 90.20  NOTICE OF TAKING AND SALE.



   (A)   Contents; notice given within five days.  When an impounded
vehicle is taken into custody, the city or impound lot operator taking it
into custody must give notice of the taking within five days.  The notice
must:



      (1)   Set forth the date and place of the taking; the year,
make, model and serial number of the impounded motor vehicle if the
information can be reasonably obtained; and the place where the vehicle is
being held;



      (2)   Inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to
reclaim the vehicle under § 90.21; and



      (3)   State that failure of the owner or lienholders to
exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle and contents within the
appropriate time allowed under § 90.19 is deemed a waiver by them of all
right, title and interest in the vehicle and contents and a consent to the
transfer of title to and disposal or sale of the vehicle and contents
pursuant to § 90.23.



   (B)   Notice by mail or publication.  The notice must be sent by
mail to the registered owner, if any, of an impounded vehicle and to all
readily identifiable lienholders of record.  The Department makes this
information available to impound lot operators for notification purposes. 
If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and
address of the registered owner and all lienholders, the notice will be
published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the
motor vehicle was towed from or abandoned.  Published notices may be grouped
together for convenience and economy.



   (C)   Unauthorized vehicles; notice.  If an unauthorized vehicle
remains unclaimed after 30 days from the date the notice was sent under
division (B) of this section, a second notice must be sent by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the registered owner, if any, of the
unauthorized vehicle and to all readily identifiable lienholders of record.



§ 90.21  RIGHT TO RECLAIM.



   (A)   Payment of charges.  The owner or any lienholder of an
impounded vehicle will have a right to reclaim the vehicle from the city or
impound lot operator taking it into custody upon payment of all towing and
storage charges resulting from taking the vehicle into custody within 15 or
45 days, as applicable under § 90.19, after the date of the notice required
by § 90.20.



   (B)   Lienholders.  Nothing in this chapter is to be construed to
impair any lien of a garage keeper under the laws of this state, or the right
of a lienholder to foreclose.  For the purposes of this section, GARAGE
KEEPER is an operator of a parking place or establishment, an operator of a
motor vehicle storage facility, or an operator of an establishment for the
servicing, repair or maintenance of motor vehicles.



§ 90.22  OPERATOR'S DEFICIENCY CLAIM; CONSENT TO SALE.



   (A)   Deficiency claim.  The nonpublic impound lot operator has a
deficiency claim against the registered owner of the vehicle for the
reasonable costs of services provided in the towing, storage and inspection
of the vehicle minus the proceeds of the sale or auction.  The claim for
storage costs may not exceed the costs of:



      (1)   25 days storage for a vehicle described in section §
90.19(A); and



      (2)   55 days storage for a vehicle described in § 90.19(B).



   (B)   Implied consent to sale.  A registered owner who fails to
claim the impounded vehicle within the applicable time period allowed under
section § 90.19 is deemed to waive any right to reclaim the vehicle and
consents to the disposal or sale of the vehicle and its contents and transfer
of title.



§ 90.23  DISPOSITION BY IMPOUND LOT.



   (A)   Auction or sale.



      (1)   If an abandoned or unauthorized vehicle and contents
taken into custody by the city or any impound lot is not reclaimed under §
90.21, it may be disposed of or sold at auction or sale when eligible
pursuant to §§ 90.20 and 90.21.



      (2)   The purchaser must be given a receipt in a form
prescribed by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles which will be sufficient title
to dispose of the vehicle.  The receipt must also entitle the purchaser to
register the vehicle and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of
all liens and claims of ownership.  Before a vehicle is issued a new
certificate of title, it must receive a motor vehicle safety check.



   (B)   Unsold vehicles.  Abandoned or junk vehicles not sold by the
city or public impound lots pursuant to division (A) of this section must be
disposed of in accordance with § 90.24.



   (C)   Sale proceeds; public entities.  From the proceeds of a sale
under this section by the city or public impound lot of an abandoned or
unauthorized motor vehicle, the city will reimburse itself for the cost of
towing, preserving and storing the vehicle, and all administrative, notice
and publication costs incurred in handling the vehicle pursuant to this
chapter.  Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale must be held for the
owner of the vehicle or entitled lienholder for 90 days and then must be
deposited in the treasury of the city.



   (D)   Sale proceeds; nonpublic impound lots.  The operator of a
nonpublic impound lot may retain any proceeds derived from a sale conducted
under the authority of division (A) of this section.  The operator may
retain all proceeds from sale of any personal belongings and contents in the
vehicle that were not claimed by the owner or the owner's agent before the
sale, except that any suspected contraband or other items that likely would
be subject to forfeiture in a criminal trial must be turned over to the
appropriate law enforcement agency.



§ 90.24  DISPOSAL AUTHORITY.



   The city may contract with others or may utilize its own equipment and
personnel for the inventory of impounded motor vehicles and abandoned scrap
metal and may utilize its own equipment and personnel for the collection,
storage and transportation of these vehicles and abandoned scrap metal.  The
city may utilize its own equipment and personnel only for the collection and
storage of not more than five abandoned or unauthorized vehicles without
advertising for or receiving bids in any 120-day period.



§ 90.25  CONTRACTS; REIMBURSEMENT BY MPCA.



   (A)   MPCA review and approval.  If the city proposes to enter into
a contract with a person licensed by the MPCA pursuant to this section or a
contract pursuant to section § 90.24, the MPCA may review the proposed
contract before it is entered into by the city, to determine whether it
conforms to the MPCA's plan for solid waste management and is in compliance
with MPCA rules.  A contract that does so conform may be approved by the
MPCA and entered into by the city.  Where a contract has been approved, the
MPCA may reimburse the city for the costs incurred under the contract that
have not been reimbursed under § 90.23.  Except as otherwise provided in §
90.24, the MPCA shall not approve any contract that has been entered into
without prior notice to and request for bids from all persons duly licensed
by the MPCA to be a party to a disposal contract pursuant to M.S. § 116.07,
as it may be amended from time to time; does not provide for a full
performance bond; or does not provide for total collection and transportation
of abandoned motor vehicles, except that the MPCA may approve a contract
covering solely collection or transportation of abandoned motor vehicles
where the MPCA determines total collection and transportation to be
impracticable and where all other requirements herein have been met and the
unit of government, after proper notice and request for bids, has not
received any bid for total collection and transportation of abandoned motor
vehicles.



   (B)   The city may perform work.  If the city utilizes its own
equipment and personnel pursuant to its authority under § 90.24, and the use
of the equipment and personnel conforms to the MPCA's plan for solid waste
management and is in compliance with MPCA rules, the city may be reimbursed
by the MPCA for reasonable costs incurred which are not reimbursed under §
90.23.



   (C)   The city required to contract work.  The MPCA may demand that
the city contract for the disposal of abandoned motor vehicles and other
scrap metal pursuant to the MPCA's plan for solid waste disposal.  If the
city fails to contract within 180 days of the demand, the MPCA, through the
Department of Administration and on behalf of the city, may contract with any
person duly licensed by the MPCA for the disposal.



CHAPTER 91:  ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



   91.01   Definitions



   91.02   Operation of system



   91.03   Miscellaneous



 



   91.99   Penalty



§ 91.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM SYSTEM.  Any assembly of equipment or devices, either
mechanically or electrically operated, which signals, either audibly or in
any other manner so as to be seen, heard, or otherwise detected inside or
outside the protected area serviced by the alarm system, that an incident is
occurring which could reasonably be expected to summon police or fire
services.  ALARM SYSTEM does not include systems affixed to motor vehicles,
trailers or recreational motor vehicles unless the vehicle is permanently
located at a site.



   ALARM USER.  The person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind which uses an alarm system to protect its
premises, regardless of whether it owns or leases the system.



   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE.  A device which utilizes the public primary
telephone trunk lines or other dedicated lines to select a predetermined or
assigned telephone number and which transmits, by a pre-recorded voice
message or code signal, that an incident of the kind noted in the definitions
of “Alarms System” has occurred.



   FALSE ALARM.  Any activation of an alarm system that results in a
response by police or fire personnel where an emergency does not exist. 
FALSE ALARM includes, but is not limited to, activation of an alarm system
through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the
negligent use or maintenance of the alarm system by the alarm user or the
alarm user's employee or agents.  FALSE ALARM does not include alarm
activations caused by utility company power outages, by climatic conditions
such as unusually strong winds or lightning, or by any other conditions that
are clearly beyond the control of the alarm manufacturer, installer, and
user.  FALSE ALARM does not include activation of an alarm system as the
result of an effort or order to upgrade, install, test, or maintain the
system if the police and/or fire departments and, where applicable, the
central monitoring agency for the alarm system are each notified before such
work on the alarm system.



('72 Code, § 1025:00)  (Ord. 1994-752, passed 1-10-94)



§ 91.02  OPERATION OF SYSTEM.



   (A)   Operation and maintenance.  The alarm user must maintain the
alarm system and premises in a manner that will minimize or eliminate false
alarms.



   (B)   Signed statement.  Within five days of notification of each
false alarm, the alarm user must submit a signed statement to the Brooklyn
Park Police Department or Fire Department, stating the apparent cause of the
false alarm and the measure(s) taken or to be taken to remedy the problem. 
An administrative penalty of $25 must be paid by the alarm user to the city
for each signed statement not returned to the city within five days. 
Payment of these penalties may be enforced by civil action.



   (C)   Penalties. An administrative penalty must be paid by the alarm
user to the city for each false alarm in excess of three during a calendar
year.  The penalty shall be $50 for the fourth alarm and shall increase by
the sum of $25 for each succeeding false alarm thereafter.  Payment of these
penalties may be enforced by civil action.



   (D)   Hearing.  An alarm user who receives an administrative
citation including a change under this chapter may request a hearing before a
hearing officer to contest the charge under the City of Brooklyn Park
Administrative Penalties Program, as outlined in Chapter 37.



('72 Code, § 1025:05)  (Ord. 1994-752, passed 1-10-94; Am. Ord. 2003-996,
passed 4-14-03)



§ 91.03  MISCELLANEOUS.



   (A)   Local exterior alarms with audible sounds must not sound for a
period exceeding 15 minutes.



   (B)   It is unlawful to intentionally set off a false alarm.



   (C)   The use of automatic dialing devices is permitted, except that
such device must not be set or programmed to dial the Brooklyn Park Police
Department, Fire Department or the Hennepin County Sheriff's Dispatch Center.



   (D)   (1)   Alarm users whose protected premises are located
within the city must provide, upon the occurrence of its first false alarm
and on an ongoing basis, the following information:



         (a)   The name, date of birth and address of the alarm
user, alarm owner (if different from the user) and the alarm servicer.



         (b)   The type of alarm system being used.



         (c)   The person(s) designated by the alarm user as its
contact person(s) for purposes of alarm related matters and home or
appropriate telephone number.



      (2)   The provision of this information must be an on- going
requirement such that the Police/Fire Department must be notified of
additions or changes.



   (E)   All information and statistics collected and maintained in the
administration of this section are deemed non-public data and security
information exempt from disclosure pursuant to state statute.



('72 Code, § 1025:10)  (Ord. 1994-752, passed 1-10-94)  Penalty, see §
91.99



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   Except for the occurrence of a false alarm, or the failure to submit a
signed statement, the remedy for which is an administrative fine under the
city’s administrative penalties program, a  violation of any other
provision of this chapter is a penal offense and will be punished according
to § 10.99 of this code.



('72 Code, § 1025:15)  (Ord. 1994-752, passed 1-10-94)



CHAPTER 92:  ANIMALS



Section




General Provisions




   92.01   Definitions



   92.02   Issuance of tags; regulations; lost or stolen tags



   92.03   Restraint



   92.04   Confinement



   92.05   Animal noise



   92.06   Public nuisances



   92.07   Animal defecation



   92.08   Notice to owner



   92.09   Responsibility of owner



   92.10   Pound



   92.11   Diseased animals prohibited



   92.12   Impounding



   92.13   Enforcement



   92.14   Quarantine



   92.15   Commercial kennels



   92.16   Certain male dogs to be neutered



   92.17   Animals posing an imminent threat



   92.18   Treatment during impounding



   92.19   Redemption



   92.20   Notice to owner; disposal of unredeemed animals



   92.21   Limit of animals on one premises



   92.22   Abandonment



   92.23   Reports by pound keeper



   92.24   Nuisance prohibited



   92.25   Potentially dangerous dogs



   92.26   Dangerous dogs



   92.27   Concealment



   92.28   Restrictions on future ownership



   92.29   Basic care



   92.30   Public protection from dogs



   92.31   Conditioning equipment prohibited



   92.32   Off leash dog exercise area permit required




Licensing




   92.35   License required



   92.36   Licensing exceptions



   92.37   Fees and charges



   92.38   Application for license




Deer Management





   92.40   Prohibition on deer feeding





Beekeeping




   92.50   Definitions



   92.51   Purpose



   92.52   Beekeeping limited



   92.53   Colony location



   92.54   Colony density



   92.55   Required conditions



   92.56   Registration required



   92.57   Inspection



   92.58   Appeal and hearing procedure




Cross-reference:





   Licensing and permit regulations; fees, revocation, and the like, see
Ch. 110




GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 92.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL.  Cats, dogs, domestic animals and wild animals, and
crossbreeds with wild animals not customarily maintained at all times in an
enclosure cage within a dwelling.



   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.  That person or agency designated by the City
Manager to control the keeping of animals within Brooklyn Park.



   AT LARGE.  An animal is “at large” when it is not under
restraint.  A dog is not "at large" when accompanied by an owner at an off
leash dog exercise area.



   CAT.  An animal of the species Felis Domestica.



   COMMERCIAL KENNEL.  A place in a proper business zoning district where
animals are kept, congregated, or confined and where the business of selling,
boarding (during the day or overnight), breeding, showing, treating,
training, or grooming animals is conducted.



   COMPETENT PERSON.  An individual that has full control of the animal,
either by physical control or verbal control.



   DANGEROUS DOG. 



      (1)   Any dog that has:



         (a)    Without provocation, inflicted substantial bodily
harm on a human being on public or private property;



         (b)   Killed a domestic animal without provocation while
off the owner's property; or



         (c)   Been found to be potentially dangerous, and after
the owner has notice that the dog is potentially dangerous, the dog
aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic
animals.



      (2)   A dog is dangerous when the owner or custodian is in
possession of training apparatus, paraphernalia, or drugs intended to be used
to prepare or train dogs for fighting and the dog displays evidence that it
has been or will be fought.



   DOG.  An animal of the species Canis Domestica.



   GREAT BODILY HARM. Bodily injury which creates a high probability of
death, or which causes serious permanent disfigurement, or which causes a
permanent or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily
member or organ or other serious bodily harm.



   KEEPING OF ANIMAL.  Providing for any animal in compliance with M.S.
Chapter 346, Companion Animal Welfare Act.



   OFF LEASH DOG EXERCISE AREA.  A public, city-designated area where a
dog owner is permitted to allow a dog or dogs to socialize and exercise off
leash, subject to the rules and regulations for such an area.



   OWNER.  Any person, group, or corporation owning, keeping, harboring,
or having custody of an animal.



   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG. Any dog that:



      (1)   When unprovoked, inflicts bites on a human or domestic
animal on public or private property;



      (2)   When unprovoked, chases or approaches a person,
including a person on a bicycle, upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public
or private property, other than the dog owner's property, in an apparent
attitude of attack; or



      (3)   Has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to
attack unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of
humans or domestic animals.



   SUBSTANTIAL BODILY HARM.  Bodily injury which involves a temporary but
substantial disfigurement, or which causes a temporary but substantial loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ, or which causes
a fracture of any bodily member.



   UNATTENDED ANIMAL.  An animal unaccompanied or not in the control of a
competent person.



   UNDER RESTRAINT.  An animal is "under restraint" if it is controlled
by a leash or within a vehicle being driven or parked on a public street, or
within the property limits of its owner's premises under some form of
physical restraint such as a leash or fence or in the presence of a competent
person.  An unattended animal on the property of another, without the
consent of such property owner, is "at large" and not under restraint, even
though it is on a leash.



('72 Code, § 415:00)  (Am. Ord. 1977-251(A), passed 10-11-77; Am. Ord.
1989-626(A), passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord. 1997-861, passed 10-27-97; Am. Ord.
2001-944, passed 1-8-01; Am. Ord. 2006-1067, passed 11-27-06; Am. Ord.
2009-1096, passed 2-23-09; Am. Ord. 2010-1114, passed 4-26-10; Am. Ord.
2012-1149, passed 9-4-12)



§ 92.02  ISSUANCE OF TAGS; REGULATIONS; LOST OR STOLEN TAGS.



   (A)   Upon issuance of an animal license by the License Division,
the licensee will be provided with a metallic tag.  The animal must wear a
collar or harness on which the license tag is affixed.  It is unlawful to
counterfeit any such tag of this municipality or use a counterfeit tag.  A
license tag is not transferrable to any other animal or to a new owner for an
animal for which it is issued.



   (B)   If any such tag is lost or stolen, the owner may obtain a new
tag by paying the sum set by the Council therefor from time to time.



   (C)   Owners of dogs designated as dangerous must affix an
additional tag to the dog's collar identifying the dog as dangerous and
containing the dangerous dog symbol as further set forth in M.S. § 347.51.



('72 Code, §§ 415:12 - 415:15)  (Am. Ord. 1989-626(A), passed 6-26-89; Am.
Ord. 1997-861, passed 10-27-97; Am. Ord. 2009-1096, passed 2-23-09) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.03  RESTRAINT.



   No person shall permit an animal to be at large in this city, but must
keep such animal under restraint at all times.  No person having custody or
control of any animal shall permit the same to be on any unfenced area or 
lot abutting upon a street, public park, public place or upon any private
land without being effectively restrained from moving beyond such unfenced
area or lot; nor shall any person having custody or control of any animal
permit the same at any time to be on any street, public park, school ground
or any public place without being effectively restrained by chain or leash
not exceeding eight feet in length.  A dog may be unrestrained by a chain or
leash in an off leash dog exercise area, subject to the rules and regulations
for such an area.



('72 Code, § 415:18)  (Am. Ord. 2001-944, passed 1-8-01; Am. Ord.
2010-1114, passed 4-26-10) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.04  CONFINEMENT.



   The owner must confine within a building or secure enclosure any
fierce, or vicious animal except when muzzled and in the control of a
competent person.  Every female animal in heat must be confined in a
building, secure enclosure, veterinary hospital, or commercial kennel, or
must be controlled on a leash while being exercised, provided it does not
create a public nuisance. While on the owner's property, dogs designated as
dangerous must be kept in a proper enclosure as described in M.S. §§
347.50, 347.52 and this code.



('72 Code, § 415:21)  (Am. Ord. 1989-626(A), passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord.
2009-1096, passed 2-23-09; Am. Ord. 2012-1149, passed 9-4-12)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 92.05  ANIMAL NOISE.



   It is unlawful to keep any animal or bird which by causing frequent or
long continued noise unreasonably annoys or disturbs the peace, quiet,
comfort, or repose of any ordinary person or persons in the vicinity.



('72 Code, § 415:23)  (Am. Ord. 1984-455(A), passed 6-11-84; Am. Ord.
1990-654(A), passed 6-25-90)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.06  PUBLIC NUISANCES.



   The keeping of an animal that annoys other persons is a public nuisance
and is unlawful.  Any animal which damages property, plantings, or
structures, or which deposits fecal matter on public or private property of
others or which scratches or bites persons while at large, or which
habitually barks, cries, or mews, or which chases or approaches persons on
public streets or sidewalks in a threatening manner, after the owner has been
notified of such acts pursuant to § 92.08 hereof, is declared to be a
nuisance.  Upon the receipt of a written complaint of such annoyance signed
by the occupants of two or more neighboring properties, the Animal Control
Officer must notify the owner of such animal that the nuisance must be abated
within 48 hours.  Failure to obey such notice is a penal offense.



('72 Code, § 415:24)  (Am. Ord. 1997-861, passed 10-27-97)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 92.07  ANIMAL DEFECATION.



   (A)   Animal defecation prohibited.  Any person being the owner of
or having charge of any animal not confined to that person's property must
immediately remove any feces deposited on public or private property.  Any
such person must have in their possession a means to collect and dispose of
all fecal matter in a proper manner.  A person convicted of a violation of
this provision is guilty of a penal offense.



   (B)   Accumulation of feces prohibited.  A person being the owner
of or having charge of any animal must keep their premises free from an
unreasonable accumulation of fecal matter.  A person convicted of a
violation of this provision is guilty of a penal offense.



('72 Code, § 415:245)  (Ord. 1993-713, passed 1-11-93; Am. Ord. 1997-861,
passed 10-27-97)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.08  NOTICE TO OWNER.



   In addition to the provisions of § 92.06, anyone may send or deliver
to the City Manager or other person the City Manager designates, or the
Animal Control Officer a written complaint, stating the acts committed by an
animal, the name and address of the person owning or harboring the animal,
and the name and the address of the person making the complaint.  The City
Manager or other person the City Manager designates, or the Animal Control
Officer must then promptly notify the person owning or harboring the dog or
cat of the acts complained of, must request that the animal be restrained
from committing any more such acts, and must inform the person that if the
animal continues to commit such acts thereafter then the person owning or
harboring the animal may be convicted hereunder.



('72 Code, § 415:25)  (Ord. 1977-251(A), passed 10-11-77; Am. Ord.
1997-861, passed 10-27-97)



§ 92.09  RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.



   A person who owns or harbors an animal declared to be a nuisance
hereunder is deemed to be maintaining a nuisance.



('72 Code, § 415:26)  (Ord. 1977-251(A), passed 10-11-77)



§ 92.10  POUND.



   The Council may provide for an animal pound, either within or outside
the municipal limits.



('72 Code, § 415:27)



§ 92.11  DISEASED ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly bring into the city, or have
in the person’s possession, an animal which is afflicted with infectious or
contagious diseases.  All such diseased animals must be destroyed in a
humane manner unless the disease is curable and the animal is under the care
of, and receiving treatment from, a licensed veterinarian.



('72 Code, § 415:28)  (Ord. 1989-626(A), passed 6-26-89)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 92.12  IMPOUNDING.



   It is the duty of the Animal Control Officer to apprehend any animal
found running at large or otherwise in violation of the provisions of this
chapter and to impound such animal in the pound or other suitable place
pending compliance or a determination on the animal's disposition.  The
Animal Control Officer upon receiving any animal must make a complete
registry, entering the breed, color, sex, and whether licensed, if such
information can be obtained safely.  If licensed, the Animal Control Officer
must enter the name and address of the owner and the number of the license
tag.  If the animal bears no identification which reasonably reveals its
ownership, the Animal Control Officer shall impound the animal in the pound
for a period of at least seven days.  Immediately upon impounding an animal,
reasonable efforts shall be made to notify the owner and inform the owner of
the animal's confinement and the procedures for release of the animal to the
owner. Any animal impounded, with the exception of a potentially dangerous
dog or dangerous dog or a dog that has inflicted substantial or great bodily
harm upon a person, may be reclaimed by the owner within seven days after
such impoundment. Before the owner shall be permitted to recover possession
of the animal, the owner shall pay the city all required fees and costs of
impoundment. An animal that is not redeemed by its owner within seven days
after impounding may be euthanized and disposed of in a sanitary manner by
the Animal Control Officer.



('72 Code, § 415:30)  (Am. Ord. 1997-861, passed 10-27-97; Am. Ord.
2006-1067, passed 11-27-06; Am. Ord. 2009-1096, passed 2-23-09)



§ 92.13  ENFORCEMENT.



   To enforce this chapter, the Animal Control Officer or a police officer
may enter upon private property where there is reasonable cause to believe
that an animal is on the premises and is not licensed as required by
ordinance, or that there is an animal on the premises which is not being
kept, confined, or restrained.  The owner must produce for inspection the
owner’s animal license receipt when requested to do so by such officer.



('72 Code, § 415:33)  (Am. Ord. 1989-626(A), passed 6-26-89)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 92.14  QUARANTINE.



   An animal that has bitten a person will immediately be euthanized, if
required to test for rabies as determined by state or county health agencies,
as recommended by the Center for Disease Control, or at the request of the
owner.  An animal not euthanized under this section must be quarantined by a
responsible person designated by the Chief of Police, or by the owner, if all
other sections of this chapter are met, as approved by the Animal Control
Officer for a period of ten days and must be kept apart from other animals. 
Upon completion of the ten-day requirement the animal must be examined by a
veterinarian, designated by this municipality, to determine if the animal has
a disease which may have been transmitted by such bite, such impound and
examination are the expense of the animal owner.  Upon the expiration of the
ten days, if the required and satisfactory examination by a licensed
veterinarian occurs, the quarantine will be lifted.  If during the course of
the quarantine, it is determined that the animal may be afflicted with an
infectious disease, the Animal Control Officer must take immediate action to
determine conclusively if such a disease is present in the animal, up to and
including euthanasia and testing of the animal.  Any animal which has been
bitten by a rabid animal must be euthanized or impounded and kept in the same
manner for a period of six months; provided that if the animal, which has
been bitten by a rabid animal, has been vaccinated at least three weeks
before such bite and within one year of such bite and if it is again
immediately vaccinated, then the animal must be confined or impounded for a
period of 40 days before it is released.  This section does not apply to a
dog serving in the city’s Police Department as a part of its canine patrol
or to a dog that has inflicted substantial or great bodily harm on a human
being on public or private property without provocation, which is governed by
§ 92.26.



('72 Code, § 415:36)  (Am. Ord. 1973-156(A), passed 11-12-73; Am. Ord.
1989-626(A), passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord. 1997-861, passed 10-27-97; Am. Ord.
2006-1067, passed 11-27-06; Am. Ord. 2009-1096, passed 2-23-09)



§ 92.15  COMMERCIAL KENNELS.



   The following performance standards are for commercial kennels:



   (A)   The owner of a commercial kennel must receive a license per
M.S. § 347.31 through  347.40.



   (B)   Fecal waste.  All animal wastes must be disposed of in a
timely and sanitary manner.  In no event shall there be an accumulation of
waste beyond 24 hours.  In public areas during operating hours, all wastes
must be disposed of immediately or, at minimum, such waste to be stored in a
container with tight fitting lids and disposed of in an approved sanitary
manner at the end of the day.



   (C)   All cages, pens, benches, boxes, or receptacles in which
animals are confined shall be easily cleanable, durable and constructed of
non-corrosive material and maintained in good repair. Such cages and pens
shall also be properly sufficient and humane in size for the confinement of
such animals.



   (D)   Abandoned animals.  M.S. § 346.37 regulating the abandonment
of animals in commercial kennels is hereby adopted by reference and fully set
forth in this code. 



   (E)   Sale of animals.  Any commercial kennel engaging in the sale
of animals must comply with Minn. Rules § 1720.1560 which are hereby adopted
by reference.



   (F)   Bites.  All sections of this chapter pertaining to dog bites
shall apply to commercial kennels.



   (G)   Humane treatment.  M. S. §§ 343.20 through 343.36 relating
to cruelty to animals are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in and
made a part of this article as though fully set forth in this section. 



   (H)   Exception. Hospitals, clinics, and federally-regulated medical
facilities operated by licensed veterinarians exclusively for the care and
treatment of animals are exempt from the provisions of this section.



(Ord. 2012-1149, passed 9-4-12)



§ 92.16  CERTAIN MALE DOGS TO BE NEUTERED.



   A male dog which bites a human must be neutered upon completion of the
quarantine requirement, unless the animal owner can demonstrate that
neutering the animal will significantly decrease its value for show.  This
neutering is to  be at the expense of the animal owner.  If the owner or
person in whose custody the animal resides refuses to neuter the dog, the
Animal Control Officer will declare the keeping of the dog to be a public
nuisance and must by written notice direct the owner or person keeping the
dog to abate the public nuisance, and if the person fails to do so, the
person is guilty of a penal offense.  Dogs designated as dangerous and
potentially dangerous must be sterilized at the owner's expense as set forth
in this code and M.S. § 347.52.



('72 Code, § 415:38)  (Ord. 1997-861, passed 10-27-97; Am. Ord. 2009-1096,
passed 2-23-09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.17  ANIMALS POSING AN IMMINENT THREAT.



   If an animal is diseased, vicious, rabid, or exposed to rabies, or
poses an imminent threat to public safety, and if such animal cannot be
impounded after a reasonable effort, or cannot be impounded without serious
risk to the persons attempting it, the animal may be immediately killed by or
under the direction of the Animal Control Officer or a police officer.



('72 Code, § 415:39)  (Am. Ord. 1997-861, passed 10-27-97; Am. Ord.
2009-1096, passed 2-23-09)



§ 92.18  TREATMENT DURING IMPOUNDING.



   Any dog or cat or other animal impounded must be kept with kind
treatment and comfort. 



('72 Code, § 415:42)  (Am. Ord. 1989-626(A), passed  - - ; Am. Ord.
1997-861, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 2006-1067, passed 11-27-06)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 92.19  REDEMPTION.



   (A)   An animal may be redeemed from the pound during the hours set
forth by the requirements of Minnesota Statutes, by the owner upon paying the
following fees and charges:



      (1)   The license fee for the dog or cat if the license has
not previously been obtained.



      (2)   The late-license penalty, in the amount set by the
Council, where a license has not been obtained within the required time.



      (3)   The boarding fee in the amount set by the Council from
time to time.



      (4)   An impounding fee in the amount established by the
Council.



      (5)   Any fees incurred by the city for required treatment of
the animal.



      (6)   If the owner of any impounded animal is unable to get to
the city offices during normal working hours to pay the redemption fees, the
Animal Control Officer is authorized to accept after hours or on weekends or
holidays, a deposit in the amount equal to or greater than the highest fee
amount that would be expected for the impound in question.  This deposit
must be presented to the Licensing Division on the next business day.  The
animal owner may then return to the city offices at their earliest
convenience to receive any refund due, which is the difference between the
deposit and the actual fees due.  The License Division will also add a fee
as established by the City Council for any services rendered when the officer
is required to extend services in the following cases:



         (a)   Beyond regular office hours.



         (b)   At times when he or she is not regularly on patrol.



         (c)   If the city incurs additional expenses for any
additional services.



   (B)   This section does not require the pound keeper or the Animal
Control Officer to extend services other than during regular business hours
unless it is reasonably convenient for those persons to provide those
services.



('72 Code, § 415:45)  (Am. Ord. 1997-861, passed 10-27-97)



§ 92.20  NOTICE TO OWNER; DISPOSAL OF UNREDEEMED ANIMALS.



   The Animal Control Officer must make a reasonable effort to notify the
owner of any dog or cat or other impounded animal which has identification on
it from which the name and address of the animal’s owner can be readily
determined.  For the purposes of this section, a reasonable effort to notify
the owner will have been made if within 48 hours of impound a written notice
containing the date and time of impoundment, the location and phone number of
the pound, the end of the impoundment period and a copy of this section, is
either mailed by first class mail or delivered to the place of residence of
the owner, if known.  If at the end of the impounding period the animal is
not reclaimed by the owner, such animal is deemed to have been abandoned and
becomes the property of the pound keeper for disposal in a humane manner. 
The notice, reclamation, and disposition of a dangerous dog is set forth in
§ 92.26 of this code.



('72 Code, § 415:48)  (Am. Ord. 1985-482(A), passed 4-22-85; Am. Ord.
1997-861, passed 10-27-97; Am. Ord. 2009-2096, passed 2-23-09)



§ 92.21  LIMIT OF ANIMALS ON ONE PREMISES.



   It is unlawful to keep more than three animals over six months of age
at any one dwelling unit except at a commercial kennel.  Up to five animals
over six months of age may be kept at any one dwelling unit only if at least
two of the animals are trained or in training by a recognized program with an
established curriculum for animals to perform certain tasks such as animals
that provide assistance to persons with disabilities, police K-9s, detecting
animals, and search and rescue animals and animals awaiting adoption in
foster homes under a recognized animal foster program.



('72 Code, § 415:54)  (Am. Ord. 1989-626(A), passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord.
1997-861, passed 10-27-97; Am. Ord. 2018-1230, passed 4-23-18)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 92.22  ABANDONMENT.



   It is unlawful for any person to abandon any animal in this
municipality.  Failure to timely redeem animals from the city pound
constitutes abandonment as provided in this section.



('72 Code, § 415:57)  (Am. Ord. 1997-861, passed 10-27-97)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 92.23  REPORTS BY POUND KEEPER.



   The pound keeper must make an accurate written report each month to the
City of Brooklyn Park stating all cats or other animals impounded, the
duration of any such impoundment, all animals destroyed, and any other
pertinent data relating to animal control which may be requested by the City
Manager or designated person.



('72 Code, § 415:75)  (Am. Ord. 1997-861, passed 10-27-97)



§ 92.24  NUISANCE PROHIBITED.



   Nothing herein contained in this chapter shall be construed to allow
any acts which constitute a nuisance under this code.



('72 Code, § 415:76)  (Ord. 1989-626(A), passed 6-26-89)



§ 92.25  POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS.



   (A)   Registration.  Any person who has a dog that has been
determined to be a potentially dangerous dog pursuant to this code or
pursuant to M.S § 347.50, must register the dog as a potentially dangerous
dog with the city.



      (1)   The owner shall also make the potentially dangerous dog
available to be photographed by the city's Animal Control Officer for
identification purposes at a time and place specified by Animal Control.



      (2)   The registration of the potentially dangerous dog must
be renewed annually with the city until the dog is deceased or is determined
to be no longer potentially dangerous.  The current owner of a potentially
dangerous dog must notify the city's Animal Control Officer in writing of the
death of the dog or its transfer to another owner or to another location
within 30 days of the dog's death or transfer.  If requested by the city,
the owner must execute an affidavit under oath setting forth the
circumstances of the dog's death and disposition or the complete name,
address and telephone number of the person to whom the dog was transferred
to.  The Chief of Police, or its designee, shall be allowed to inspect the
animal and the place where the animal is now located at any reasonable time.



      (3)   The owner of a potentially dangerous dog must be 18
years of age or older.



   (B)   Appeal.  An appeal of the designation must be submitted on
the form supplied by the city.  The completed form and designation appeal
fee must be returned to the Chief of Police within seven days of
notification.  Potentially dangerous determination appeals consist of a
record review by the Chief of Police, or its designee.  The owner shall be
notified of the results of the record review within ten days of the receipt
of the completed form and designation appeal fee.



   (C)   Microchip implantation. All dogs that are determined to be
potentially dangerous pursuant to the definition contained within this code
or pursuant to M.S § 347.50 by the city shall be implanted with a microchip
for identification purposes within 14 days of the date the dog is declared
potentially dangerous. All costs related to purchase and implantation of the
microchip shall be borne by the owner of the dog. The name of the microchip
manufacturer and identification number of the microchip must be provided to
the city. If the microchip is not implanted by the owner, the city may have a
microchip implanted in the dog at the owner's expense. Upon request, the
owner or custodian of a potentially dangerous dog must make the dog available
to Animal Control for an inspection to  determine whether a microchip has
been implanted.



   (D)   Sterilization. The city may require a potentially dangerous
dog to be sterilized at the owner's expense within 14 days of the date the
dog is declared potentially dangerous.  If the owner does not have the dog
sterilized, Animal Control may have the dog sterilized at the owner's
expense. Upon request, the owner or custodian of a potentially dangerous dog
must make the dog available to Animal Control for an inspection or provide
proof in the form of a statement from a licensed veterinarian to determine
whether the dog has been sterilized.



   (E)   Obedience class.  The city may require that the owner and its
potentially dangerous dog attend and complete an approved obedience class.



   (F)   Removal of potentially dangerous dog classification. A dog
determined to be a potentially dangerous dog may be evaluated by a
professional animal behaviorist. The owner may provide to the city at the
time of the license a report by such animal behaviorist. If the  report
states that the dog has been rehabilitated, the dog may no longer be
classified as potentially dangerous and is no longer subject to the
requirements of this section.



   (G)   Victim's request.  Upon the request of an adult victim, the
Chief of Police may waive the designation as a potentially dangerous dog so
long as the owner of the dog complies with the requirements of this code and
state law as it applies to potentially dangerous dogs.



   (H)   Removal of potentially dangerous dog classification. 
Beginning six months after a dog is declared a potentially dangerous dog, an
owner may request on an annual basis that the city review the dog's
designation as a potentially dangerous dog.  The owner must provide evidence
that the dog's behavior has changed due to the dog's age, neutering,
environment, completion of obedience training that includes modification of
aggressive behavior, or other factors.  If Animal Control finds sufficient
evidence that the dog's behavior has changed, the city may rescind the
potentially dangerous dog classification.  The owner of the dog shall be
notified in writing of the review results within ten business days of receipt
of the request.



   (I)   Misdemeanor. Any person convicted of violating this section
shall be subject to the penalties specified by state statute.



   (J)   Exemption.  Dogs owned and controlled by local, state and
federal law enforcement agencies that are used in law enforcement or related
activities and service animals, which are individually trained or being
trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a
disability, are exempt from the provisions of this section.  A dog may not
be declared potentially dangerous if the threat, injury, or damage was
sustained under the conditions set forth in M.S. § 347.51, Subd. 5.



(Ord. 2006-1067, passed 11-27-06; Am. Ord. 2009-1096, passed 2-23-09)



§ 92.26  DANGEROUS DOGS.



   (A)   Registration. Any person who has a dog that has been
determined to be a dangerous dog pursuant to this code or pursuant to M.S. §
347.50, Subd. 1, must register the dog as a dangerous dog with the city, pay
an annual fee in addition to the dog license fee, and meet all the other
requirements provided for in M.S. § 347.51, Subd. 2.



      (1)   The owner shall also make the dangerous dog available to
be photographed by the city's Animal Control Officer for identification
purposes at a time and place specified by Animal Control.



      (2)   The registration of the dangerous dog must be renewed
annually with the city until the dog is deceased or is determined to be no
longer dangerous. The current owner of the dangerous dog must notify the
city's Animal Control Officer in writing of the death of the dog or its
transfer to another owner or to another location within 30 days of the dog's
death or transfer. If requested by the city, the owner must execute an
affidavit under oath setting forth the circumstances of the dog's death and
disposition or the complete name, address and telephone number of the person
to whom the dog was transferred to.



      (3)   The owner of the dangerous dog must be 18 years of age
or older.



      (4)   Dangerous dogs registered in the city shall be provided
with a warning symbol for posting on the owner's property pursuant to M.S. §
347.51, Subd. 2a.  The city may charge the registrant a reasonable fee for
the symbol.



   (B)   Keeping of dangerous dogs.



      (1)   Confinement. A dangerous dog must be securely confined
indoors or confined in a secure outdoor enclosure suitably sized for the dog
and otherwise meeting the requirements of a proper enclosure. An enclosure is
secure and proper within the meaning of this section if it meets the
following specifications:



         (a)   A floor area of 32 square feet per animal kept in
such enclosure;



         (b)   A sidewall height of five feet, constructed of 11
gauge of heavier wire with openings that do not exceed two inches; and



         (c)   If the enclosure is on a permeable surface, the
fence must be buried a minimum of 18 inches into the ground;



         (d)   The support posts are one and one-quarter inch or
larger steel pipe buried a minimum of 18 inches into the ground;



         (e)   A cover over the entire kennel that is constructed
of the same gauge wire as the sidewalls or heavier with openings no greater
than two inches;



         (f)   An entrance/exit self closing, self locking gate
constructed of the same material as the sidewalls and with openings no
greater than two inches; and



         (g)   In compliance with all zoning setbacks
requirements unless a variance is obtained.



   When the dog is confined in the enclosure, all access points of the
enclosure must be locked. An Animal Control Officer may seize a dangerous dog
that is unconfined while on the owner's property and not otherwise restrained
as provided below.



      (2)   Restraint.  If the dangerous dog is outside of the
proper enclosure, it must be securely muzzled and restrained with a chain not
exceeding three feet in length, and having a tensile strength sufficient to
restrain it. The dog's muzzle must be designed in a manner that will prevent
it from biting any person or animal but that will not cause injury to the dog
or interfere with its vision or respiration.



      (3)   Sterilization.  The city may require a dangerous dog to
be sterilized at the owner's expense within 14 days of the date the dog is
declared dangerous. If the owner does not have the dog sterilized, Animal
Control may have the dog sterilized at the owner's expense. Upon request, the
owner or custodian of a dangerous dog must make the dog available to Animal
Control for an inspection to determine whether the dog has been sterilized.



      (4)   Microchip implantation. All dogs that are determined to
be dangerous shall be implanted with a microchip for identification purposes.
All costs related to purchase and implantation of the microchip shall be
borne by the owner of the dog. The name of the microchip manufacturer and
identification number of the microchip must be provided to the city. If the
microchip is not implanted by the owner, the city may have a microchip
implanted in the dog at the owner's expense. Upon request, the owner or
custodian of a dangerous dog must make the dog available to Animal Control
for an inspection to determine whether a microchip has been implanted.



      (5)   Surety bond or liability insurance.  Before the city
will register a dangerous dog the owner must present sufficient evidence that
the owner has obtained a surety bond or a policy of liability insurance in
the amounts set forth in M.S. § 347.51, Subd. 2.



   (C)   Obedience class.  The city may require that the owner and its
dangerous dog attend and complete an approved obedience class.



   (D)   Removal of dangerous dog classification.  Beginning six
months after a dog is declared  a dangerous dog, pursuant to M.S. § 347.51,
Subd. 3(a), an owner may request on an annual basis that the city review the
dog's designation as a dangerous dog. The  owner must provide evidence that
the dog's behavior has changed due to the dog's age, neutering, environment,
completion of obedience training that includes modification of aggressive
behavior, or other factors. If Animal Control finds sufficient evidence that
the dog's behavior has changed, the city may rescind the dangerous dog
classification. The owner of the dog shall be notified in writing of the
review results within ten business days of receipt of the request.



   (E)   Seizure of dangerous dogs. The city may seize any dangerous
dog if the dog has been declared dangerous and the owner has not registered
the dog pursuant to this section within 14 days of receiving notice of the
dangerous dog declaration. The city may also seize a dangerous dog that is
not being maintained in a secure enclosure, a dog that is outside of the
enclosure and is not under the required physical restraint, or if the owner
of a dangerous dog has otherwise violated M.S. § 347.54. The city shall
provide the dog's owner with notice of the dog's seizure. A dangerous dog
seized under this section may be  reclaimed by the owner upon payment of
impound and boarding fees and presenting proof that all requirements of this
section are being met. A dangerous dog that is not reclaimed within seven
days of the date of the notice may be disposed of as provided in this section
and the dog's  owner shall be responsible for any costs incurred in the
confinement and disposal of the dog.



   (F)   Destruction of dangerous dogs. The Chief of Police or the
Chief of Police's designee, after having been advised that a dog has
inflicted substantial or great bodily harm on a human being on public or
private property without provocation; inflicted multiple bites on a human on
public or private property without provocation; bit multiple human victims on
public or private property in the same attack without provocation; bit a
human on public or private property without provocation in an attack where
more than one dog participated in the attack; or the dangerous dog is in
violation of this section or state law may proceed as follows:



      (1)   The owner of the dog shall be notified by the city in
writing either personally or by mail as to the reasons the dog is subject to
destruction under this section and the date(s), time(s), place(s), names of
person(s) harmed, circumstances, telephone number and contact person where
the dog is kept, copy of the ordinance and state statute, and the statements
and form required by M.S. § 347.541 including that the owner shall be given
seven days to request a hearing for a determination as to the disposition of
the dog. If the owner does not request a hearing within seven days of the
date of receiving the notice, the Chief of Police or the Chief of Police's
designee may order the dog to be destroyed and shall serve or deliver a copy
of the destruction order to the dog's owner. The city shall not destroy a dog
until at least seven days have passed since the issuance of a destruction
order.



      (2)   If the dog's owner requests a hearing for determination
as to the dangerous nature of the dog, the hearing shall be held before an
impartial hearing officer selected by the Chief of Police from a list of
persons approved by the City Council at a date not more than 14 days after
receipt of the owner's demand for the hearing. The records of the Animal
Control Officer shall be admissible for consideration without further
foundation. After considering all evidence, the hearing officer shall make a
determination as he or she deems proper and issue a decision on the matter
within ten days of the hearing.  The hearing officer shall consider the
following factors:



         (a)   Whether the threat, injury, or damage fits any of
the exemptions set forth in M.S. § 347.51, Subd. 5; and



         (b)   Whether the threat, injury, or damage occurred
while the animal was protecting or defending a person or the animal's
offspring within the immediate vicinity of the animal.



      (3)   The hearing officer may order the dog to be destroyed.
The city shall deliver a copy of the  hearing officer's order to the dog's
owner. The decision of the  hearing officer shall be final unless the owner
files an appeal to the Court of Appeals. The city shall not destroy a dog
until at least five business days have passed since the issuance of a
destruction order.



      (4)   The Animal Control Officer is authorized to take the dog
subject to the destruction order into custody at the time a destruction order
is served or delivered. The dog's owner must immediately make the dog
available to the Animal Control Officer at the time a destruction order is
delivered. The city shall not destroy a dog until at least seven days have
passed since the issuance of a destruction order.



      (5)   If the dangerous dog declaration is upheld by the
hearing officer, the actual expenses of the hearing will be the
responsibility of the dog's owner.  If the declaration is overturned by the
hearing officer, the costs and fees of the hearing, impound, and boarding
will be reviewed by the hearing officer.



   (G)   Misdemeanor. Any person convicted of violating this section
shall be subject to the penalties specified by state statute.



   (H)   Exemption.  Dogs owned and controlled by local, state and
federal law enforcement agencies that are used in law enforcement or related
activities and service animals, which are individually trained or being
trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a
disability, are exempt from the provisions of this section. A dog may not be
declared dangerous if the threat, injury, or damage was sustained under the
conditions set forth in M.S. § 347.51, Subd. 5.



(Ord. 2006-1067, passed 11-27-06; Am. Ord. 2009-1096, passed 2-23-09)



§ 92.27  CONCEALMENT.



   Any person who harbors, hides, or conceals a dog declared dangerous
that has been ordered into custody for disposition shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



(Ord, 2090-1096, passed 2-23-09)



§ 92.28  RESTRICTIONS ON FUTURE OWNERSHIP.



   (A)   Convictions.  A person may not own a dog if he or she has
been convicted of any of the violations set forth in M.S. § 347.542.  This
prohibition applies to any member of that same person's household.



   (B)   Non-compliance.  An owner of a potentially dangerous of
dangerous dog that fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter or
state law may be prohibited or restricted from future ownership or custody of
other dogs.  An owner in violation of this chapter or state law shall be
notified in writing and may request a hearing within seven days of the
receipt of the notice of violation.  If a hearing is requested, the Chief of
Police, or its designee, shall schedule a hearing before an impartial hearing
officer within 14 days of the receipt of the request.  A hearing fee shall
be paid to the city prior to the scheduling of the hearing.  The owner shall
be notified of the hearing results in writing within ten days.



(Ord. 2009-1096, passed 2-23-09)



§ 92.29  BASIC CARE.



   All animals shall receive kind and humane treatment from their owners,
which shall include proper and adequate, clean, ventilated, and sanitary
housing or shelter from the elements, and sufficient food and water for their
comfort. Failure to provide basic care is a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 2009-1096, passed 2-23-09)



§ 92.30  PUBLIC PROTECTION FROM DOGS.



   Any person owning or having care, control, or custody of a dog shall at
all times prevent the dog from attacking, biting or otherwise causing injury
or attempting to cause injury to any person engaged in an lawful act or
causing injury or attempting to cause injury to a domestic animal.



(Ord. 2090-1096, passed 2-23-09)



§ 92.31  CONDITIONING EQUIPMENT PROHIBITED.



   No person shall use or possess any device, equipment, treatment or
products for the strengthening or conditioning of an animal with the intent
to enhance the animal's ability to inflict bodily injury upon human beings or
domestic pets on public or private property.



(Ord. 2009-1096, passed 2-23-09)



§ 92.32  OFF LEASH DOG EXERCISE AREA PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for an owner of a dog to make use of an off leash dog
exercise area unless the owner has paid the required license fee to the city,
has obtained a valid license tag from the city, or has paid the daily use
fee, and complies with the rules and regulations for such an area.  The
license fee and the daily use fee is in the amount set by the Council from
time to time and in the Fee Appendix to this code.



(Ord. 2010-1114, passed 4-26-10)



LICENSING



§ 92.35  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful to own, harbor, keep, or have custody of an animal over
six months of age within this municipality, unless a current license for the
animal has been obtained and unless the animal has a current vaccination
against rabies with an approved vaccine as determined by the current official
“Comprehendium of Animal Rabies Vaccines” published by the Conference of
State Public Health Veterinarians and the Center for Disease Control of the
Department of Health and Human Services.  Every person convicted of a
violation of this provision is guilty of a penal offense.



('72 Code, § 415:03)  (Am. Ord. 1973-138(A), passed 2-26-73; Am. Ord.
1989-626(A), passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord. 1997-861, passed 10- 27-97)  Penalty,
see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Licensing and permit regulations; fees, revocation, and the like, see
Ch. 110



§ 92.36  LICENSING EXCEPTIONS.



   Each non-domesticated animal with proof of an exhibitor’s license
issued by the U.S.D.A. and/or the Commissioner of Natural Resources pursuant
to M.S. § 97A.041 may be licensed without the vaccination requirement as
stated in § 92.35 provided applicable zoning requirements as stated in this
code are met.  Animals trained or in training by a recognized program with
an established curriculum for animals to perform certain tasks such as
animals that provide assistance to persons with disabilities, police K-9s,
detecting animals, and search and rescue animals and animals awaiting
adoption in foster homes under a recognized animal foster program are exempt
from the license requirements in this section.



('72 Code, § 415:04)  (Ord. 1993-738, passed 11-8-93; Am. Ord. 1997-861,
passed 10-27-97; Am. Ord. 2018-1230, passed 4-23-18)



§ 92.37  FEES AND CHARGES.



   The license fee for each animal is in the amount set by the Council
from time to time and in the fee appendix of this code.  If the license for
an animal is obtained while the animal is impounded by this municipality or
after the required license period has commenced, there will be added to the
regular license fee a late license penalty for an additional sum as set by
the Council from time to time and the fee appendix for each such animal
provided that any owner who secures an animal after the expiration of a
license or any owner who has an animal at the time of becoming a resident of
this municipality will be allowed 30 days to secure a license, without
incurring a late-license penalty provided in this section.



('72 Code, § 415:06)  (Am. Ord. 1982-385(A), passed 4-12-82; Am. Ord.
1989-626(A), passed 6-26-89)



§ 92.38  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   Application for an animal license must be made to the Licensing
Division or person designated by the City Manager.  The application must
include such descriptive identification as the City Manager requires. 
Applicants must be of legal age.  Applicants must provide a certificate
issued by a doctor of veterinary medicine showing that the animal in question
has been currently vaccinated against rabies, the type vaccine used, and the
length of time the vaccination is effective.  The license is effective for
the duration of the vaccine effectiveness, as stated in the current official
“Comprehendium of Animal Rabies Vaccines” published by the Conference of
State Public Health Veterinarians and the Center for Disease Control of the
Department of Health and Human Resources.



('72 Code, § 415:09)  (Am. Ord. 1982-385(A), passed  4-12-82; Am. Ord.
1989-626(A), passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord. 1997-861, passed 10- 27-97)



DEER MANAGEMENT



§ 92.40  PROHIBITION ON DEER FEEDING.



   (A)   No person may place, or permit to be placed, on the ground or
within four feet of the ground surface, any grain, fodder, salt licks, or any
other food, including feed for birds, which may reasonably be expected to
result in deer feeding, unless such items are screened or protected in a
manner that prevents deer from feeding on them; except as follows:



      (1)   Feeding programs or efforts undertaken by the city in
accordance with the deer management plan of the Department of Natural
Resources;



      (2)   Veterinarians, city animal control officers, or county,
state or federal game officials who, in the course of their duties, have deer
in their custody; or



      (3)   Any food placed upon the property for the purpose of
trapping or otherwise taking deer, where such are trapped or taken pursuant
to a permit issued by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.



   (B)   No person shall hunt or otherwise engage in the hunting or
removal of deer, unless such person is acting on the city's behalf and has
obtained a special permit in conjunction with its Deer Management Program.



(Ord. 2001-954, passed 7-9-01)



BEEKEEPING



§ 92.50  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCREDITED INSTITUTION.  An educational institution holding accredited
status which has been licensed or registered by the Minnesota Office of
Higher Education at the time the registrant obtained their certificate.



   APIARY.  The assembly of one or more colonies of bees on a single lot.



   APIARY SITE.  The lot upon which an apiary is located.



   BEEKEEPER.  A person who owns or has charge of one or more colonies of
honey bees or a person who owns or controls a lot on which a colony is
located whether or not the person is intentionally keeping honey bees. 



   BEEKEEPING EQUIPMENT.  Anything used in the operation of an apiary,
such as hive bodies, supers, frames, top and bottom boards and extractors.



   COLONY.  An aggregate of honey bees consisting principally of workers,
but having, when perfect, one queen and at times drones, brood, combs and
honey.



   FLYWAY BARRIER.  A barrier that raises the flight path of bees as they
come and go from a hive.



   HIVE.  The receptacle inhabited by a colony.



   HONEY BEE.  All life stages of the common domestic honey bee, apis
mellifera.  This definition does not include wasps, hornets, African
subspecies or Africanized hybrids.



   NUCLEUS COLONY.  A small quantity of honey bees with a queen housed in
a smaller than usual hive box designed for a particular purpose, and
containing no supers.



   REGISTRANT.  Any registered beekeeper and any person who has applied
for approval of a beekeeping registration.



   ROOFTOP.  The uppermost section of a primary or accessory structure of
at least one full story and at least 12 feet in height.  Areas including but
not limited to decks, patios and balconies shall not be considered a rooftop.



   SUPER.  A box that holds the frames where bees will store the honey.



   SWARMING.  The process where a queen bee leaves a colony with a large
group of worker bees in order to form a new honey bee colony.



   UNUSUAL AGGRESSIVE BEHAVIOR. Any instance in which unusual aggressive
characteristics such as stinging or attacking without provocation occurs. 
Provocation is an act that an adult could reasonably expect may cause a bee
to sting or attack.



(Ord. 2015-1191, passed 5-18-15)



§ 92.51  PURPOSE.



   Honey bees are an asset to the community and important in the
pollination of plants and in the production of honey and other products. 
The purpose and intent of this portion of Chapter 92 is to permit and
establish requirements for the keeping of honey bee colonies, hives, and
equipment within the city.



(Ord. 2015-1191, passed 5-18-15)



§ 92.52  BEEKEEPING LIMITED.



   No person shall keep, harbor, maintain or allow to be kept any hive or
other facility for the housing of honeybees on or in any property in the city
without an approved registration unless otherwise exempted by  §§
92.54(A)(5) and 92.56(B).



(Ord. 2015-1191, passed 5-18-15)



§ 92.53  COLONY LOCATION.



   (A)   Hives cannot be located in the front yard and must be located
a minimum of ten feet from the rear or side property lines and 20 feet from
public rights-of-way unless further restricted elsewhere in this code.  A
corner lot shall be considered to have two front yards.



   (B)    Hives must be located a minimum of ten feet from any adjacent
dwelling unit.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, in each instance
where any part of a hive is kept within 25 feet of a lot line of the apiary
site, a flyway barrier of at least six feet in height must be constructed.



      (1)   The flyway barrier must consist of a wall, fence, or
dense vegetation that requires honey bees to fly over, rather than through,
the barrier.



      (2)   If a dense vegetation flyway barrier is used, the
initial planting may be a minimum of four feet in height, but the vegetation
must reach a height of at least six feet within two years after installation.



      (3)   If a wall or fence flyway barrier is used, the materials
must be decay resistant, maintained in good condition and constructed in
accordance with §§ 152.291 through 152.293 of this code.



      (4)   The flyway barrier must continue parallel to the lot
line of the apiary site for at least ten feet in both directions from the
hive or must contain the hive or hives in an enclosure at least six feet in
height.



      (5)   A flyway barrier is not required if the hive is located
on a rooftop.



(Ord. 2015-1191, passed 5-18-15)



§ 92.54  COLONY DENSITY.



   (A)    Every lot or parcel of land in the city shall be limited to
the following number of colonies based on the size of the apiary lot:



      (1)   One-half acre or smaller is allowed two colonies;



      (2)   More than one-half acre to three-quarters of an acre is
allowed four colonies;



      (3)   More than three-quarters of an acre to one acre is
allowed six colonies;



      (4)   More than one acre to five acres is allowed eight
colonies;



      (5)   More than five acres, there is no restriction on the
number of colonies and no registration is required.



   (B)   If any beekeeper serves the community by removing a swarm or
swarms of honeybees from locations where they are not desired, that person
shall not be considered in violation of the colony density restrictions in
this section if the following conditions are met:



      (1)   The person temporarily houses the honeybees at an apiary
site of a beekeeper registered with the city;



      (2)   The bees are not kept for more than 30 days; and



      (3)   The site remains in compliance with the other provisions
of this section.



(Ord. 2015-1191, passed 5-18-15)



§ 92.55  REQUIRED CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Honey bee colonies shall be kept in hives with removable
frames, which shall be kept in sound and useable condition.



   (B)   Each colony on the apiary site shall be provided with a
convenient source of water which must be located within ten feet of each
active colony.



   (C)   Materials from a hive such as wax combs or other materials
that might encourage robbing by other bees shall be promptly disposed of in a
sealed container or placed within a building or other bee and vermin proof
enclosure.



   (D)   For each colony permitted to be maintained, there may also be
maintained upon the same apiary lot, one nucleus colony in a hive structure
not to exceed one standard nine and five-eighths-inch depth box, ten frame
hive body with no supers.



   (E)   Beekeeping equipment must be maintained in good condition,
including keeping the hives free of chipped and peeling paint if painted, and
any unused equipment must be stored in an enclosed structure.



   (F)   Hives shall be continuously managed to provide adequate living
space for their resident honeybees in order to prevent swarming.



   (G)   In any instance in which a colony exhibits unusual aggressive
behavior, it shall be the duty of the beekeeper to promptly re-queen the
colony. 



   (H)   Honey may not be sold from any residential property unless a
home occupation permit has been obtained and required conditions met in
accordance with § 152.262(B) of this code.



(Ord. 2015-1191, passed 5-18-15)



§ 92.56  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   The application for registration must be upon a form provided
by the city.  All required information must be complete.



   (B)   Each apiary site must apply for registration and receive
approval prior to bringing any honey bees into the city.  Registration is
not required for sites over five acres in size.



   (C)   If the beekeeper relocates a hive or colony to a new apiary
site, the beekeeper shall apply for an updated registration, prior to the
relocation, on the form provided by the city.



   (D)   The beekeeping registration shall be valid until March 31 of
each calendar year following initial issuance and must be renewed by the
registrant prior to expiration each year by submitting a renewal form to the
Community Development Department on the form provided by the city.



   (E)   Upon receipt of an application for initial registration, the
city will send written notice to all owners of properties located within 200
feet of the property line of the apiary site(s) identified on the
application.  Any objections to the registration must be made in writing and
received within 14 days of mailing the notice.  If any written objection is
received, the registration application must be referred to the City Manager.



      (1)   The registration application must be denied if the city
receives a written objection from a resident living within the designated
notification area that includes medical documentation by a licensed physician
of an allergy to honey bee venom.



   (F)   Beekeeping training and education is required for the
beekeeper prior to the issuance of the initial beekeeping permit by the
city.  At the time of application for registration, the beekeeper must
submit a certificate of completion of a honey beekeeping course from an
accredited Minnesota institution.



   (G)   The fees for the registration will be determined by the City
Council in the city's fee schedule.



   (H)   The property must be in compliance with all other applicable
city regulations in order to receive approval and renewal.



   (I)   If the standards of practice are not maintained subsequent to
issuance of a beekeeping permit, the permit may be revoked by the City
Manager.



   (J)    Beekeepers operating in the city prior to the effective date
of the section will have until July 1, 2015 to apply for registration.



(Ord. 2015-1191, passed 5-18-15)



§ 92.57  INSPECTION.



   (A)   Upon initial registration, annual renewal or any updated
registration, each beekeeper must allow for an inspection of the site.



   (B)   Upon prior notice to the owner of the apiary site, city staff
shall have the right to inspect any apiary.



   (C)   In the case of a complaint regarding the apiary, the apiary
site may be inspected without prior notice.



(Ord. 2015-1191, passed 5-18-15)



§ 92.58  APPEAL AND HEARING PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Registrations issued under this section may be denied, revoked
or non-renewed due to any of the following:



      (1)   The keeping of honey bees in a manner which constitutes
a nuisance to the health, safety or general welfare of the public;



      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or a false statement contained
in the registration application or during the course of the registered
activity;



      (3)   Any violation of the applicable provisions in this
chapter.



   (B)   Notice of approval, denial, revocation or non-renewal must be
made in writing to the registrant and to any person opposing the application
for initial registration specifying the reason(s) for the action.  The
registrant or any person opposing the application may request a hearing
within 14 days of the date of the notification letter.



   (C)   A hearing officer shall hold a hearing on a contested
approval, denial, revocation, or non-renewal.  The hearing officer shall be
a person appointed by the city.  At the hearing, the applicant and any
person objecting to the application for initial registration may speak and
may present witnesses and other evidence.  Upon the conclusion of the
hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision that includes
findings of fact.  The city shall provide the registrant and any objecting
party with a copy of the hearing officer's decision.  The registrant may
appeal the hearing officer's decision in accordance with state law.



(Ord. 2015-1191, passed 5-18-15)



CHAPTER 93:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 93A:  FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION



Section



   93A.01   Code enforcement



   93A.02   Fees



   93A.03   Adoption of Minnesota State Fire Code



   93A.04   Amendments to Minnesota State Fire Code



   93A.05   Copies on file



   93A.06   Open flame heaters banned



   93A.07   Open burning



   93A.08   Recreational fires



   93A.09   D.C. welders for thawing frozen waterlines



   93A.10   Pyrotechnics



   93A.11   Underground liquid storage systems



   93A.12   Fire hydrant placement



 



   93A.99   Penalty



§ 93A.01  CODE ENFORCEMENT.



   The Fire Marshal and investigators/inspectors appointed to assist the
Fire Marshal, must enforce all statutes, ordinances and codes aimed at fire
prevention and may achieve enforcement through the issuance of notices,
warning tickets or citations in lieu of arrest or detention.



(Ord. 2017-1219, passed 8-28-17)



§ 93A.02  FEES.



   (A)   Licenses, permits, service fees, inspection fees and charges
shall be in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the City Council in
the amount provided by the fee resolution, set forth in the Appendix to this
code.



   (B)   Upon application for a key box, a fee must be paid for the
city to supply each key box. The fee shall be determined by the Fire Chief on
the basis of the actual costs to the city.



   (C)   The installation of any fire suppression system/fire alarm
system, equipment or device(s) requires payment by the applicant of fees in
the amount provided by the fee resolution, set forth in the Appendix to this
code.



   (D)   No permit will be issued until the applicant files with the
Fire Chief or the Fire Chief's designee a complete set of plans and permit
application with appropriate fees and the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief's
designee gives final approval.



(Ord. 2017-1219, passed 8-28-17)



§ 93A.03  ADOPTION OF MINNESOTA STATE FIRE CODE.



   The Minnesota State Fire Code as promulgated by the Minnesota
Department of Labor and Industry (2015 Edition) together with Appendices B,
C, D, E, F, G, H, I, K, and L is adopted by reference and incorporated into
this code as if fully set forth herein, subject to deletions or modifications
contained in this chapter.



(Ord. 2017-1219, passed 8-28-17)



§ 93A.04  AMENDMENTS TO MINNESOTA STATE FIRE CODE.



   Amendments made to the 2015 edition of the Minnesota State Fire Code:



   (A)   Standpipe systems. Class II standpipe hose stations, Class I
and Class III standpipe outlets shall not be concealed, obstructed or
impaired.  A 3-foot (914.4 mm) clear space shall be maintained around the
circumference of all standpipe stations and/or outlets, and valving, except
as otherwise required by the Fire Chief.



   (B)   Fire extinguishers. Fire extinguishers shall not be obstructed
or obscured from view.  In rooms or areas in which visual obstruction cannot
be completely avoided, means shall be provided to indicate the locations of
extinguishers.  A 3-foot (914.4 mm) clear space shall be maintained around
the circumference of all fire extinguishers, except as otherwise required by
the Fire Chief.



   (C)   Fire extinguishers type. All commercial buildings, regardless
of use or occupancy shall use 4A60BC fire extinguishers.



   (D)   Fire alarm and detection systems. Alarm-initiating devices,
alarm-signaling devices and annunciators shall not be concealed, obstructed
or impaired.  A 3-foot (914.4 mm) clear space shall be maintained around the
circumference of fire alarm and detection equipment except as otherwise
required by the Fire Chief.



   (E)   Commercial cooking systems. Permits are required to conduct
hood cleaning.  Every application for such a permit shall be made in writing
to the Fire Department at least five working days in advance of the date of
proposed cleaning.  A permit shall be issued only after the Fire Chief or
the Fire Chief's designee has given approval and the applicant has paid the
permit fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the City Council in
the amount provided by the fee resolution, set forth in the Appendix to this
code. Prior to setting an appointment for the hood cleaning, a pre-arranged
appointment must be set with the fire department for the inspection. 
Changes in the appointment time should be communicated as soon as possible. 
If the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief's designee does not approve the cleaning
of the system and/or has to return for additional inspections, the applicant
shall be required to apply for additional permits, and pay additional fees as
required.



   (F)   Alarm system monitoring. Fire alarm systems shall be
electrically monitored by an approved central station service.  Electrically
monitoring shall require an Underwriters Laboratories (U.L.) 72 "Central
Station Fire Alarm System" Certificate Service be issued on all new Fire
Alarm Systems and Communicators.



EXCEPTIONS:



   i.   For existing fire alarm systems, monitoring is required when
the systems are upgraded or altered with additions.



   ii.   Supervisory service is not required for automatic sprinkler
systems in one- and two- family dwellings.



General fire alarm, water-flow alarm, trouble, and supervisory signals shall
be distinctively different and shall be automatically transmitted to an
approved central station in accordance with National Fire Protection
Association (N.F.P.A.) Standard 72.



(Ord. 2017-1219, passed 8-28-17)



§ 93A.05  COPIES ON FILE.



   The Fire Chief must have one copy of the Minnesota Fire Code and one
copy of this chapter available for public inspection.



(Ord. 2017-1219, passed 8-28-17)



§ 93A.06  OPEN FLAME HEATERS BANNED.



   It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of any structure containing
three or more residential units to maintain in an operable condition or
operate within a garage, whether attached or detached, used as an accessory
use to such residential unit, the following:



   (A)   An open flame-type heater or stove.



   (B)   Welding or torch cutting equipment.



   (C)   Any other equipment utilizing an open flame.



(Ord. 2017-1219, passed 8-28-17)



§ 93A.07  OPEN BURNING.



   (A)   Except as otherwise permitted by this section, all open
burning is prohibited in the City of Brooklyn Park.  The Fire Chief or the
Fire Chief's designee is authorized to issue burning permits, and is granted
the authority to place conditions upon applicants requesting a burning
permit.  Items that will require a burning permit are:



      (1)   Fires purposely set under the supervision of the City
Fire Department for the instruction and training of firefighting personnel.



      (2)   Fires set for the elimination of a fire hazard which
cannot be abated by any other practical means.



      (3)   Fires purposely set for forest and game management
purposes.



      (4)   The burning of trees, brush, grass and other vegetable
matter in the clearing of land, the maintenance of street, road and highway
right-of-way, and in accepted agricultural land management practices, located
within the City of Brooklyn Park.



      (5)   Fires for which the Fire Chief has deemed necessary.



   (B)   Permits are required to conduct open burning.  Every
application for such a permit shall be made in writing to the Fire Department
at least 15 days in advance of the date of proposed burning.  The permit
application shall include a diagram of the grounds on which the burning is to
be conducted showing the point at which the material to be burned is located;
the location of buildings, highways and other lines of communication; and the
location of nearby trees, telegraph or telephone lines and other overhead
obstructions.  The Fire Chief shall make an investigation to determine
whether the proposed burning location meets the minimum requirements of the
code and these ordinances.  At the time of permit application, the Fire
Chief or the Fire Chief's designee shall be consulted regarding requirements
for standby fire apparatus.  A permit shall be issued only after the Fire
Chief or the Fire Chief's designee has given approval for the open burning
and the applicant has paid the permit fee in accordance with the fee schedule
adopted by the City Council in the amount provided by the fee resolution, set
forth in the Appendix to this code.  After the permit has been issued, it
shall be lawful for that purpose and time period only.  No permit so granted
shall be transferable.



   (C)   Open burning material restrictions.



      (1)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of
oils, petro fuels, rubber, plastics, paper, chemically treated materials or
other materials which produce excessive or noxious smoke such as tires,
railroad ties, treated, painted or glued wood, composite shingles, tar paper,
insulation, composition board, sheetrock, wiring, asbestos material, paint or
paint filters.



      (2)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of
hazardous waste or salvage operations, solid waste generated from an
industrial or manufacturing process or from a service or commercial
establishment, or building material generated from demolition of commercial
or industrial structures, or discarded material resulting from the handling,
processing, storage, preparation, serving or consumption of food.



   (D)   Time and atmospheric restrictions.  Open burning shall only
be performed when time limits comply with the time limits set forth in the
open burning permit.  The prevailing wind at the time of burning and
expected burning duration shall not exceed ten mph, and must not blow towards
nearby residences, or other occupied buildings, roads or high power lines
which would create a hazard or nuisance.



   (E)   Location.



      (1)   Open burning shall not be conducted within 600 feet
(182,880 mm) of any road, high power line, or any occupied structure; other
than those occupied structure(s) located on the property on which the open
burning is to be conducted.  Open burning shall not be conducted within one
mile (1.609 km) of an airport or landing strip unless the affected airport or
landing strip gives written approval.  Open burning shall not be conducted
within 50 feet (15,240 mm) of any other combustible material.



      (2)   All combustible materials within 50 feet (15,240 mm) of
the open burn site shall be eliminated prior to ignition.



   (F)   Fire-extinguishing equipment.  Appropriate fire-extinguishing
equipment (as required by the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief's designee) shall
be readily available for use at open-burning sites.



   (G)   Attendance.  Burning material shall be constantly attended by
a person knowledgeable in the use of the fire-extinguishing equipment
required in Section 307.1.6 of the Minnesota State Fire Code, have a copy of
the burn permit at the burn site at all times, and be familiar with the
permit limitations which restrict open burning.  The open burn fire shall be
completely extinguished before the permit holder or permit holder's
representative leaves the site.



   (H)   Discontinuance.



      (1)   The Chief is authorized to require that open burning be
immediately discontinued if the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief's designee
determines that: a fire hazard exists or develops during the course of the
burn: any conditions of the permit are being violated during the course of
the burn; smoke emissions are or become offensive to occupants of surrounding
property during the course of the burn; or a smoldering fire with no flame is
present.



      (2)   Any permit burn shall be extinguished within four hours
of a public announcement when the Fire Chief, the Fire Chief's designee or
Department of Natural Resources official has officially declared a burning
ban due to potential hazardous fire conditions, or when the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency has declared an Air Quality Alert.



   (I)   Permit holder responsibility.  The permit holder is
responsible for compliance and implementation of all general conditions, and
special conditions as established in the permit issued.  The permit holder
shall be responsible for all costs incurred as a result of the burn
including, but not limited to, fire suppression and administrative fees.



(Ord. 2017-1219, passed 8-28-17)



§ 93A.08  RECREATIONAL FIRES.



   In additional to complying with the requirements of the Minnesota State
Fire Code, the following shall be required.



   (A)   Material restrictions.



      (1)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit burning of
oils, petro fuels, rubber, plastics, paper, refuse, rubbish, chemically
treated materials or other materials which produce excessive or noxious smoke
such as tires, railroad ties, treated, painted or glued wood, composite
shingles, tar paper, insulation, composition board, sheetrock, wiring,
asbestos material, paint or paint filters, leaves, or grass.



      (2)   No person shall conduct, cause or permit burning of
hazardous waste or salvage operations, solid waste generated from an
industrial or manufacturing process or from a service or commercial
establishment, or building material generated from demolition of commercial
or industrial structures, or discarded material resulting from the handling,
processing, storage, preparation, serving or consumption of food.



   (B)   Responsibility.  The property owner is responsible for
compliance and implementation of all general conditions, and special
conditions as established for recreational fires. The property owner shall be
responsible for all costs incurred as a result of the recreational fire
including, but not limited to, fire suppression and administrative fees.



(Ord. 2017-1219, passed 8-28-17)



§ 93A.09  D.C. WELDERS FOR THAWING FROZEN WATERLINES.



   (A)   It is unlawful to use an electric welding machine within the
limits of the city for purposes of thawing frozen water mains or services.



   (B)   It is unlawful to make any connection from an electric welding
machine to any water main, service, or any appurtenance thereto within the
city.



   (C)   Exception:  Unless the person and/or company obtains a permit
from Public Works Division. The person and/or company must show proof of
liability and property damage, minimum insurance of $500,000.  Before any
machine is turned on, a continuity test must be conducted to ensure proper
connection of the effective water pipe.



(Ord. 2017-1219, passed 8-28-17)



§ 93A.10  PYROTECHNICS.



   (A)   Pyrotechnic special-effect material.  Temporary storage,
use/display and handling of pyrotechnic special effects material used in
motion pictures, television and theatrical and group entertainment
productions shall be required to obtain a permit.



   (B)   Displays.  Permits are required to conduct a fireworks
display.  A fireworks display is only permitted when supervised by a
pyrotechnic operator certified by the State Fire Marshal.  Every application
for such a permit shall be made in writing to the Fire Department at least 15
days in advance of the date of display.  In addition to the information
required in Section 3308.2 of the Minnesota State Fire Code, the permit
application shall include the number, type and size of the fireworks to be
discharged.  For proximate audience displays, the plans required by Section
3308.2 of the Minnesota State Fire Code shall also show the fallout radius
for each pyrotechnic device used during the display.  At the time of permit
application, the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief's designee shall be consulted
regarding requirements for standby fire apparatus.  The Licensing Division
shall issue a permit only after the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief's designee
has given approval for the display and the applicant has paid the permit fee
in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the City Council in the amount
provided by the fee resolution, set forth in the Appendix to this code. 
After the permit has been issued, sales, possession, use and distribution of
fireworks for such display shall be lawful for that purpose only.  No permit
so granted shall be transferable.



(Ord. 2017-1219, passed 8-28-17)



§ 93A.11  UNDERGROUND LIQUID STORAGE SYSTEMS.



   Wherever there is a conflict of requirements, the more restrictive
governs so as to further the purpose of this section in protecting the
public's health, safety and welfare from the dangers of leakage of systems
contents.



   (A)   Permits; general provisions. The installation, alteration,
repair or removal of any underground liquid storage system governed by this
section requires permits issued pursuant to the provisions of the Minnesota
State Fire Code and any other applicable code, ordinance, statute or rule.
The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be in accordance
with the fee schedule adopted by the City Council in the amount provided by
the fee resolution, set forth in the Appendix to this code. The Fire Chief
may deny a permit to persons not capable of performing pursuant to ordinance
requirements.



   (B)   Permits; application.  The application for any permit
required by this section must contain as a minimum and in addition to any
further information the city may require, the following:



      (1)   The address and legal description of the property on
which the underground liquid storage system is or will be located;



      (2)   The name and address of each owner of the property;



      (3)   The name and address of each owner of the underground
liquid storage system for which a permit is desired;



      (4)   The name and address of the operator who will be
responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of the underground storage
system(s) and who is legally constituted and empowered to receive service of
notice of violation of the provisions of city ordinances, to receive orders,
to institute remedial action to affect such orders, to accept all service of
process pursuant to law and to be available to be contacted by the city in
the case of an emergency.  The Fire Chief must be notified immediately in
writing of any change of required operator information;



      (5)   The actual or anticipated contents of the underground
liquid storage tank(s);



      (6)   The purpose for which the permit is requested;



      (7)   The name and address of the applicant and the
applicant's relationship to the owners of the underground liquid storage
tank(s);



      (8)   The location of any records required to be maintained
pursuant to this section;



      (9)   The resin composition used in the manufacture of the
fiberglass tank, if fiberglass, together with a listing of compatible product
types;



      (10)   A current copy of the contractor's certificate of
certification approved by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency;



      (11)   A report containing the highest known or calculated
water table.  As referenced in the 100-year flood plain plan for the city,
for the proposed tank location.



If any of the information contained in the application required by the above
changes before the granting or expiration of the permit, the applicant or
permittee, as the case may be, must notify the Fire Chief of any such
change.  Every permittee must respond in writing to the Fire Chief within 72
hours of the Fire Chief's inquiry concerning the ownership or control of any
underground liquid storage system, the land on which it is located, or the
activity for which the permit was granted.



   (C)   Qualifications for licensee.



      (1)   The Fire Chief may investigate applicants and
applications for all licenses required by this section.  The Fire Chief may
deny any application for license required by this section for just cause.



      (2)   It is unlawful for a person, firm, or corporation,
including subcontractors, to engage in the business of installing,
maintaining, altering, repairing or removing any underground liquid storage
system without first having procured a license therefor as herein provided.
Licenses are issued only to contractors who have been approved by the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency as a certified contractor, pursuant to
M.S. § 116.491 Subd. (1), to enable them to install, maintain, alter, repair
or remove underground liquid storage systems.



      (3)   Applications for licenses must be made to the Fire
Department and the license will be granted upon proof of the applicant's
qualifications therefor and upon filing a bond in the amount of $2,000 and
the Fire Chief's approval conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of
this section. The provisions of § 110.37 of this code apply to licenses
issued pursuant to this section, which licenses expire on December 31 next
following the date of issuance.



(Ord. 2017-1219, passed 8-28-17)



§ 93A.12  FIRE HYDRANT PLACEMENT.



   With respect to the placement of fire hydrants for new development, at
least one fire hydrant shall be located within 100 feet of the intended
location of the Fire Department connection.



(Ord. 2017-1219, passed 8-28-17)



§ 93A.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provisions of the chapter
hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to
comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no
appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as
affirmed or modified by the Council or by a court of competent jurisdiction
within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every violation
and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a penal offense and punished
according to § 10.99 of this code.  The imposition of one penalty for any
violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all
such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or
defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified each ten
days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate
offense.



   (B)   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to
prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.



(Ord. 2017-1219, passed 8-28-17)



CHAPTER 94:  HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES



Section




Nuisances




   94.01   Definitions



   94.02   Public nuisance prohibited



   94.03   Specific public nuisances prohibited



   94.04   Limitations on keeping of animals



   94.05   Litter prohibited



   94.06   Abatement of nuisance and assessment of cost



   94.07   Service charges and special assessments against benefitted
properties



   94.08   Purpose and intent



   94.09   Declaration of property as a public nuisance



   94.10   Law enforcement notice to other authorities



   94.11   Seizure of property



   94.12   Action by City Health Official



   94.13   Responsibilities of owner



   94.14   Owner's responsibility for costs



   94.15   City authority to initiate cleanup and recovery of costs



 



   94.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Nuisances regarding excavations and earth moving, see §§ 118.01 et
seq.



NUISANCES



§ 94.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED PROPERTY.  In the form of deteriorated, wrecked or derelict
property in unusable condition, having no value other than nominal scrap or
junk value, and left unprotected from the elements; the term includes, but is
not limited to, deteriorated, wrecked, inoperable, or partially dismantled
motor vehicles, trailers, plumbing fixtures, and furniture.



   CHILD.   Any person less than 18 years of age.



   CHEMICAL DUMPSITE.   Any place or area where chemicals or other waste
materials have been located.



   CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB.   The unlawful manufacture or attempt to
manufacture controlled substances.



   CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITE. Any place or area where an unlawful
clandestine drug lab exists. A CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITE includes any
dwellings, accessory structures, a chemical dump site, a vehicle boat trailer
or other similar appliance or any other area or location.



   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE.   Any drug, substance or immediate precursor in
Schedules I through V of M.S. § 152.02. The term does not include distilled
spirits, wine, malt beverages, intoxicating liquors or tobacco.



   GARBAGE.  All putrescible animal, vegetable, or other matter that
attends the preparation, consumption, display, dealing in or storage of meat,
fish, fowl, birds, fruit, or vegetables, including the cans, containers, or
wrappers wasted along with such materials.



   HAZARDOUS WASTE.  Any refuse, sludge, or waste material or
combinations of refuse, sludge or other waste materials in solid, semi-solid,
liquid, or contained gaseous form which because of its quantity,
concentration, or chemical, physical, or infectious characteristics may cause
or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in
serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness; or pose a
substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment
when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise
managed.  Categories of hazardous waste materials include, but are not
limited to: explosives, flammables, oxidizers, poisons, irritants, and
corrosives.  HAZARDOUS WASTE does not include source, special nuclear, or
by-product material as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended.



   LITTER.  Any garbage, refuse, abandoned property, and hazardous waste
and additionally includes the meaning given by M.S. § 609.68.



   METHAMPHETAMINE PRECURSOR DRUGS.    Any:



      (1)   Drug or product containing as its sole active ingredient
ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine, or any of their salts,
optical isomers, or salts or optical isomers; or



      (2)   Combination drug or product containing as one of its
active ingredients ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine, or any of
their salts, optical isomers, or sales of optical isomers.



   OVER-THE-COUNTER SALES. A retail sale of a drug or product, but not
including the sale of a drug or product pursuant to the terms of a valid
prescription.



   OWNER. Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity who owns, in
whole or in part, the land, building, structure, vehicle, boat, trailer or
other location associated with a clandestine drug lab site or chemical dump
site.



   REFUSE.  All solid waste products or those wastes having the character
of solids rather than liquids in that they will not flow readily without
additional liquid and which are composed wholly or partly of such materials
as garbage, sweepings, swill, cleanings, trash, rubbish, industrial solid
wastes or domestic solid wastes; organic wastes or residue of animals sold as
meat, fruit, or other vegetable or animal matter from kitchen, dining room,
market, food establishment or any place dealing or handling meat, fowl,
fruit, grain or vegetables; offal, animal excreta, or the carcass of animals;
tree or shrub trimmings, or grass clippings; brick, plaster, wood, metal or
other waste matter resulting from the demolition, alteration or construction
of buildings or structures; accumulated waste materials, cans, containers,
junk vehicles, ashes, tires, junk, or other such substances which may become
a nuisance.



   UNDERGROUND LIQUID STORAGE SYSTEM, UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANK or TANK. 
Any one or a combination of containers including tanks, vessels, enclosures,
or structures and underground appurtenances connected to them, that is used
to contain or dispense an accumulation of liquid substances deemed by the
city to pose a threat to the public's health, safety or welfare.  The volume
of which, including the volume of the underground pipes connected to them, is
ten percent or more beneath the surface of the ground, this does not include
septic tanks.



('72 Code, § 1000:01)  (Ord. 1989-627(A), passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord.
1993-741, passed 11-22-93; Am. Ord. 2005-1030, passed 1-10-05)



§ 94.02  PUBLIC NUISANCE PROHIBITED.



   Whoever, by act or failure to perform a legal duty, intentionally does
any of the following is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance, and is
punishable as set forth herein:



   (A)   Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys,
injures, or endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort, or repose of any
number of members of the public; or



   (B)   Interferes with, obstructs, or renders dangerous for passage,
public streets, highway or right of way, or waters used by the public; or



   (C)   Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by statutory
law, the common law, or this subchapter to be a public nuisance, whether or
not any sentence is specifically provided therefor; or



   (D)   Permits real property under the person’s control to be used
to maintain a public nuisance or rents the same, knowing it will be so used.



('72 Code, § 1000:06)  (Ord. 1989-627(A), passed 6-26-89)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.03  SPECIFIC PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED.



   It is declared to be a public nuisance to permit, maintain, or harbor
any of the following:



   (A)   Diseased animals, fish, or fowl, wild or domestic, whether
confined or running at large.



   (B)   Carcasses of animals, fish, or fowl, wild or domestic, not
buried at least three feet under the surface of the ground or destroyed
within 24 hours after death.



   (C)   Garbage not stored in rodent free or fly-tight containers, or
garbage stored so as to emit foul and disagreeable odors, or garbage stored
so as to constitute a hazard to public health.



   (D)   Accumulations of refuse, garbage, litter, abandoned property
or hazardous waste as defined herein.



   (E)   The dumping of any effluent, garbage, refuse, wastewater, or
other noxious substance upon public or private property.



   (F)   Any open well, pit, excavation, structure, barrier or other
obstruction which endangers public health, safety, or welfare.



   (G)   The pollution of any public or private well or cistern, any
public stream, lake, canal, or body of water by effluent, garbage, rubbish,
or other noxious substance.



   (H)   Any noxious weeds, or any other vegetation which endangers
public health, safety, or welfare, or which is contraband within the meaning
of state or federal laws.



   (I)   The emitting or production of dense smoke, foul odor, noise,
noxious fumes, gases, soot, cinders, or sparks in quantities which
unreasonably annoy, injure, or endanger the safety, health, morals, comfort,
or repose of any number of members of the public.



   (J)   The public exposure of persons having a contagious disease or
condition which endangers public health, safety, or welfare.



   (K)   Accumulation of junk, disused furniture, appliances,
machinery, automobiles or parts thereof, or any matter which may become a
harborage for rats, snakes, or vermin or which creates a visual blight, or
which may be conducive to fire, or which endangers the comfort, repose,
health, safety, or welfare of the public.



   (L)   It is unlawful to cause, permit, or maintain any abandoned
cesspool or septic tank without its being properly filled.



   (M) Any abandoned, damages, defective, leaking, destroyed, unrepaired
or unrestored underground liquid storage system.



('72 Code, § 1000:11)  (Ord. 1989-627(A), passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord.
1993-741, passed 11-22-93)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.04  LIMITATIONS ON KEEPING OF ANIMALS.



   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance to permit, maintain, or
harbor any of the following:



   (A)   More than three animals, as defined by § 92.01 of this code,
over six months old, except in a commercial kennel.



   (B)   Chickens and other domestic fowl.



   (C)   Any combination of animals and/or fowl of any age kept in such
numbers or under conditions which reasonably annoy, injure, or endanger the
health, safety, comfort, repose, or welfare of the public or of the animals
or fowl.



   (D)   Any wild animal, including crossbreeds with wild animals,
which in their wild state pose a threat to humans or domestic animals or are
capable of transmitting rabies, including, but not limited to, wolves, bear,
cougar, skunk, lynx, bobcat and fox.



   (E)   Any animal prohibited by Chapter 92 of this code.



('72 Code, § 1000:16)  (Ord. 1989-627(A), passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord.
1997-861, passed 10-27-97; Am. Ord. 2012-1149, passed 9-4-12)  Penalty, see
§ 94.99



§ 94.05  LITTER PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful to throw, deposit or store litter on private or public
property within the city.



   (A)   Duties of owners and occupants.  The owner, lessee, or
occupant of private property, whether occupied or vacant, must maintain the
property free of litter.



   (B)   Authorized storage.  Nothing in this section prohibits the
storage of litter on private property in receptacles or containers which meet
the requirements of the city code.



   (C)   Removal of litter; procedure; collection of costs.



      (1)   Notice; service.  When there exists litter on private
property, a notice to remove the litter will be served upon the owner, lessee
or occupant thereof by the Health Authority.  The notice must be served by
certified mail, or by personal delivery.  When the property is occupied,
service upon the occupant is deemed service upon the owner; where the
property is unoccupied or abandoned, service must be by mail to the last
known owner of record of the property.



      (2)   Notice; contents.  The notice required by subdivision
(1) must state:



         (a)   The nature and location of the litter;



         (b)   That the litter must be removed or properly stored
within ten days of service of the notice; and



         (c)   That if the litter is not so removed or stored, it
will be removed by the city and the cost of such removal assessed against the
property.



      (3)   Costs.  The Health Authority must keep a record of all
costs incurred by the city in the removal and disposition of litter pursuant
to this section, including all administrative costs involved in the service
of the notice required by this section, and must report to the City Clerk
annually not later than August 1.



      (4)   Assessment.  On or before September 1 of each year, the
Clerk must list the total costs incurred by the city under this section
against each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable.  The
City Council must then spread the costs against each property as a special
assessment for collection as other special assessments in the following year,
all as authorized by M.S. Chapter 429.



('72 Code, § 1000:21)  (Ord. 1989-627(A), passed 6-26-89)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.06  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE AND ASSESSMENT OF COST.



   (A)   When any nuisance is found to exist, the Health Authority of
the city must order the owner or occupant thereof to remove the same, at the
expense of the owner or occupant, within a period not to exceed ten days, the
exact time to be specified in the notice.  Upon failure of the owner or
occupant to abate the nuisance, the City Manager or designee must cause the
nuisance to be abated and must certify the cost thereof to the Finance
Department, and the Finance Department must certify the costs to the County
Auditor to be extended on the tax roll of the county against the real estate
from which the nuisance has been abated, all in accordance with M.S. §§
145A. It is unlawful to obstruct any official of the City of Brooklyn Park in
enforcing this chapter.



   (B)   In the event the Health Authority of the city deems a nuisance
situation to constitute an immediate public health hazard, the Health
Authority may immediately abate or condemn the nuisance.



   (C)   The owner or occupant must then make safe or secure the
property or nuisance in accordance with the above provisions.



('72 Code, § 1000:26)  (Ord. 1989-627(A), passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord.
1989-640(A), passed 12-18-89)



§ 94.07  SERVICE CHARGES AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS AGAINST BENEFITTED
PROPERTIES.



   (A)   The city is authorized by M.S. § 429.101 to provide for the
collection of unpaid special charges for all or any part of the cost of snow,
ice or rubbish removal from sidewalks or public ways; weed elimination from
streets or private property; removal or elimination of public health or
safety hazards from private property; installation or repair of water service
lines; street sprinkling or other dust treatment of streets; the trimming and
care of trees and the removal of unsound trees from any street or public way;
the treatment and removal of insect infested or diseased trees on private
property; the repair of sidewalks and alleys; or the operation of a street
lighting system; as a special assessment against the property benefitted.



   (B)   The city provides that all of the foregoing services may be
special assessed against benefitted properties which require these
services.  The City Manager must provide the property owner or owners as
shown on city tax records with a written notice to correct the problems
addressed in division (A) of this section.  The City Manager may also
provide in the written notice that the primary responsibility for correction
of the problem is upon the property owner or occupant to do the work
correcting the problem within a specific time.  This provision applies in
all cases except street sprinkling or other dust treatment, alley repair,
tree trimming, care and removal or the operation of a street lighting
system.  If the property owner does not correct the problem or remove or
eliminate the public health or safety hazard the notice must state that the
city will do the work and attempt to collect the costs from the property
owner or other person served for the charges and if the costs are not paid
the unpaid charges must be specially assessed pursuant to the provisions of
M.S. § 429:101.



   (C)   All the provisions of M.S. § 429.101 are incorporated by
reference.



('72 Code, § 1000:60)



§  94.08  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purpose of §§ 94.08 through 94.15 of this chapter is to protect
the public health, safety and welfare and to reduce public exposure to health
risks where law enforcement officers have determined that hazardous chemicals
from a suspected clandestine drug lab or chemical dump site may exist. The
City Council finds that such sites may contain hazardous chemicals,
substances, or residues that place people, particularly children or adults of
child-bearing age, at risk of exposure through inhabiting or visiting the
site or using or being exposed to contaminated personal property.



(Ord. 2005-1030, passed 1-10-05)



§ 94.09  DECLARATION OF PROPERTY AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   (A)   Any property containing a clandestine drug lab or chemical
dump site will be declared a public health nuisance.



   (B)   No person may occupy, enter or allow occupancy or entrance to
property declared a public health nuisance under this section until such
declaration is vacated or modified to allow occupancy.



(Ord. 2005-1030, passed 1-10-05)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.10  LAW ENFORCEMENT NOTICE TO OTHER AUTHORITIES.



   Upon identification of a clandestine drug lab site or chemical dumpsite
deemed to place neighbors, visiting public, or present and future occupants
of the affected property at risk for exposure to harmful contaminants and
other associated conditions, law enforcement officials will notify the City
Health Official and other appropriate municipal, child protection, and public
health authorities of the property location, property owner if known, and
conditions found.



(Ord. 2005-1030, passed 1-10-05)



§ 94.11  SEIZURE OF PROPERTY.



   (A)   If a clandestine drug lab or chemical dump site is located
inside a vehicle, boat, trailer, or other form of moveable personal property,
law enforcement authorities may immediately seize such property and transport
it to a more secure location.



   (B)   Personal property may not be removed from a clandestine drug
lab site or a chemical dump site without the prior consent from the City
Health Official.



(Ord. 2005-1030, passed 1-10-05)



§ 94.12  ACTION BY CITY HEALTH OFFICIAL.



   (A)   Upon notification by law enforcement authorities, the City
Health Official or other appropriate municipal or public health authority
will issue a Declaration of Public Health Nuisance for the affected property
and post a copy of the Declaration at all probable entrances to the dwelling
or property.



   (B)   Removal of the posted Declaration of Public Health Nuisance by
anyone other than the City Health Official, law enforcement authorities, or
their designees, is prohibited.



   (C)   The City Health Official will also attempt to notify the
following parties of the Declaration of Public Health Nuisance:



      (1)   Owner of the property;



      (2)   Occupants of the property;



      (3)   Neighbors at probable risk;



      (4)   The City of Brooklyn Park Police Department;



      (5)   Other state and local authorities, such as the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency and the Minnesota Department of Public Health, which
are known to have public and environmental protection responsibilities
applicable to the situation.



   (D)   Any rental license issued by the city for the property is
immediately suspended upon issuance of the Declaration of Public Health
Nuisance. Such license will be reinstated only after full compliance with an
abatement order.



   (E)   After issuance of the Declaration of Public Health Nuisance,
the City Health Official will issue an order to the property owner to abate
the public health nuisance. The abatement order will include the following:



      (1)   A copy of the Declaration of Public Health Nuisance;



      (2)   An order to immediately vacate those portions of the
property, including building or structure interiors, which may place the
occupants or visitors at risk;



      (3)   Notification of suspension of the rental license, if
applicable; and



      (4)   A summary of the owner's and occupant's responsibilities.



(Ord. 2005-1030, passed 1-10-05)



§ 94.13  RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNER.



   (A)   Within ten days after the abatement order is mailed to the
owner, the property owner must, at the owner's expense:



      (1)   Properly secure and post the perimeter of any
contaminated areas on the property in an effort to avoid exposure to
unsuspecting parties;



      (2)   Promptly contract with appropriate environmental testing
and cleaning firms to conduct on-site assessment, complete cleanup and
remediation testing, including periodic follow-up testing to assure that the
health risks are sufficiently reduced to allow safe human occupancy of the
property and structures located on the property;



      (3)   Regularly notify the city of actions taken and reach
agreement with the city on the cleanup schedule; and



      (4)   Provide written documentation to the city of the cleanup
process, including a signed, written statement that the property is safe for
human occupancy and that the cleanup was conducted in accordance with
Minnesota Department of Health guidelines.



   (B)   The property may not be reoccupied or used in any manner until
the city has obtained the written statement in division (A)(4) and has
confirmed that the property has been cleaned in accordance with the
guidelines established by the Minnesota Department of Health.



(Ord. 2005-1030, passed 1-10-05)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.14  OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS.



   The owner is responsible for all costs associated with nuisance
abatement and cleanup of the clandestine drug lab site or chemical dump site,
including, but not limited to, costs for:



   (A)   Emergency response;



   (B)   Posting and physical security of the site;



   (C)   Notification of affected parties;



   (D)   Expenses related to the recovery of costs, including the
assessment process;



   (E)   Laboratory fees;



   (F)   Cleanup services;



   (G)   Administrative fees: and



   (H)   Other associated costs.



(Ord. 2005-1030, passed 1-10-05)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.15  CITY AUTHORITY TO INITIATE CLEANUP AND RECOVERY OF COSTS.



   (A)   If, after issuance of the Declaration of Public Health
Nuisance and the abatement order, the city is unable to locate the property
owner or the property owner fails to arrange appropriate assessment and
cleanup, the City Health Official is authorized to initiate the on-site
assessment and cleanup.



   (B)   The city may initiate on-site assessment and cleanup before
the expiration of the ten-day period in § 94.13(A) if the Health Authority
deems the situation to be an immediate public health hazard.



   (C)   The city may abate the nuisance by removing any hazardous
structure, building, or otherwise, in accordance with M.S. Chapter 463.



   (D)   If the city abates the public health nuisance, it may recover
all costs associated with such abatement. In addition to any other legal
remedy, the city may recover costs by civil action against the person or
persons who own the property or by assessing such costs as a special tax
against the property in the manner that taxes and special assessments are
certified and collected pursuant to M.S. §  429.101 and §§  94.06 and
94.07 of this chapter.



   (E)   Nothing in this chapter is intended to limit the owner's,
occupant's or the city's right to pursue an action authorized by law to
recover costs incurred from the persons contributing to or operating a
clandestine drug lab or from any other lawful source.



(Ord. 2005-1030, passed 1-10-05)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of
not more than $1,000 and by imprisonment for a period of not exceeding 90
days or both, together with the costs of prosecution.  Each day that
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   Each day that a prohibited act shall continue, or such
nuisance shall be maintained, shall constitute a separate offense.



('72 Code, § 1000:31)  (Ord. 1989-627(A), passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord.
2005-1030, passed 1-10-05)



CHAPTER 95:  PARK REGULATIONS



Section



   95.01   Purpose; definitions



   95.02   Regulation of public use



   95.03   Regulation of general conduct; personal behavior



   95.04   Regulations pertaining to general parkland operation



   95.05   Protection of property, structures and natural resources



   95.06   Regulation of recreation activity



   95.07   Regulation of motorized vehicles, traffic and parking



   95.08   Enforcement



Cross-reference:



   Recreation and Park Department, see §§ 31.01 et seq.



   Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission, see §§ 31.45 et seq.



§ 95.01  PURPOSE; DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Purpose.  The city deems it appropriate, reasonable and
necessary to provide an ordinance specifying rules and regulations in order
to provide for the recreational enjoyment of park areas and facilities; for
the protection and preservation of park property, facilities and natural
resources of the city; and for the safety and general welfare of the public.



   (B)   Definitions.



      AMUSEMENT CONTRAPTIONS.  Any contrivance, device, gadget,
machine or structure designed to test the skill or strength of the user or to
provide the user with any sort of ride, lift, swing or fall experience
including, but not limited to, ball-throwing contest device, pinball type
devices, animal ride devices, dunk tank, ball and hammer device, trampoline
devices and the like.



      AREA or AREAS.  A specified place within a park.



      CITY.  The City of Brooklyn Park, established pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes.



      COUNCIL.  Mayor and City Council of Brooklyn Park.



      DIRECTOR.  Either the Director of Recreation and Parks or the
Director of Operations and Maintenance.



      EMPLOYEE.  Any city volunteer or full or part-time regular or
temporary worker hired by the city.



      HIKING.  Traveling on foot, i.e., walking, running or with an
assistive mobility device.



      LASER.  Any device, which emits a coherent, monochromatic beam
of light.



      MOTOR VEHICLE.  Every device in, upon, or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a roadway except devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.



      MOTORIZED RECREATION VEHICLE.  Any self-propelled, off-the-road
or all-terrain vehicle including, but not limited to, snowmobile, mini-bike,
amphibious vehicle, motorcycle, go- cart, trail bike, dune buggy or
all-terrain cycle.



      NATURAL RESOURCES.  All flora and fauna within the city and the
physical factors upon which they depend, including air, water, soil and
minerals.



      OFF LEASH DOG EXERCISE AREA.  A public, city-designated area
where a dog owner is permitted to allow a dog or dogs to socialize and
exercise off leash, subject to the rules and regulations for such an area.



      PARK.  Any land, water area, or trail corridor and all
facilities thereon, under the jurisdiction, control or ownership of the city.



      PARK PATROL OFFICER.  Any regular, temporary, or intermittent
employee vested with the legal authority to enforce the City Ordinance.



      PERMIT/SPECIAL USE PERMIT.  Written permission obtained from the
city to carry out certain activities.



      PERSON or PERSONS.  Individuals, firms, corporations, societies
or any group or gathering whatsoever.



      PEST.  Any plant, animal, or microorganism that is determined to
be undesirable because it conflicts with park management objectives, creates
an annoyance to park guests, or has the potential to create a health hazard.



      PESTICIDE.  A chemical or biological substance intended to
prevent or destroy a pest; and/or a substance to be used as a plant
regulator, defoliant, or desiccant. Repellents are not considered pesticide.



      PET.  A domestic animal who is accompanied by a person in the
immediate vicinity of the animal.



      POLICE OFFICER.  Those individuals that are licensed as a
Minnesota police officers by the Minnesota Post Board vested with the legal
authority to enforce laws and ordinances.



      POLLUTANT.  Any substance, solid, liquid or gas, which could
cause contamination of air, land or water so as to create or cause a nuisance
or render it unclean or noxious or unpure so as to be actually or potentially
harmful or detrimental or injurious to public health, safety or welfare, or
that of wildlife or vegetation.



      POSSESSION.



      (1)   PHYSICAL POSSESSION.  Having a controlled substance on
one’s person with knowledge of the nature of the substance.



      (2)   CONSTRUCTIVE POSSESSION.  Having once possessed a
controlled substance or continuing to exercise dominion, and control over the
substance up to the time of arrest, or aiding and abetting another in
possessing a controlled substance.



      PROPERTY.  Any land, waters, facilities or possessions of the
city.



      RESPONSIBLE PERSON.  The parent, guardian, or person having
lawful custody and control of a juvenile.



      ROLLERSKATER.  Any person riding or propelling oneself by human
power or gravity on wheeled devices that are worn on a person’s feet or
stood upon by a person. Such devices specifically include, but are not
limited to, rollerskates, in-line skates, rollerskis, skateboards and
scooters.



      WATERCRAFT.  Any contrivance used or designed for navigation on
water.



      WEAPON.  All those weapons included under M.S. § 609.02, Subd.
6 but also includes spears, crossbows, bows and arrows, sling shots,
paintball gun or any other dangerous weapon or projectile.



      WILDLIFE.  Any living creature, not human, wild by nature,
including, but not limited to, mammals, birds, fish, amphibians, insects,
reptiles, crustaceans and mollusks.



(Ord. 2002-969, passed 5-13-02; Am. Ord. 2010-1114, passed 4-26-10)



§ 95.02  REGULATION OF PUBLIC USE.



   (A)   Park hours .



      (1)   Parks shall be open to the public from 6:00 a.m. until
10:00 p.m. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain in a park
at any other time without a use permit except when the park area or facility
is otherwise designated by the city, or the park area or facility is being
used as part of an authorized city program.



      (2)   The City Manager, his/her designee or an on-duty
police/fire supervisor is authorized to close any park or portion thereof at
any time for the protection of park property or the public health, safety or
welfare.



   (B)   Permits.



      (1)   City permits shall be required for the exclusive or
special use of all or portions of park areas, buildings or trails or for the
use of park areas and facilities when they are otherwise closed to the public.



      (2)   Permits shall be required for an entertainment,
tournament, exhibition or any other special use which can reasonably be
expected to have 25 or more persons involved or potentially have a
detrimental effect on park property or other park users.  Security,
insurance and/or security bonds may be required and paid by permit holder
prior to usage.



      (3)   It shall be unlawful for a person to violate any
provision of a permit.



   (C)   Use fee; failure to pay use fee.  It shall be unlawful for
any person to use, without payment, any facility or area for which a permit
is required and user fee charged, unless the payment is waived by permit.



(Ord. 2002-969, passed 5-13-02; Am. Ord. 2010-1114, passed 4-26-10) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.03  REGULATION OF GENERAL CONDUCT;  PERSONAL BEHAVIOR.



   (A)   Drug and alcohol use.  It shall be unlawful for any person to:



      (1)   Use, possess or sell any alcoholic beverage in violation
of state statutes or City Code § 112.047 and unless expressly approved by
city permit or license.



      (2)   Consume or display any alcoholic beverage at sites where
the city or its agent is a licensed vendor of alcoholic beverages, unless
purchased at that site, or authorized by special permit.



      (3)   Possess or bring beer or wine into a park in kegs,
barrels, or other bulk tap quantities, except by city permit.



   (B)   Public nuisance; personal safety.  It shall be unlawful for
any person to:



      (1)   Engage in fighting or exhibit threatening, violent,
disorderly or indecent behaviors.



      (2)   Make unreasonable coarse utterance, gesture or display.



      (3)   Address abusive language tending to incite a breach of
the peace or to be inimical to the peace of any person present.



      (4)   Engage in any course of conduct or participate in any
activity in any park after he or she is advised by a police officer or other
park employee or park patrol agent having authority to regulate or manage the
area, that such conduct or participation is unreasonably and unnecessarily
hazardous to the personal safety of said person or another person; or impairs
or limits the lawful use and enjoyment of the facility or area by other
persons.



      (5)   Intentionally expose his or her own genitals, pubic
area, buttocks, or female breast below the top of areola, with less than a
fully opaque covering while on park property, if ten years of age or older.



   (C)   Property of others.  It shall be unlawful for any person to:



      (1)   Intentionally disturb, harass or interfere with a park
visitor's property.



      (2)   Leave or store personal property on city property.



   (D)   Littering.  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit,
scatter, drop or abandon in a park any bottles, cans, broken glass, hot
coals, ashes, sewage, waste or other material, except in receptacles provided
for such purposes.



   (E)   Possession and use of firearms; weapons; fireworks  Except
for a licensed police officer, it shall be unlawful for any person to:



      (1)   Have in his/her possession within any city park, fire or
discharge, or cause to be fired or discharged across, in, or into any portion
of a park all those weapons included under M.S. § 609.02, Subd. 6, but also
includes a spear, bow and arrow, crossbow, sling shot, paintball gun, or any
other dangerous weapon or projectile, except for purposes designated by the
city in areas and at times designated by the city.



      (2)   Possess, set off or attempt to set off or ignite any
firecracker, fireworks, smoke bombs, rockets, black powder guns or other
pyrotechnics without a city permit.



      (3)   Shine a laser in the face of another person.



   (F)   Interference with employee performance of duty.  It shall be
unlawful for any person to impersonate or pretend to be any employee of the
city or interfere with, harass or hinder any employee in the discharge of
his/her duties.



(Ord. 2002-969, passed 5-13-02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.04  REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO GENERAL PARKLAND OPERATION.



   (A)   Commercial use; solicitation; advertising; photography.  It
shall be unlawful for any person to:



      (1)   Solicit, sell, or in any manner charge admission, or
otherwise peddle any goods, wares, merchandise, services, liquids or edibles
in a park except by authorized concessionaire with a city permit and the
required licenses from the city.



      (2)   Operate a still, motion picture, video or other camera
for commercial purposes in a park without a city permit. (News coverage or
media journalism is not considered a commercial purpose).



   (B)   Pets in parks.  It shall be unlawful for any person to:



      (1)   Bring a pet into a park unless caged or kept on a leash
not more than six feet in length, except that an owner of a dog is not
required to restrain a dog or dogs by a chain or leash in an off leash dog
exercise area, subject to the rules and regulations for such an area and
Chapter 92 of this code.



      (2)   Permit a pet under his/her control to disturb, harass or
interfere with any park visitor, a park visitor's property or park employee.



      (3)   Tether any animal to a tree, plant, building or park
equipment.



      (4)   Have custody or control of any dog or domestic pet in a
park without possessing and using an appropriate device for cleaning up pet
feces and disposing of the feces in a sanitary manner.



   (C)   Noise; amplification of sound.  It shall be unlawful for any
person except emergency equipment operated by public emergency personnel to
install, use or operate or permit the use or operation within a park of any
of the following devices:



      (1)   Loudspeaker or sound amplifying equipment without a city
permit.



      (2)   Radios, tape players, phonographs, television sets,
musical instruments or other machine or device for the production or
reproduction of sound in such a manner as to be disturbing or a nuisance to
reasonable persons of normal sensitivity within the area of audibility.



   (D)   Fires  It shall be unlawful for any person to:



      (1)   Start a fire in a park, except in a designated area, and
then only in fire rings or grills, except for city employees or contractors
engaged in cleaning or maintaining public property.



      (2)   Leave a fire unattended or fail to fully extinguish a
fire.



      (3)   Scatter or leave unattended lighted matches, hot coals,
burning tobacco, paper or other combustible material.



   (E)   Aviation.  It shall be unlawful, except for emergency
aircraft, to use city property for a starting or landing field for aircraft,
hot air balloons, parachutes, hang gliders or other flying apparatus without
a city permit.



   (F)   Amusement contraptions.  It shall be unlawful to bring in,
set up, construct, manage or operate any amusement or entertainment
contraption, device or gadget without authorization of the City Manager or
his designee.



   (G)   Engine-powered models and toys.  It shall be unlawful for any
person to start, fly or use any fuel or battery powered model aircraft, model
boat or rocket or like powered toy or model without a city permit unless in
an area designated by the city.



   (H)   Unlawful occupancy,  It shall be unlawful for any person to:



      (1)   Enter in any way any building, installation, or area
that may be under construction, locked or closed for public use except public
safety workers.



      (2)   Enter in any way or be upon any building, installation
or area after the posted closing time or before the posted opening time, or
contrary to posted notice in any park.



      (3)   Enter in any way any building, installation or area
after receiving a permit revocation or unlawful occupancy notification during
the time period specified.



(Ord. 2002-969, passed 5-13-02; Am. Ord. 2010-1114, passed 4-26-10) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.05  PROTECTION OF PROPERTY, STRUCTURES AND NATURAL RESOURCES.



   (A)   Disturbance of natural features.  It shall be unlawful for
any person to:



      (1)   Intentionally remove, alter, injure or destroy any tree,
other plant, rock, soil or mineral without a permit.



      (2)   Dig trenches, holes or other excavations in a park.



      (3)   Introduce any plant, animal or other agent within a park.



      (4)   Harvest, grow or cultivate controlled substances.



   (B)   Wildlife.  It shall be unlawful for any person to:



      (1)   Kill, trap, hunt, pursue or in any manner disturb or
cause to be disturbed, any species of wildlife, except as permitted by city
permit in designated areas.



      (2)   Remove any animal, living or dead, from a park.  Any
animal so removed or taken contrary to the provisions of this chapter or laws
of the State of Minnesota shall be considered contraband and subject to
seizure and confiscation.



      (3)   Release or abandon any animal within a park.



      (4)   Feed any wildlife or feral animals in a park.



   (C)   Destruction; defacement of park property; signs.  It shall be
unlawful for any person to:



      (1)   Intentionally deface, vandalize or otherwise cause
destruction to park property.



      (2)   Intentionally deface, destroy, cover, damage or remove
any placard, notice or sign, or parts thereof, whether permanent or
temporary, posted or exhibited by the city.



      (3)   Graffiti: reference Graffiti Ordinance.



   (D)   Release of harmful or foreign substances.  It shall be
unlawful for any person to:



      (1)   Place any debris or other pollutant in or upon any city
lands or any body of water in or adjacent to a park or any tributary, stream,
storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters.



      (2)   Discharge waste water or any other wastes in a park,
except into designated containers, drains or dumping stations.



      (3)   Release a pesticide in or upon any park lands except by
city permit.



   (E)   Interference of park property.  It shall be unlawful for any
person to build an encroaching structure, such as a fence or garden, on park
property.



(Ord. 2002-969, passed 5-13-02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.06  REGULATION OF RECREATION ACTIVITY.



   (A)   Camping; swimming.  It shall be unlawful for any person to:



      (1)   Camp in a park without a written city permit.



      (2)   Wade or swim within a park, except at designated areas.



   (B)   Picnicing.  It shall be unlawful for any person to:



      (1)   Assume exclusive use of a reservation picnic site
without a permit.



      (2)   Use a reservation picnic area without a permit if the
area is reserved by permitted group.



      (3)   Conduct picnic activity at reservation picnic sites
contrary to a city permit, or otherwise violate provisions on the city permit.



      (4)   Set up temporary shelters, tents, tarps, canopies and
other such devices without a city permit from the Building Inspection
Department.



   (C)   Fishing.  It shall be unlawful for any person to fish in a
park except in designated areas.



   (D)   Horseback riding.  It shall be unlawful for any person to:



      (1)   Ride, lead or allow a horse or other animal within a
park except in designated areas or trails at designated hours.



      (2)   Ride a horse in a reckless manner so as to create a
nuisance or to endanger the safety or property of any park visitor.



      (3)   Tether a horse to a tree, other plant, building or park
equipment.



      (4)   Allow a horse to graze or browse.



   (E)   Cross-country skiing.  It shall be unlawful for any person to:



      (1)   Cross-country ski on any city golf course or sports
complex except on designated trails.



      (2)   Conduct a race, meet, or ski team practice with over 12
participants on city ski trails without a city permit.



      (3)   Cross-country ski on park trails contrary to rules and
regulations issued by the city or in violation of any posted trail sign.



   (F)   Rollerskating; in-line skating.  It shall be unlawful for any
person to:



      (1)   Rollerskate, including the activities of skateboarding,
in-line skating and rollerskiing in a park except on paved areas unless
posted otherwise.



      (2)   Rollerskate in a park except in a prudent and careful
manner and at a speed that is reasonable and safe with regard to the safety
of the operator and others in the immediate area.



      (3)   Rollerskate except as close to the right hand side of
the authorized trail or roadway as conditions permit.



      (4)   Rollerskate including the activities of skateboarding,
in-line skating, and rollerskiing in or on a city building, stairway,
railing, or other park structure.



(Ord. 2002-969, passed 5-13-02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.07  REGULATION OF MOTORIZED VEHICLES, TRAFFIC AND PARKING.



   (A)   Motorized recreation vehicles.  It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate a motorized recreation vehicle within a park except in such
areas and at times as may be designated by the city.



   (B)   Snowmobiles.  It is unlawful to operate a snowmobile upon the
roadway, public boulevard or on any public lands within the city in
accordance with § 73.32 of the Brooklyn Park City Code.



   (C)   Vehicle operation.  It shall be unlawful for any person to:



      (1)   Operate a vehicle at a speed in excess of 15 miles per
hour or posted speed limits, except for emergency vehicles.



      (2)   Operate a vehicle within a park in violation of posted
regulations, M.S. Chapter 169, county or municipal traffic codes, or orders
or directions of traffic officers or park employees authorized to direct
traffic.



      (3)   Operate a vehicle in a careless or reckless manner.



      (4)   Operate a vehicle which emits excessive or unusual
noise, noxious fumes, dense smoke or other pollutants.



      (5)   Fail to yield right of way to pedestrians and other
trail users.



   (D)   Parking vehicles.  It shall be unlawful to:



      (1)   Park or leave a vehicle standing except in a designated
area and then only in a manner so as not to restrict normal traffic flow.



      (2)   Leave a vehicle standing after posted closing hours
without written permission.  The city reserves the right to impound cars
after 24 hours.



      (3)   Leave a vehicle in a park for purposes of offering it
for sale.



      (4)   Park or leave a vehicle in an area designated for
drop-off only.



   (E)   Maintenance of personal vehicles.  It shall be unlawful for
any person to wash, grease, change oil or perform other maintenance on any
vehicle on park property except in emergencies.



(Ord. 2002-969, passed 5-13-02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.08  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Police officers shall, in connection with their duties imposed
by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter and may issue
citations, arrest, arrest with warrant, and eject from parks persons acting
in violation of this chapter.



   (B)   Police officers shall have the authority to seize, confiscate
and impound any substance, plant, animal, vehicle or other article which,
upon probable cause, they find to be used or possessed in violation of this
chapter.



   (C)   Park Patrol Officers shall, in connection with their duties as
prescribed by the city diligently enforce the provisions of the chapter and,
except as limited by the City Manager, issue warnings to persons acting in
violation of this chapter.



   (D)   The city retains the right to require security insurance
and/or security bonds for any event or activity occurring on public property
if it is determined to be necessary for the safety and security of the park
guests or general public. The cost of the above security will be paid by the
permit holder prior to the usage of the park facility.



   (E)   Future usage of park facilities may be revoked if permit
holders, participants or spectators violate any section of this chapter.



(Ord. 2002-969, passed 5-13-02) Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 96:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section




General Provisions




   96.01   Routing of traffic



   96.02   Obstruction and impairment of fire hydrants and
fire-protection equipment



   96.03   Protection of traffic, utilities, property, and the like



   96.04   Attractive nuisance



   96.05   Care of excavated material



   96.06   Damage to existing improvements



   96.07   Property lines and easements



   96.08   Clean-up



   96.09   Protection of water courses



   96.10   Breaking through pavement



   96.11   Tunnels



   96.12   Backfilling



   96.13   Rock excavating and backfill material



   96.14   Restoration of surface



   96.15   Trenches in pipe laying



   96.16   Prompt completion of work



   96.17   Urgent work



   96.18   Emergency action



   96.19   Noise, dust and debris



   96.20   Preservation of monuments



   96.21   Inspections



   96.22   City right to restore surface



   96.23   Maintain drawings



   96.24   Applicability to city work



   96.25   Public service companies



   96.26   Liability of city



   96.27   Requirements and additional provisions



   96.28   Ice and snow removal




Permits and Insurance




   96.40   Excavation permit



   96.41   Application



   96.42   Display of excavating permits



   96.43   Fee



   96.44   Surety bond



   96.45   Insurance



Cross-reference:



   House numbering, see § 151.071



   Excavations and earth moving, see Ch. 118



   Road designations, see § 151.070



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 96.01  ROUTING OF TRAFFIC.



   (A)   The permittee must provide all traffic control for the
proposed work and take appropriate measures to assure that during the
performance of the excavation work traffic conditions are maintained as
nearly normal as practicable at all times so as to cause as little
inconvenience as possible to the occupants of the abutting property and to
the general public.  The City Engineer or other duly authorized employees
may permit the closing of streets to all traffic for a period of time
prescribed in the permit if it is deemed necessary.  The permittee must
route and control traffic including its own vehicles.  All traffic control
must conform to the latest version of the Minnesota Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices (MMUTCD) including all appendices.  Traffic control for work
zones in the public right-of-way are separated into three categories:  short
term, long term, and roadway closure.



   (B)   The following steps must be taken by the permittee for each
category:



      (1)   Short term (less than 12 hours).



         (a)   Obtain an approved right-of-way permit;



         (b)   Use appropriate traffic control plan from Appendix
B of MMUTCD;



         (c)   Notify the City Engineer upon the removal of
traffic control devices and completion of the work.



      (2)   Long term (12 hours or more).



         (a)   Submit and receive approval of a traffic control
plan;



         (b)   Obtain an approved right-of-way permit;



         (c)   Notify the City Engineer at least one day in
advance of the implementation of the plan;



         (d)   Monitor and maintain the traffic control devices
daily;



         (e)   Notify the City Engineer upon the removal of the
traffic control devices and completion of the work.



      (3)   Roadway closure.



         (a)   Submit and receive approval of a detour and
traffic control plan;



         (b)   Obtain an approved right-of-way permit;



         (c)   Post notification signs of roadway closure and
notify police, fire, emergency response, and other roadway users at least one
week in advance to the closing of any street;



         (d)   Notify the City Engineer at least two days in
advance of the implementation of the plan;



         (e)   Monitor and maintain the traffic control devices
daily;



         (f)   Obtain all other state, county, or municipal
permits required;



         (g)   In the case that there are no existing streets to
utilize as a detour route, the permittee must construct all detours at its
expense and in a manner approved by the City Engineer;



         (h)   Notify the City Engineer, police, fire, and
emergency response upon the removal of the traffic control devices and
completion of the work.



('72 Code, § 650:14)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 96.02  OBSTRUCTION AND IMPAIRMENT OF FIRE HYDRANTS AND FIRE-PROTECTION
EQUIPMENT.



   The excavation work must be performed and conducted so as not to
interfere or obstruct fire hydrants, Fire Department inlet connections or
fire-protection system control valves in a manner that would prevent such
equipment or fire hydrants from being immediately discernible.  The Fire
Department must not be deterred or hindered from gaining immediate access to
fire-protection equipment or hydrants.  Materials or obstructions must not
be placed within 15 feet of fire-protection equipment or hydrants.



('72 Code, § 650:17)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 96.03  PROTECTION OF TRAFFIC, UTILITIES, PROPERTY, AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   Protection of traffic.  The permittee must stockpile
excavated materials in a manner as to not encroach upon any streets,
sidewalks, trailways, or sight distances for intersections.  If stockpiling
interferes with facilities as stated above, the permittee must employ the use
of traffic control devices as stated in § 96.01 of this chapter.  Adequate
planking for sidewalk and trailway pedestrian crossings must be placed in a
manner as approved by the City Engineer and OSHA trench safety standards. 
If a sidewalk or trailway must be closed off, the permittee must utilize
traffic control devices to delineate the work zone and show an alternate
route.  In the case that there are no existing facilities to use as an
alternate route, the permittee must construct a detour at its expense and in
a manner approved by the City Engineer.



   (B)   Removal and protection of utilities.  The permittee must not
interfere with any existing utility without the written consent of the City
Engineer and the utility company or person owning the utility.  If it
becomes necessary to remove an existing utility this must be done by its
owner.  No utility owned by the city will be moved to accommodate the
permittee unless the cost of such work is borne by the permittee.  The cost
of moving privately owned utilities must be similarly borne by the permittee
unless it makes other arrangements with the person owning the utility.  The
permittee must support and protect by timbers or otherwise all pipes,
conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus which may be in any way affected by
the excavation work and do everything necessary to support, sustain and
protect them under, over, along or across said work.  In case any of the
pipes, conduits, poles, mires or apparatus should be damaged, they must be
repaired by the agency or person owning them and the expense of such repairs
will be charged to the permittee, and its bond will be liable therefor.  The
permittee is responsible for any damage done to any public or private
property by reason of the breaking of any water pipes, sewer, gas pipe,
electric conduit or other utility and its bond is liable therefor.  The
permittee must inform itself as to the existence and location of all
underground utilities by contacting the Gopher State One Call System or other
similar service as approved by the City Engineer and protect the same against
damage.



   (C)   Protection of adjoining property.  The permittee must at all
times and at its own expense preserve and protect from injury any adjoining
property by providing proper foundations and taking other measures suitable
for the purpose.  The permittee must, at its own expense shore up and
protect all buildings, walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged
during the progress of the excavation work and is responsible for all damage
to public or private property or highways resulting from its failure properly
to protect and carry out said work.  Whenever it may be necessary for the
permittee to trench through any lawn area, the sod must be carefully cut and
rolled and replaced after ditches have been backfilled as required in this
chapter.  All construction and maintenance work must be done in a manner
calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a
condition as equal to or better to that which existed before such work
began.  The permittee must not remove even temporarily any trees or shrubs
which exist in parking strip areas or easements across private property
without first having notified and obtained the consent of the property owner,
or in the case of public property the appropriate department or official
having control of the property.



   (D)   Protective measures.  The permittee must erect such fence,
railing or barriers about the site of the excavation work as will prevent
danger to persons using the city street or sidewalks, and such protective
barriers must be maintained until the work is completed or the danger
removed.  At twilight there must be placed upon the place of excavation and
upon any excavated materials or structures or other obstructions to streets
suitable and sufficient lights which must be kept burning throughout the
night during the maintenance of the obstructions.  It is unlawful for anyone
to remove or tear down the fence or railing or other protective barriers or
any lights provided there for the protection of the public.



('72 Code, §§ 650:18 - 650:24)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24- 95) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.04  ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE.



   It is unlawful for the permittee to suffer or permit to remain
unguarded at the place of excavation or opening any machinery, equipment or
other device having the characteristics of an attractive nuisance likely to
attract children and hazardous to their safety or health.



('72 Code, § 650:26)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 96.05  CARE OF EXCAVATED MATERIAL.



   (A)   All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the
trench or in any street must  be piled and maintained in such manner as not
to endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the streets,
and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using
streets and adjoining property.



   (B)   Where the confines of the area being excavated are too narrow
to permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench, such might be
the case in a narrow alley, the City Engineer has the authority to require
that the permittee haul the excavated material to a storage site and then
rehaul it to the trench site at the time of backfilling.  It is the
permittee's responsibility to secure the necessary permission and make all
necessary arrangements for all required storage and disposal sites.



('72 Code, § 650:28)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 96.06  DAMAGE TO EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS.



   All damage done to existing improvements during the progress of the
excavation work must be repaired by the permittee.  Materials for such
repair must conform with the requirements of any applicable code or
ordinance.  If upon being ordered the permittee fails to furnish the
necessary labor and materials for such repairs, the City Engineer has the
authority to cause the necessary labor materials to be furnished by the city
and the cost will be charged against the permittee, and the permittee is also
liable on its bond therefor.



('72 Code, § 650:30)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 96.07  PROPERTY LINES AND EASEMENTS.



   Property lines and limits of easements must be indicated on the plan of
excavation submitted with the application for the excavation permit and it is
the permittee's responsibility to confine excavation work within these limits.



('72 Code, § 650:32)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 96.08  CLEAN-UP.



   As the excavation work progresses all streets and private properties
must be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock, and other
debris resulting from such work.  All clean-up operations at the location of
the excavation must be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and must
be completed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.  From time to time as
may be ordered by the City Engineer and in any event immediately after
completion of the work, the permittee must at its own expense clean up and
remove all refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from the work
and upon failure to do so within 24 hours after having been notified to do so
by the City Engineer, the work may be done by the City Engineer and the cost
thereof charged to the permittee and the permittee is also liable for the
cost thereof under the surety bond provided hereunder.



('72 Code, § 650:34)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 96.09  PROTECTION OF WATER COURSES.



   The permittee must provide for the flow of all water courses, sewers or
drains intercepted during the excavation work and must replace the same in as
good condition as it found them or must make such provisions for them as the
City Engineer may direct.  The permittee must not obstruct the gutter of any
street but must use all proper measures to provide for the free passage of
surface water.  The permittee must make provision to take care of all
surplus water, muck, silt, slickings or other run-off pumped from excavations
or resulting from sluicing or other operations and must be responsible for
any damage resulting from its failure to so provide.



('72 Code, § 650:36)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 96.10  BREAKING THROUGH PAVEMENT.



   (A)   Whenever it is necessary to break through existing pavement
for excavation purposes and where trenches are to be four feet or over in
depth, the pavement in the base must be removed to at least six inches beyond
the outer limits of the sub-grade that is to be disturbed in order to prevent
settlement, and a six-inch shoulder of undisturbed material must be provided
in each side of the excavated trench.



   (B)   The face of the remaining pavement must be approximately
vertical.  A power-driven concrete saw must be used so as to permit complete
breakage of concrete pavement or base without rugged edges.  Asphalt paving
must be scored or otherwise cut in a straight line.  No pile driver may be
used in breaking up the pavement.



('72 Code, § 650:38)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 96.11  TUNNELS.



   Tunnels under pavement are not permitted except by permission of the
City Engineer and if permitted must be adequately supported by timbering or
encasing and backfilling under the direction of the City Engineer.



('72 Code, § 650:40)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 96.12  BACKFILLING.



   Backfilling in any street opened or excavated pursuant to an excavation
permit issued hereunder must be compacted to a degree equivalent to the
requirements as outlined in the city's standard detail specifications for
excavation and restoration procedures.  Compacting must be done by
mechanical tampers or vibrators as required by the soil in question and sound
engineering practices generally recognized in the construction industry.



('72 Code, § 650:42)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 96.13  ROCK EXCAVATING AND BACKFILL MATERIAL.



   Whenever any excavation for the laying of pipe is made through rock,
the pipe must be laid six inches above the rock bottom of the trench and the
space under, around and six inches above the pipe must be backfilled with
clean river sand, non- corrosive soil or one-quarter inch minus gravel. 
Broken pavement, large stones, and debris must not be used in the backfill. 
Use of frozen backfill is prohibited, in any case.



('72 Code, § 650:48)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 96.14  RESTORATION OF SURFACE.



   (A)   The permittee must restore the surface of all streets, broken
into or damaged as a result of the excavation work, to its original condition
in accordance with the specifications of the City Engineer.  The permittee
may be required to place a temporary surface over openings made in paved
traffic lanes.  Except when the pavement is to be replaced before the
opening of the cut to traffic, the fill above the bottom of the paving slab
must be made with suitable material well tamped into place and this fill must
be topped with a minimum of at least one inch of bituminous mixture which is
suitable to maintain the opening in good condition until permanent
restoration can be made.  The crown of the temporary restoration must not
exceed one inch above the adjoining pavement.  The permittee must exercise
special care in making such temporary restorations and must maintain the
restorations in safe traveling condition until such time as permanent
restorations are made.  The asphalt which is used must be in accordance with
the City Engineer specifications.



   (B)   Permanent restoration of the street must be made by the
permittee in strict accordance with the specifications prescribed by the City
Engineer to restore the street to its original and proper condition, or as
near as may be.



   (C)   Acceptance or approval of any excavation work by the Engineer
does not prevent the city from asserting a claim against the permittee and/or
its surety under the surety bond required hereunder for incomplete or
defective work if discovered within 12 months from the completion of the
excavation work.  The City Engineer's presence during the performance of any
excavation work does not relieve the permittee of its responsibilities
hereunder.



('72 Code, § 650:52)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 96.15  TRENCHES IN PIPE LAYING.



   Except by special permission from the City Engineer, no trench may be
excavated more than 50 feet in advance of the pipe laying nor left unfilled
more than 100 feet where the pipe has been laid.  The length of the trench
that may be opened at any one time must not be greater than the length of
pipe and the necessary accessories which are available at the site ready to
be put in place.  Trenches must be braced and shored according to OSHA, 29
C.F.R. Part 1926, Occupational Safety and Health Standards for Excavations. 
Bracing, shoring, pipe, or appurtenance materials must not be left in any
trench.



('72 Code, § 650:54)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 96.16  PROMPT COMPLETION OF WORK.



   The permittee must prosecute with diligence and expedition all
excavation work covered by the excavation permit and must promptly complete
such work and restore the street to its original condition, or as near as may
be, as soon as practicable and in any event not later than the date specified
in the excavation permit therefor.  It is the duty of the permittee to
guarantee and maintain the site of the excavation work in the same condition
it was prior to the excavation for one year after restoring it to its
original condition.



('72 Code, § 650:56)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 96.17  URGENT WORK.



   If in the City Engineer’s  judgment, traffic conditions, the safety,
or convenience of the traveling public or the public interest require that
the excavation work be performed as emergency work, the City Engineer has
full power to order, at the time the permit is granted, that a crew of men
and women and adequate facilities be employed by the permittee 24 hours a day
to the end that the excavation work may be completed as soon as possible.



('72 Code, § 650:58)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 96.18  EMERGENCY ACTION.



   In the event of any emergency in which a sewer main, conduit or utility
in or under any street breaks, bursts or otherwise is in such condition as to
immediately endanger the property, life, health or safety of any individual,
the person owning or controlling the sewer, main, conduit or utility, without
first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit hereunder, must
immediately take proper emergency measures to cure or remedy the dangerous
conditions for the protection of property, life, health and safety of
individuals.  However, the person owning or controlling the facility must
apply for an excavation permit not later than the end of the next succeeding
day during which the city offices are open for business, and must not proceed
with permanent repairs without first obtaining an excavation permit hereunder.



('72 Code, § 650:60)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 96.19  NOISE, DUST AND DEBRIS.



   Each permittee must conduct and carry out the excavation work in such
manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general
public and occupants of neighboring property.  The permittee must take
appropriate measures to reduce to the fullest extent practicable in the
performance of the excavation work, noise, dust, and unsightly debris and
during the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., must not use, except with the
express written permission of the City Engineer or in case of an emergency as
herein otherwise provided, any tool, appliance or equipment producing noise
of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the
neighbors property.



('72 Code, § 650:62)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 96.20  PRESERVATION OF MONUMENTS.



   The permittee must not disturb any surface monuments or hubs found on
the line of excavation work until ordered to do so by the City Engineer.



('72 Code, § 650:64)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 96.21  INSPECTIONS.



   The City Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the city must
make such inspections as are reasonably necessary in the enforcement of this
chapter.  The City Engineer has the authority to promulgate and cause to be
enforced such rules and regulations as may be reasonably necessary to enforce
and carry out the intent of this chapter.



('72 Code, § 650:66)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 96.22  CITY RIGHT TO RESTORE SURFACE.



   Work must progress in an expeditious manner until completion in order
to avoid unnecessary inconvenience to traffic.  In the event that the work
is not performed in accordance with the applicable regulations or ceases or
is abandoned without due cause, or if the permittee fails to restore the
surface of the street to its original and proper condition upon the
expiration of the time fixed by the permit or otherwise fails to complete the
excavation work covered by the permit, the City Engineer, if the City
Engineer deems it advisable, may, after 24 hours notice in writing to the
holder of the permit of intent to do so, do all work and things necessary to
restore the street and to complete the excavation work.  The permittee is
liable for the actual cost thereof and 25% of such cost in addition for
general overhead and administrative expenses.  The city will have a cause of
action for all fees, expenses and amounts paid out and due it for such work
and will apply in payments of the amount due it any funds of the permittee
deposited with the city and the city will also enforce its rights under the
permittee's surety bond provided pursuant to this chapter.



('72 Code, § 650:68)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 96.23  MAINTAIN DRAWINGS.



   Users of sub-surface street space must maintain accurate drawings,
plans, and profiles showing the location and character of all underground
structures including abandoned installations.  Corrected maps must be filed
with the City Engineer within 60 days after new installations, changes or
replacements are made.



('72 Code, § 650:70)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 96.24  APPLICABILITY TO CITY WORK.



   The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to any excavation
work under the direction of competent city authorities by employees of the
city or by any contractor of the city performing work for and in behalf of
the city necessitating openings or excavations in streets.



('72 Code, § 650:72)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 96.25  PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANIES.



   All persons operating public utilities in the city under franchises
granted by the city and having the right either by general or special
permission to enter upon streets and open and excavate pavements, sidewalks
or disturb the surface thereof by excavation or other work are not required
to apply for permit but are required to perform the work and bring it to
completion as promptly as practicable and to that end must employ an adequate
standing force.  Any person operating any such public utility must however,
comply with other requirements of this chapter, including the surety bond and
deposit requirements.



('72 Code, § 650:74)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 96.26  LIABILITY OF CITY.



   This chapter is not to be construed as imposing upon the city or any
official or employee any liability or responsibility for damages to any
person injured by the performance of any excavation work for which an
excavation permit is issued hereunder; nor is the city or any official or
employee thereof deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility
by reason of inspections authorized hereunder, the issuance of any permit or
the approval of any excavation work.



('72 Code, § 650:76)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 96.27  REQUIREMENTS AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter are not in lieu of but in addition to
all utility connection permits that may be required by ordinance, or by the
rules and regulations of the Engineer of the city.



('72 Code, § 650:78)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 96.28  ICE AND SNOW REMOVAL.



   The owners or occupant of any building, grounds, or premises within the
corporate limits must keep the public sidewalks along or in front of the same
free from snow and ice and must sprinkle the sidewalk with sand or ashes, if
necessary.



('72 Code, § 655:00)  (Am. Ord. 1973-159(A), passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



PERMITS AND INSURANCE



§ 96.40  EXCAVATION PERMIT.



   It is unlawful for any person to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel,
undermine or in any manner disturb any public right-of-way or to make or
cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any street for any
purpose or to place, deposit or leave upon any street, any earth or other
excavated material obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of
the public right-of-way or easement, unless such person has first obtained an
excavation permit therefor from the City Engineer as herein provided.



('72 Code, § 650:00)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



Cross-reference:



   Licensing and permit regulations; fees, revocation, and the like, see
Ch. 110



§ 96.41  APPLICATION.



   No excavation permit will be issued without submission of a written
application on a form provided by the City Engineer.  The written
application must state the name and address of the applicant, the nature,
location or purpose of the excavation, the date of commencement and date of
completion of the excavation, and other data as may reasonably be required by
the City Engineer.  The application must be accompanied by plans showing the
extent of the proposed excavation work, the dimensions and elevations of both
the existing ground prior to the excavation and of the proposed excavated
surfaces, the location of the excavation work and such other information as
may be prescribed by the City Engineer or other duly authorized employee.



('72 Code, § 650:02)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 96.42  DISPLAY OF EXCAVATING PERMITS.



   Permits for excavations will be issued in writing and the permit must
be kept on the site of the work while it is in progress in the custody of the
individual in charge, and must be exhibited upon request made by any city
official or police officer.



('72 Code, § 650:04)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 96.43  FEE.



   Before a permit is issued, the applicant requesting the permit must pay
a fee in the amount set forth in the Appendix to this code to the city's
cashier for each location covered by the permit.  Each transverse excavation
and each 150 feet or portion thereof of longitudinal excavation is deemed a
location.



('72 Code, § 650:08)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 96.44  SURETY BOND.



   (A)   Before an excavation permit as herein provided is issued, the
applicant must deposit with the City Engineer a surety bond in the minimum
amount of $5,000 payable to the city.



   (B)   The required surety bond must:



      (1)   Be with good and sufficient surety;



      (2)   Be by a surety company authorized to transact business
in the State of Minnesota;



      (3)   Be dated and signed by an authorized officer of the
principal and by a representative of the surety (attorney-in- fact);



      (4)   Be conditioned upon the permittee's compliance with this
chapter and to secure and hold the city, its officials, and employees
harmless against any and all claims, damages, liabilities, losses, actions,
suits, judgments, or other costs arising from the excavation and other work
covered by the excavation permit or for which the city, Council or any city
employee may be made liable by reason of any accident or injury to persons or
property through the fault of the permittee either in not properly guarding
the excavation or for any other injury resulting from the negligence of the
permittee, and further conditioned to fill up, restore and place in good and
safe condition as near as may be to its original condition, and to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer or other duly authorized employee, all
openings, and excavations made in streets, and to maintain any street where
excavation is made in as good condition for the period of 12 months after the
work is done, usual wear and tear excepted as it was in before the work was
done.  Any settlement of the surface within the one-year period is deemed
conclusive evidence of defective backfilling by the permittee.  Nothing
herein contained is construed to require the permittee to maintain any
repairs to pavement made by the city if such repairs should prove
defective.  Recovery on such bond for any injury or accident must not
exhaust the bond but it must in its entirety cover any or all future
accidents or injuries during the excavation work for which it is given.  In
the event of any suit or claim against the city by reason of the negligence
or default of the permittee, upon the city's giving written notice to the
permittee of such suit or claim, any final judgment against the city
requiring it to pay for such damage is conclusive upon the permittee and 
surety.  An annual bond may be given under this provision which must remain
in force for one year conditioned as above, in the amount specified above and
in other respects as specified above but applicable as to all excavation work
in streets by the principal in such bond during the term of one year from the
date;



      (5)   Be described as a permit bond to carry on the business
of excavations within the public right-of-way or easements of the city for
the tapping, installation, modification, or construction of utilities,
driveways, or streets.



      (6)   Be identified with a reference or claim number;



      (7)   Identify the principal (contractor) and the surety
company;



      (8)   Identify the principal and the surety company both as
being bound to the owner (city);



      (9)   Be an amount as specified on the permit.  The dollar
amounts should be identified numerically in addition to being written out
with words;



      (10)    Have a corporate seal which clearly identifies the
surety company;



      (11)    Pay all damages imposed upon it for violation of any
federal or state law, city or county ordinance, or conditions of any permit
issued thereunder;



      (12)    Indemnify any person who suffers a loss through
violation by said principal of any federal or state law, city or county
ordinance, or conditions of any permit issued thereunder;



      (13)    Guaranty to replace or perform again in a faithful and
adequate manner all work and materials not in accordance with the applicable
federal or state law, city or county ordinance, and permits;



      (14)    Indemnify any person for whose benefit the applicable
federal or state law, city or county ordinance specifically provides
indemnification;



      (15)    Faithfully satisfy all judgements based on tort
liability which are obtained by reason of negligence through the business
which negligence is attributable to the principal or agent.



('72 Code, § 650:10)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 96.45  INSURANCE.



   The permittee must hold the city harmless and agrees to defend and
indemnify the city and the city’s employees and agents, for any claims,
damages, losses, and expenses related to the permittee’s excavation work. A
permittee, prior to the commencement of excavation work hereunder, must
furnish the City Engineer satisfactory evidence in writing that the permittee
has in force and will maintain in force during the performance of the
excavation work and the period of the excavation permit general liability,
worker's compensation, and business automotive insurance as specified from
time to time by the City's Risk Management Office.  The insurance must be
duly issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in this state.
The city must be named as additional insured under that insurance for any
claims arising from the permittee’s excavation work against either the city
or the permittee. The permittee’s insurance must be the primary insurance
for the city.



('72 Code, § 650:12)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



CHAPTER 97:  GRASS, WEED, AND TREE REGULATIONS



Section



   97.01   Purpose



   97.02   Definitions



   97.03   Adoption of state law by reference



   97.20   Weed and grass maintenance and elimination; duty of owner



   97.25   Public notification of weed elimination



   97.30   City Tree Inspector; duties and inspections



   97.35   Public tree planting and maintenance



   97.40   Private tree planting and maintenance



   97.45   Shade tree disease control, prevention, pest control and
abatement



   97.50   Nuisances



   97.55   Removal and abatement



§ 97.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   It is the purpose of this chapter to prohibit the uncontrolled
growth of vegetation, while permitting the planting and maintenance of
landscaping or garden treatments that add diversity and a richness to the
quality of life.  There are reasonable expectations regarding the
maintenance of vegetation because vegetation that is not maintained may
threaten public health, safety, and order, and may decrease adjacent property
values.  It is also in the public's interest to encourage diverse
landscaping and garden treatments, particularly those that restore native
vegetation, which requires less moisture and places a lower demand on the
public's water resources.



   (B)   The city recognizes the value of a healthy urban forest to its
residence and visitors. Trees benefit the city's natural environment by
protecting against wind and water erosion, providing a natural buffer between
land uses, supplying shade and insulation that increases energy conservation,
and adding to the habitat for wildlife. Further, trees are a community
asset.  They improve privacy, increase livability standards among residents,
and add value to property. The city works to enhance, preserve and protect
the urban forest within its boundaries by promoting and establishing the
growth of new trees, ensuring proper and adequate tree maintenance, and
monitoring the removal all public trees. The following sections provide
regulations and standards for the planting, maintenance and removal of shade
trees within the city.



   (C)   Further the Council may by ordinance declare any vertebrate or
invertebrate animal, plant pathogen, or plant in the community threatening to
cause significant damage to a shade tree or community forest, as defined by
M.S. § 89.001, to be a shade tree pest and prescribe control measures to
effectively eradicate, control, or manage the shade tree pest, including
necessary timelines for action.  Such known diseases and pests currently
include Dutch Elm Disease, Oak Wilt, Emerald Ash Borer and Gypsy Moth.  It
is the intent of this section to also include any yet unknown pests and to
include them immediately when identified by the Commissioner of
Agriculture.  It has further been determined that the loss of elm, ash and
oak trees growing upon private and public property would substantially
depreciate the value of property within the city and impair the safety, good
order, general welfare and convenience of the public.  It is declared to be
the intention of the Council to control and prevent the spread of these
diseases and this section is enacted for that purpose.



(‘72 Code, § 1020:00)  (Ord. 1998-871, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord. 2002-973,
passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 2014-1170, passed 5-27-14)



§ 97.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply:



   ABATE .  To put a stop to or put an end to a nuisance.



   BUFFER STRIP. A managed strip of land used to separate differing
landscapes and to minimize the impact to adjacent land uses.  A buffer strip
may include low-growing vegetation and grasses less than eight inches in
height, mowed turf-grass, wood chips, rock, landscape edging, trees and
shrubs.



   CITY MANAGER .  The City Manager or the City Manager's designee.



   CITY TREE INSPECTOR .  A person or persons appointed by the City
Council who is certified by the Minnesota Commission of Agriculture to plan,
direct, and supervise all requirements for controlling shade tree diseases
throughout the designated disease control area.



   CONTROL .  To destroy the above ground growth of noxious weeds by a
lawful method that prevents the maturation of noxious weed propagating parts
and their spread from one area to another.



   DISEASE CONTROL AREA . The entirety of Brooklyn Park is designated a
disease control area in which this shade tree disease ordinance and control
procedures shall be enacted.



   DISEASED TREE. Any tree within the disease control area diagnosed with
any of the shade tree diseases as defined by the Commissioner of Agriculture.



   ERADICATE .  To destroy the above ground growth and the roots of
noxious weeds by a lawful method that prevents the maturation of noxious weed
propagating parts and their spread from one area to another.



   GRASS .  Grasses commonly used in regularly cut lawn areas, such as
bluegrass, fescue, rye grass blends, or other similar grasses.



   HAZARD TREE .  Any tree with a condition or in a location that
constitutes a hazard to life or property.



   MANAGED NATURAL LANDSCAPE. A planned, intentional and maintained
planting of native or non-native grasses, wildflowers, forbs, ferns, shrubs
or trees, including but not limited to rain gardens, prairie or meadow
vegetation, and ornamental plantings.



   MEADOW OR PRAIRIE VEGETATION .  Grasses and flowering broad-leaf
plants that are native to, or adapted to, the State of Minnesota, and that
are commonly found in meadow and prairie plant communities, except weeds.



   NOXIOUS WEED .  Any plant which is identified by the State
Commissioner of Agriculture as a noxious weed pursuant to M.S. § 18.77,
Subd. 8 or as a county noxious weed pursuant to M.S. § 18.771(e).



   ORNAMENTAL PLANTS. Grasses, perennials, annuals and groundcovers
purposefully planted for aesthetic reasons.



   PUBLIC NUISANCE .  Any noxious weed as defined by M.S. § 18.77, Subd.
8, tree, or any other vegetation which endangers public health, safety, or
welfare or which is in violation of city, county, state or federal laws.



   RAIN GARDEN. A native plant garden that is designed not only to
aesthetically improve properties, but also to reduce the amount of stormwater
and accompanying pollutants from entering streams, lakes and rivers.



   SHADE TREE DISEASE .  Dutch Elm Disease caused by Ophiostoma ulmi
[formally Ceratocystis ulmi] or Oak Wilt caused by Ceratocystis fagacearum or
any other disease identified and designated as a shade tree disease by the
Minnesota State Commissioner of Agriculture.



   SHADE TREE PEST.   Any vertebrate or invertebrate animal, plant
pathogen, or plant that is determined by the Commissioner of Agriculture to
be harmful, injurious, or destructive to shade trees or community forests.



   STREET TREE .  Any tree planted in the public right-of-way.



   TREE.  Any woody plant, having a single woody trunk(s) and a potential
diameter of two inches or more.



   TURF-GRASS LAWN. A lawn comprised mostly of grasses commonly used in
regularly cut lawns or play areas (such as but not limited to bluegrass,
fescue, and ryegrass blends), intended to be maintained at a height of less
than eight inches.



   WEED . Any noxious weed, buffalobur, burdock, common cocklebur,
crabgrass, dandelions, jimsonweed, quackgrass, common and giant ragweed,
field sandbur, velvetleaf, and wild sunflower. Weeds also include anything
that is horticulturally out of place.  For example, a tree seedling is a
weed in a vegetable garden.



(‘72 Code, § 1020:00) (Ord. 1998-871, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord. 2002-973,
passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 2014-1170, passed 5-27-14)



§ 97.03  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.



   The following regulatory provisions are hereby adopted by reference and
made a part of this code as if set out here in full, except as hereinafter
provided.  A copy of said agency rules herewith incorporated is on file in
the office of the City Clerk.



   (A)   Minnesota Noxious Weed Law, M.S. §§ 18.75 to 18.88, for the
control of noxious weeds within the city.



   (B)   M.S. §§ 18.011 through 18.024 Statutes of the Minnesota
Department of Agriculture, Plant and Animal Pest Control together with
amendments.



   (C)   M.S. Chapter 89, as amended, and rules promulgated thereunder.



(Ord. 2002-973, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 2014-1170, passed 5-27-14)



§ 97.20  WEED AND GRASS MAINTENANCE AND ELIMINATION; DUTY OF OWNER.



   (A)   In determining whether a violation of this chapter exists, the
following factors must be considered by the City Manager or designated agent:



      (1)   The weeds or grasses endanger the public health, safety,
or welfare including whether the weeds or grasses create a general aesthetic
depreciation of the neighborhood; or



      (2)   The weeds are noxious as defined herein.



   (B)   If a violation is declared, it is the duty of every owner of
property including property abutting any public street or alley to cause all
grass and weeds to be kept cut to the center of such platted street or alley,
including the public boulevard. If the grass or weeds in such a place are
eight inches or more in height it is prima facie evidence of a violation of
this chapter.



   (C)   Exemptions. The following items are exempted from the grass
and weed requirements in this chapter:



      (1)   The portion of any privately or publicly-owned lot or
tract of land in the city that contains a ponding area, drainage way, or
public water wholly or partially within its legal boundary.



         (a)   The owner of the property described in (C)(1) may
establish a strip of vegetation between the normal water level and the high
water level along the ponding area, drainage way, or public water of not more
than 20 feet.  This strip of vegetation may be allowed to grow to any height
and will not be declared a nuisance under this chapter.  However, the owner
of the property is required to control or eradicate noxious weeds.  No
grasses or weeds below the normal water level of the ponding area, drainage
way or public water will be declared a nuisance under this chapter.



      (2)   The portion of any privately or publicly-owned lot or
tract of land in the city that contains an area with side slopes of 25% or
greater wholly or partially within its legal boundary.



      (3)    Parks and natural areas owned by the city and
rights-of-way owned and maintained by the county and state.



      (4)   Any area established as a managed natural landscape:



         (a)   Managed natural landscapes may include plants and
grasses eight inches or more in height and which have gone to seed, but may
not include any weeds or noxious weeds and must be maintained so as to not
include unintended vegetation; and



         (b)   Managed natural landscapes may not include any
plantings, which due to location and manner of growth constitute a hazard to
the public or may cause injury or damage to persons or property when such
growth is in violation of other applicable sections of city code; and



         (c)   The area is established and maintained in
accordance with generally accepted practices; and



         (d)   Managed natural landscapes shall not include
turf-grass lawns left unattended for the purpose of returning to a natural
state; and



         (e)   A buffer strip not less than three feet from side
and rear property lines must be maintained when a managed natural landscape
covers more than 25% of the landscaped area of the entire yard.  A buffer
strip is not, however, required if:



            1.   A  fully opaque fence at least four feet in
height is installed along the lot line adjoining the managed natural
landscape area;



            2.   The adjacent property is not being used for
residential purposes; or



            3.   The adjacent residential property also
contains a managed natural landscape area covering more than 25% of the
landscaped area of the entire yard.



         (f)   That while a managed natural landscape is being
established and covers more than 25% of the landscaped area of the entire
yard, a sign must be posted on the property in a location likely to be seen
by the public, advising that a managed natural landscape is being
established.  The sign must be no smaller than eight inches square and no
larger than one foot square, displayed no higher than three feet, and set
back five feet from the property line.  If the managed natural landscape
covers less than 25% of the landscaped area of the entire yard a sign is not
required.



      (5)   Pasture land that is currently being used for the
exercise or feeding of domestic hoofed animals and is surrounded by a
permanent fence that separates the pasture from property used for other
purposes, is at least five acres in size, and undeveloped with any habitable
building.



      (6)   Vacant parcels of land larger than five acres in size,
(undeveloped with any habitable building) with a physical barrier to separate
the vacant land from developed adjacent properties.  If a physical barrier
does not exist, a 15-foot transition strip of land on that property which is
mowed or otherwise maintained is required next to the developed adjacent
properties.  A 15-foot transition strip must also be mowed and maintained
along all public right-of-ways, streets, trails and alleys.



      (7)   Platted lots located in subdivisions where 50% or less
of the lots have been developed provided:



         (a)   A 15-foot transition strip must be mowed and
maintained along all public right-of-ways, streets, trails and alleys.



         (b)   Vacant lots located adjacent to developed
properties must comply with this chapter.



      (8)   The portion of any privately or publicly owned lot or
tract of land in the city that contains a wooded area as determined by the
City Manager or designated agent.



(‘72 Code, § 1020:00) (Ord. 1983-439(A), passed 10-24-83; Am. Ord.
1998-871, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord. 2002-973, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord.
2010-1112, passed 4-5-10; Am. Ord. 2014-1170, passed 5-27-14)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 97.25  PUBLIC NOTIFICATION OF WEED ELIMINATION.



   In accordance with M.S. § 18.83, on or before May 15 of each year, and
at such other times as ordered by the City Manager, the City Clerk must
publish once in the official newspaper a notice directing owners and
occupants of property within the city to destroy all weeds declared to be a
nuisance and stating that if not so destroyed the weeds will be destroyed as
directed by the City Manager at the expense of the owner. If expenses are not
paid prior to the following September 1, the charge for such work will be
made a special assessment against the property concerned.



(‘72 Code, § 1020:05) (Am. Ord. 1998-871, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord.
2002-973, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 2014-1170, passed 5-27-14)



§ 97.30  CITY TREE INSPECTOR; DUTIES AND INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Duties. The City Tree Inspector shall administer the shade
tree disease control programs for the city in accordance with the city code.
Official duties include inspections, diagnosis, and the supervision of the
removal of diseased or hazard trees.



   (B)   Interference with duties. It shall be unlawful for any person
to prevent, delay, or interfere with the City Tree Inspector while engaging
in his or her official duties.



   (C)   Entry upon private premises. The City Tree Inspector or
his/her duly authorized agents may enter upon private property premises at
any reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out any of the duties
assigned under this section.  The City Tree Inspector will attempt to make
reasonable notice to the property owner before entry in accordance with M.S.
§ 89.63(B).  If the City Tree Inspector determines that a tree is a public
nuisance or constitutes an immediate threat to the public health or safety,
the Inspector may proceed with abatement of the nuisance under § 97.55(B)4).



(Ord. 2002-973, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 2014-1170, passed 5-27-14)



§ 97.35  PUBLIC TREE PLANTING AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Public tree care. The city shall have the right to plant,
prune, maintain, and remove trees, plants, and shrubs within the public
right-of-ways and on public grounds as may be necessary to insure public
safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such
right-of-ways and public grounds. This does not prohibit the planting of
"street trees" by adjacent property owners providing that the planting and
maintenance of said trees is in accordance with Operations & Maintenance
Department Forestry and Public Easement Maintenance Policies.



   (B)   Street tree selection. The official street tree species
authorized for the city shall be as indicated in the Operation & Maintenance
Department Forestry Policy. No other species may be planted as street trees
without written permission from the City Tree Inspector. No street tree shall
be removed without permission from the City Tree Inspector.



(Ord. 2002-973, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 2014-1170, passed 5-27-14)



§ 97.40  PRIVATE TREE PLANTING AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Utilities and drainage. Trees, plants, and shrubs shall not be
placed where they interfere with the site drainage or where they shall
require frequent pruning in order to avoid interference with overhead power
lines. Plant materials shall be located to provide reasonable access to all
utilities.



   (B)   Pruning and corner clearance. Every owner of any tree, plant
and shrub overhanging or bordering any street or right-of-way including
sidewalks within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches
shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any
street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet
above the surface of the sidewalk and 19 feet above the surface of the
street. Said owner shall remove all dead, diseased, or dangerous trees,
plants, and shrubs or broken or decayed limbs that constitute a menace to the
safety of the public. If private trees encroach in the right-of-way, the city
may trim private trees so they meet the above listed requirements.



      (1)   All trees and landscaping is subject to Clearview
Triangle Requirements of §§ 152.223 and 152.323 or as further modified.



      (2)   All trees and landscaping must maintain a five foot
clear zone around fire hydrants as stated in the Uniform Fire Code.



   (C)   Dead or damaged tree removal on private property. The city
shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead, damaged, or diseased
tree or part there of as specified in § 97.50 (Nuisances).



(Ord. 2002-973, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 2014-1170, passed 5-27-14)



§ 97.45  SHADE TREE DISEASE CONTROL, PREVENTION, PEST CONTROL AND ABATEMENT.



   (A)   Dutch Elm Disease.   The City Tree Inspector shall inspect
premises and places within the designated Dutch Elm disease control area of
the city as many times as practical or necessary to determine whether the
disease exists.



      (1)   Elm Trees.  Dutch Elm infected trees shall be those
trees that show any stage of infection. Property owners with trees identified
as infected with Dutch Elm from March 10 through September 15 shall be made
to remove these elm trees within 20 days of the notification.  Property
owners issued notifications on infected trees from September 15 through March
10, shall have elm trees removed prior to April 1.



      (2)   Elm Wood.  Dutch Elm infected wood, logs, or stumps
shall be disposed of by burning, chipping, or removal to an authorized
disposal site or if retained shall be debarked by April 1st.  The
stockpiling and storage of elm logs with the bark intact shall only be
allowed during the period of September 15 through April 1st.



   (B)   Oak Wilt.  The City Tree Inspector shall inspect premises and
places within the designated Oak Wilt control area of the city as many times
as practical or necessary to determine whether any disease exists.



      (1)   Oak trees.  All oak trees within the designated Oak
Wilt control area of the city diagnosed as having Oak Wilt should be isolated
from neighboring healthy oak trees of the same species by chemical or
mechanical disruption of common root systems to prevent root graft
transmission of the Oak Wilt fungus.



      (2)   To control overland spread of Oak Wilt, the pruning of
oaks shall be avoided during the most susceptible period of infection, from
April 15 until July 1.  If wounding is unavoidable during this period, as in
the aftermath of a storm or when the tree interferes with utility lines, the
person or entity pruning shall immediately apply a non-toxic tree wound
dressing.



         (a)   Red Oaks. To prevent the Oak Wilt fungus from
producing spores and to prevent overland spread of this fungus, any diseased
material of the red oak group that wilt in July and August of one year shall
be removed from both private and public property by April 1st of the
following year.



            1.   Any branch greater than two inches in
diameter of the red oak group determined to be hazardous and not salvaged
shall be disposed of by burning, chipping, or removal to an authorized dump
site prior to April 1st of the year following the appearance of symptoms. 
Dead standing red oaks that have advanced beyond the potential for spore
production need not be removed except where they constitute a hazard to life
or property as determined by the City Tree Inspector.



            2.   Stumps of trees of the red oak group removed
due to Oak Wilt shall be completely covered, removed or debarked to the
ground line to eliminate all possibilities of spore formation and overland
disease spread.



         (b)   White Oaks.  Trees of the white oak group (i.e.
white oak, bur oak, bicolor oak) diagnosed as having Oak Wilt should be
isolated by root graft disruption as stated in § 97.45(D) (Root Graft
Disruption).



      (3)   Oak Wood. Any hazardous oak wood to be used as fuel wood
or to be salvaged for other purposes must be debarked or completely covered
by heavy plastic (4 mil or greater) from April 15 until July 1 of the year
following the appearance of symptoms.  After July 1 the wood does not need
to be covered.



   (C)   Diagnosis.  Diseased shade trees shall be identified by
generally accepted field symptoms such as wilting, yellowing of leaves,
and/or staining of wood under bark. The Minnesota Department of Agriculture
tree disease laboratory or other laboratories capable of performing such
services approved by the Minnesota Commissioner of Agriculture shall do
confirmation testing, when determined to be necessary by the City Tree
Inspector.



   (D)   Root graft disruption (barriers) at property boundaries.  If
the City Tree Inspector finds that Dutch Elm disease or Oak Wilt threatens to
cross property boundaries or disease control area boundaries, the City Tree
Inspector may require root graft disruption to prevent the spread of disease.
If plowing or trenching is not possible due to terrain, location or buried
utilities, the City Tree Inspector may require alternate control measures. 
These control measures will be in accordance with current technology and
plans as may be recommended by the Minnesota Department of Agriculture,
Pesticide and Disease Control, M.S. Chapter 1505.  If, however, after the
City Tree Inspector identifies the location for the installation of a barrier
or alternate control measure, the City Tree Inspector further determines that
the installation of the barrier or alternate control measure is impossible
because of the presence of pavement or obstructions such as a septic system
or other underground utilities, the City Tree Inspector may mark for removal
all oak trees whether living or dead, infected or not and located between an
infected tree and the marked barrier location.  These marked trees must be
felled and disposed of no later than May 1 of the year following
inspection.  The stump from such felled trees must not extend more than
three inches above the ground or, if taller, must be completely debarked. 
Expenses related to the installation of such barriers and/or the removal of
these trees is at the expense of the property owner.



      (1)   The charge, or any portion thereof, for any necessary
root graft barriers or other control measures may be assessed against the
property on which the root graft barriers or other control measures are
placed.



      (2)   Because Oak Wilt is a community problem and because Oak
Wilt control may benefit an entire neighborhood, the City Tree Inspector will
require neighborhood participation, shall encourage cooperation, including
cost sharing, in root graft disruption and other control efforts, especially
where Oak Wilt is in danger of spreading across property boundaries.



   (E)   Transporting diseased Elm and Oak wood. Unless transporting
elm wood or red oak wood to an authorized disposal site, it is unlawful for
any person to transport within the City any bark intact elm wood or wood from
the red oak group that is determined to be hazardous.



   (F)   Emerald Ash Borer (EAB). The city has an adopted Emerald Ash
Borer Preparedness and Management Plan, (City Council Resolution 2011-158).
The City Tree Inspector shall inspect premises and places within the city
limits as many times as practical or necessary to determine whether the pest
exists.



      (1)   Ash trees. EAB infested trees shall be those trees that
show any stage of infestation.  Property owners with trees identified as
infected with EAB from May 1 to August 31 shall be made to remove these ash
trees after August 31 of the same year and prior to May 1 of the following
year. Property owners issued notifications on infested trees after September
1, shall have the ash trees removed prior to May 1of the following year.



      (2)   Ash wood. EAB infected wood, logs, or stumps shall be
disposed of within Hennepin County, either by grinding to a small diameter
(less than one inch in two dimensions), burning or burying. No ash wood may
be transported out of Hennepin County due to a state ordered quarantine on
transporting ash wood to help control the spread of Emerald Ash Borer.



(Ord. 2002-973, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 2014-1170, passed 5-27-14)



§ 97.50  NUISANCES.



   The following are public nuisances:



   (A)   Any living or dead standing tree or part thereof within the
city boundaries, located on public or private property, constituting a hazard
to life or property.



   (B)   Any living or dead standing tree with a shade tree pest or
disease as defined in § 97.01(C).



   (C)   Any weeds or grasses eight inches or more in height as defined
in § 97.20.



   (D)   The presence of any noxious weeds; or



   (E)   Any other public nuisance as defined by this chapter.



   (F)   Any tree or shrub which has become or threatens to become a
hazard so as to adversely affect the public safety, whether such tree or
shrub shall be on public or private property.



   (G)   Any insect and/or pest that threatens the health of the shade
trees, including, but not limited to, the Gypsy Moth, Asian Long-horned
beetle, and Emerald Ash Borer.



(Ord. 2002-973, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 2014-1170, passed 5-27-14)



§ 97.55  REMOVAL AND ABATEMENT.



   (A)   Notice of violation; removal.  It is unlawful for a person to
permit a public nuisance to remain on any premises owned or possessed by that
person as follows:



      (1)   A public nuisance as defined in § 97.50. The city may
order that the tree, trees, or any part thereof be removed by the property
owner or any person who may be in possession or who has the right to possess
such property, pursuant to the nuisance abatement procedure herein.



      (2)   A public nuisance as defined in § 97.50. The city may
order that the grass or weeds be cut or removed and the violation be
corrected by the property owner or any person who may be in possession or who
has the right to possess such property, pursuant to the nuisance abatement
procedure herein.



   (B)   Abatement procedure.



      (1)   Abatement by city.  If the owner, occupant, or other
responsible party does not abate the public nuisance within the time
specified by the city, the city may abate or contract the abatement of the
public nuisance and recover the costs in accordance with this chapter.



      (2)   Notice and Hearing.  Whenever it is determined that a
public nuisance is being maintained or exists on a property, the City Manager
must give written notice through service by regular or certified mail, by
posting a notice on the property, or by personal delivery to the owner of or
person in control of the property on which the public nuisance is located. 
When the property is occupied, service upon the occupant is deemed service
upon the owner.  Where the property is unoccupied or abandoned, service may
be by regular or certified mail to the last known owner of record of the
property or by posting on the property.  The notice must provide:



         (a)   A description of the public nuisance;



         (b)   A public nuisance as defined in § 97.50, grass or
weed maintenance and control, must be corrected within seven days of the
service of the notice, or



         (c)   A public nuisance as defined in § 97.50, tree
maintenance, must be corrected within 20 days of the service of the notice;



         (d)   That if the public nuisance is not properly
removed or corrected as ordered, the public nuisance will be abated by the
city and the costs of abatement will be specially assessed to the property;



         (e)   That the owner of or person in control of the
property on which the public nuisance is located may in writing request a
hearing before the City Manager.



      (3)   Hearing; action.  If a hearing is requested during
either the 7-day or 20-day period as required by the notice, the City Manager
must promptly schedule the hearing, and no further action on the abatement of
the public nuisance may be taken until a decision is rendered.  After the
scheduled hearing, the City Manager may cancel the notice to remove or
correct the public nuisance, modify the notice, or affirm the notice to
remove or correct the public nuisance.  If the notice is modified or
affirmed, the public nuisance must be disposed of in accordance with the
city's written order.



      (4)   Summary abatement. Prior to summary abatement, a
reasonable attempt must be made to notify the owner, occupant, or other
responsible party of the intended action and the right to appeal the
abatement and cost recovery at the next regularly scheduled City Council
meeting. The City Manager may provide for abating a public nuisance without
following the procedure required in division (B) when:



         (a)   There is an immediate threat to the public health
or safety;



         (b)   There is an immediate threat of serious property
damage; or



         (c)   A public nuisance has been caused by private
parties on public property.



      (5)   Cost recovery.  The owner of the property on which a
nuisance has been abated by the city, is personally liable to the city for
the cost of the abatement, including administrative costs.  As soon as the
work has been completed and the cost determined, an appropriate official will
prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner or other responsible
party.  The amount is immediately due and payable to the city.



      (6)   Assessment.  If the cost, or any portion of it, has not
been paid within 30 days after the date of the bill, the council may certify
the unpaid cost against the property to which the cost is attributable in
accordance with the process set forth in § 94.07 of this Code.



   (C)   Penalties.



      (1)   Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor,
punishable in accordance with state law.



      (2)   Any violation of this chapter may be subject to civil
penalties in accordance with Chapter 37 of the city code.



      (3)   This chapter is not intended to prohibit a private
property owner from seeking additional penalties or remedies.



(Ord. 2002-973, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ord. 2014-1170, passed 5-27-14)



CHAPTER 98:  GARBAGE AND REFUSE



Section




General Provisions




   98.01   Definitions



   98.02   Disposal of garbage and refuse



   98.03   Collection, supervision and control



   98.04   Pre-collection practices



   98.05   Vehicles for hauling garbage and refuse



   98.06   Licensing of refuse and recyclable materials collectors; fee



   98.07   Hours and days of residential collection



   98.08   Mandatory hauling of yard waste



   98.09   Scavengers



   98.10   Inspection



   98.11   No vested right



   98.12   Obligation of licensed collectors



   98.13   Disposal of garbage and refuse



   98.14   Storage of refuse, recyclable materials, and other waste
containers



   98.15   Incinerators



   98.16   Burning and burning permits



   98.17   Disposal and discharge of prohibited materials




Recycling




   98.30   Definitions



   98.31   Pre-collection and collection



   98.32   Licensing of collectors and haulers of recyclable materials



   98.33   Regulations for supervision and control of recycling



   98.34   Citations



   98.35   Remedies cumulative



   98.36   Injunctive relief



   98.37   Costs and special assessments



   98.38   Establishment of recycling utility



   98.39   Rates and charges



 



   98.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 98.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.  When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in
the singular number include the plural number.  The word MUST is always
mandatory and not merely directory.



   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT.  Any premises where a commercial or
industrial enterprise of any kind is carried on and includes clubs, churches
and establishments of non-profit organizations where food is prepared and
served or goods are sold.



   GARBAGE.  Animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



   INCINERATOR.  Any device used for the destruction of refuse, rubbish
or waste materials by fire.



   LEGAL HOLIDAYS.  For the purposes of garbage and recycling collection,
legal holidays are defined as New Years Day (January 1), Memorial Day,
Independence Day (July 4), Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day
(December 25).



   LICENSED PRIVATE GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTOR.  Any person holding a
valid license from the city for the collection of garbage and refuse.



   OPEN FIRE.  Any fire from which the products of combustion are
admitted directly into the open atmosphere without passing through an
adequate stack, duct or chimney.



   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.  The meaning set forth in § 98.30 of this
chapter.



   REFUSE.  Garbage and rubbish.



   RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT.  Any single building consisting of two or
less separate dwelling places with individual dual kitchen facilities for
each.  It also includes any boarding house in a residential district.



   RUBBISH.  Inorganic wastes but it does not include recyclable
materials, sand, dirt, or yard waste.



   YARD WASTE.  Organic material consisting of grass clippings, leaves
and similar items, but it does not include trees, brush, and similar
materials.



('72 Code, § 435:00)  (Am. Ord. 1981-356(A), passed 3-23-81; Am. Ord.
1989-633(A), passed 9-25-89; Am. Ord. 2012-1148, passed 9-4-12)



§ 98.02  DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE.



   Every tenant, lessee, owner or occupant of every private dwelling,
house, multiple residence, store, motel, restaurant, and every other type of
property in the city which accumulates garbage or refuse or both on such
premises must have garbage service provided by a licensed hauler.  Garbage
and refuse at any commercial establishment or multiple dwelling must be
disposed of at least once each week and as often as once each business day by
a licensed hauler if necessary to protect the public health, safety and
general welfare.  It is unlawful to  accumulate or permit to accumulate any
refuse of any property in the city which might constitute a nuisance by
reason of appearance, odor, sanitation, possible littering of neighboring
properties, littering of the property on which the refuse is accumulated, or
a fire hazard. Residents may share garbage service provided it does not
create a nuisance. Proof of proper disposal must be provided upon request of
the city. Residents who are away from their property for extended periods of
time and not accumulating garbage or refuse at that property may suspend or
cancel garbage service during that time.



('72 Code, § 435:05) (Am. Ord. 2012-1148, passed 9-4-12)  Penalty, see §
98.99



§ 98.03  COLLECTION, SUPERVISION AND CONTROL.



   (A)   The City Manager or the City Manager’s designated
representative, must prepare regulations and rules for persons licensed to
collect garbage and refuse concerning the days of collection, type and
location of waste containers and the responsibilities of collectors licensed
pursuant to § 98.06(A) pertaining to the collection, conveyance and disposal
of garbage and refuse.



   (B)   The City Manager must present the proposed regulations to the
City Council and the Council will call a public hearing to determine the
reasonableness of the proposed regulations.  All persons licensed under §
98.06(A) of this chapter at the time of the hearing must be served by
certified mail with a notice of the hearing at least ten days prior to the
date of the hearing.  Any person aggrieved by any proposed regulation of the
Manager has the right to present testimony to the Council and the Council may
confirm, modify and adopt the proposed regulations.  Regulations adopted in
this manner are considered a condition to holding a license to collect
garbage or refuse in the city and the city may refuse to grant a license or
may revoke or suspend any license issued pursuant to § 98.06(A) of this
chapter if the licensee fails to comply with the terms of the adopted
regulations.



('72 Code, § 435:10)  (Am. Ord. 1980-317(A), passed 3-24-80)



§ 98.04  PRE-COLLECTION PRACTICES.



   (A)   Yard waste and refuse.  Yard waste and refuse must be placed
in containers that have a secure lid and do not exceed 100 gallons in
capacity, or in bags or bundles not exceeding three feet in any dimension and
not exceeding 60 pounds in weight and securely fastened to avoid spillage. 
Household appliances, furniture, and similar items need not be so packaged
but must not be visible from any street before 3:00 p.m. the day before the
scheduled pickup day.  The doors of appliances must be properly secured or
removed to prevent potential health and safety hazards.  The City Council
may authorize the collection of yard waste, recyclable materials, and refuse
at the curb on specified days.



   (B)   Preparation of garbage and refuse.  Except as otherwise
provided in the preceding division, all garbage and refuse as accumulated on
any premises must be placed and maintained in containers and must have
drained from it all free liquids before being deposited for collection and
must be wrapped or bagged.  It is unlawful to so deposit explosive or highly
inflammable material.  Such material must be disposed of as directed by the
Fire Chief at the expense of the owner or possessor thereof.  It is unlawful
to so deposit household appliances, automotive batteries, motor oil, tires,
incinerator ash or hazardous wastes.



   (C)   Contagious disease refuse.  Refuse such as, but not limited
to, bedding, wearing apparel, or utensils from residential dwelling units or
other units where highly infectious or contagious diseases are present must
not be deposited for regular collection but must be disposed of as directed
by the Environmental Health Specialist or health officer at the expense of
the owner or the possessor thereof.



   (D)   Duty to provide and maintain containers in sanitary
condition.  Garbage and refuse containers must be provided by the owner,
tenant, lessee, or occupant of the premises located in such a manner so as to
prevent them from being overturned.  Such containers must be kept in a clean
and sanitary condition and kept free from any substance which will attract or
breed flies, mosquitos or other insects.  A garbage or refuse container must
not exceed 32 gallons in capacity or 100 gallons in capacity in the case of
roll-cart automated containers or have ragged or sharp edges or any other
defect liable to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents
thereof.  Containers not complying with the requirements of this chapter
must be promptly replaced upon notice as set forth in division (G) below.



   (E)   Garbage containers.  Garbage containers must be made of
metal, or other suitable material, which is rodent proof, fire resistant, and
waterproof and which will not easily corrode and is equipped with suitable
handles and tight-fitting covers and must be kept tightly covered when there
is garbage therein.



   (F)   Refuse containers.  Refuse containers must be of a kind
suitable for collection purposes, and must be of such size and weight that
they can be handled by one person, and kept tightly covered when there is
refuse therein.



   (G)   Defective containers.  Whenever a container is in poor
repair, is corroded or otherwise defective so as to permit insects, vermin or
rodents to enter, or does not meet any other requirements of this chapter,
the collector must notify the office of the City Manager in writing on forms
furnished by the City Manager’s office.  The collector must affix a copy
of the notice to the container.  The notice must state the deficiency and
must require repair or replacement on or before the next collection date.



   (H)   Dumpsters.  A dumpster is defined as a combination
garbage-refuse container and may be used in the multiple, commercial or
industrial districts or for an institution's use and which is constructed to
be lifted by a mechanical device attached to a garbage-refuse pick-up
truck.  A dumpster must be made of metal or other suitable material which is
rodent-proof, fire resistant or waterproof, and which will not easily corrode
and is equipped with suitable handles and tight-fitting covers and must be
kept tightly covered when there is garbage-refuse therein.



   (I)   Multiple residence units.  Multiple residence units having
more than three family units must either be equipped with refuse containers
and refuse pickup service as provided in this division or be equipped with a
commercial incinerator complying with the requirements of the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency and licensed by the city as provided in this
chapter.  Refuse containers provided as an alternative to or in addition to
such incineration must be at least one cubic yard in capacity, must be
conveniently located in relationship to the residence units for which they
are provided, must be water-tight and rodent-proof with self-closing lids and
must be kept in an enclosed structure concealing them from public view. 
Refuse, debris, garbage, and other waste materials must not be permitted to
be accumulated in or near the enclosing structures (except in the
containers).  There must be daily clean-up in and around each such enclosing
structure.



   (J)   Commercial - industrial problem property.  The owner or
occupant of any commercial or industrial establishment or any other property
which produces a large volume of garbage or refuse or both, which requires
garbage and refuse pickup more frequently than once each week, must also
comply with the provisions of the foregoing division (I) of this section.



('72 Code, § 435:15)  (Am. Ord. 1980-330(A), passed 7-11-80; Am. Ord.
1989-633(A), passed 9-25-89; Am. Ord. 2008-1089, passed 6-23-08)  Penalty,
see § 98.99



§ 98.05  VEHICLES FOR HAULING GARBAGE AND REFUSE.



   All persons hauling or conveying garbage or refuse over the streets of
the city will use a vehicle provided with a tight cover and so operated and
maintained as to prevent offensive odors escaping therefrom and garbage or
refuse from being blown, dropped or spilled from the vehicle.  Any such
vehicles must be kept clean and as free from offensive odors as possible. 
Each vehicle must be equipped with a broom and scoop for use in the immediate
removal of spillage.  Any vehicle customarily used for such purposes must be
kept in a clean and sanitary condition and must be thoroughly disinfected at
least once each week unless the same has not been used since the last
disinfection thereof.



('72 Code, § 435:25)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.06  LICENSING OF REFUSE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIALS COLLECTORS; FEE.



   (A)   Licensing of refuse and recyclable materials collectors.



      (1)   It is unlawful for a person to engage in the business of
recyclable materials collection or refuse collection in the city unless the
person first pays the license fee herein prescribed and secures a license
from the city to do so in accordance with the provisions of this section.



      (2)   Any person desiring a license must make application on a
form supplied by the City Clerk or designee.  The City Clerk will require on
the application such information as may be necessary for the purposes of this
chapter.



      (3)   (a)   No license is to be issued until the applicant
files with the city a certificate of insurance as proof of coverages which
are not less than the following:



            1.   Bodily injury: $1,000,000 each occurrence;
$1,000,000 aggregate.



            2.   Property damage: $1,000,000 each occurrence;
$1,000,000 aggregate.



            3.   Comprehensive automobile and truck liability:



               a.   Bodily injury: $1,000,000 each person;
$1,000,000 each accident.



               b.   Property damage: $1,000,000 each
accident; $1,000,000 non-owned (to include coverage for all owned, non-owned,
leased and hired vehicles).



         (b)   The certificate of insurance or other form as the
city may reasonably require must name the City of Brooklyn Park as an
additional insured and state that the contractor's coverage must be the
primary coverage in the event of a loss.  Further, the certificate must
provide for 30 days written notice to the city before cancellation,
expiration, or change of coverage.  The certificate of insurance
cancellation clause must conform to the city's notification requirements.



      (4)   The license expires on the last day of June each year.



      (5)   All licensees must be given a copy of any and all
regulations adopted pursuant to the provisions of § 98.03 of this chapter
and must receipt for those copies.  The licensee must agree to comply and
abide by the terms of those regulations.  Failure to comply may result in
suspension or revocation of the license to collect garbage or refuse within
the city.



      (6)   The city reserves the right to limit the number of
licenses issued, and in the interest of healthful and sanitary conditions,
reserves the right to license operations to designated geographic areas of
the city.



      (7)   Any person desiring a refuse collection license must
file with the City Clerk, prior to issuance of the license, a schedule of
proposed rates to be charged during the license period.  The schedule must
include at least two levels of service based on the volume of refuse
collected from the applicant's proposed customers.  Each refuse collection
licensee must notify the City Clerk in writing with any changes in the
licensee's schedule of rates charged within 30 days of the effective date of
any rate change.



   (B)   License fee.  License fees must be in the amount set by the
Council from time to time.



('72 Code, §§ 435:30 and 435:40)  (Am. Ord. 1980-317(A), passed 3-24-80;
Am. Ord. 1984-449(A), passed 4-23-84; Am. Ord. 1989- 633(A), passed
9-25-89)  Penalty, see § 98.99



Cross-reference:



   Licensing and permit regulations; fees, revocation, and the like, see
Ch. 110



§ 98.07  HOURS AND DAYS OF RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION.



   (A)   It is unlawful for a person engaged in hauling refuse or
garbage for hire within the city from residential dwelling units or from
commercial or industrial uses where the dumpsters or garbage and refuse
containers are within 300 feet of residential dwelling units to do so after
8:30 p.m. or before 6:30 a.m. on any day and all day Sundays and on legal
holidays.



   (B)   Holiday collection.



      (1)   In order to maintain consistent garbage and recycling
collection practices, no garbage or recycling collection is allowed on legal
holidays.  If a legal holiday occurs on a weekday, garbage and recycling
collection may not occur on that day and collection on the subsequent days of
the week will be one day later than the regular collection schedule.  If a
legal holiday falls on a weekend day, garbage and recycling collection must
be done according to the regular Monday through Friday collection schedule. 



('72 Code, § 435:45)  (Am. Ord. 1984-470(A), passed 11-13-84; Am. Ord.
2012-1148, passed 9-4-12)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.08  MANDATORY HAULING OF YARD WASTE.



   Each refuse collector licensee must on a bi-monthly basis, separately
collect and haul away yard waste to an approved recycling or composting site
during the period from May 1 through November 30 or as designated by the City
Manager or his or her authorized representative and must keep an accurate
accounting of the amount of the deposited yard waste.  Within 15 days after
the expiration of each such period each licensee must submit a written report
to the City Manager or the City Manager’s authorized representative
detailing the amount of such yard waste that has been collected and delivered
for composting during each week of such period.



('72 Code, § 435:46)  (Ord. 1989-633(A), passed 9-25-89)  Penalty, see §
98.99



§ 98.09  SCAVENGERS.



   It is unlawful for any person, except a law enforcement officer acting
in the course of official business, to scavenge or otherwise collect refuse,
recyclable materials or yard waste at the curb or from refuse containers or
from recyclable materials containers without a license therefor from the city
and an account relationship with the owner or occupant of the premises. 
Responsibility for and ownership of recyclable materials remains with the
individual resident until collected by a licensed hauler of recyclable
materials, at which time the ownership and responsibility passes to the
hauler.



('72 Code, § 435:47)  (Ord. 1989-633(A), passed 9-25-89)  Penalty, see §
98.99



§ 98.10  INSPECTION.



   Each vehicle for which a license is applied for or which is licensed is
subject to inspection by the city at the annual renewal date and at all
reasonable times.  Any such vehicle, while it is used by the licensee in the
city, must have the name of the licensee clearly printed on both sides and
the license for the vehicle must be kept in the vehicle at all times while it
is being so used.  Each licensed vehicle must have attached a decal to be
issued by the city showing current registration.  The decal must be affixed
to the outside of that portion of the truck body used to hold refuse or
recyclable materials.  Each licensed recyclable material hauler must also
provide appropriate container vehicles in good condition.



('72 Code, § 435:50)  (Am. Ord. 1989-633(A), passed 9-25-89)



§ 98.11  NO VESTED RIGHT.



   No person licensed pursuant to this chapter will gain a vested right in
the license.  The city may, upon finding that public necessity requires,
determine to establish another means of garbage or refuse collection.



('72 Code, § 435:55)



§ 98.12  OBLIGATION OF LICENSED COLLECTORS.



   A licensed garbage and refuse collector must pick up any garbage and
refuse of the collector’s customers which has been deposited for
collection, in the manner provided by this chapter.



('72 Code, § 435:60)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.13  DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE.



   It is unlawful to dispose of garbage or refuse upon any property in the
city.



('72 Code, § 435:65)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.14  STORAGE OF REFUSE, RECYCLABLE MATERIALS, AND OTHER WASTE
CONTAINERS.



   Refuse, yard waste, recyclable materials, and other waste containers,
bags, or bundles must not be stored or located within the front yard or any
side yard that is adjacent to a street. In addition, all refuse, yard waste,
recyclable materials, and other waste containers, bags, or bundles must be
fully screened from view from all front and adjacent side streets and from
the front yards of adjacent properties.  For the purposes of this section,
the phrase FULLY SCREENED means that the containers, bags, or bundles are
screened with structurally sound opaque materials, such as a fence or other
materials designed for this purpose, which may include architectural features
similar to the home.  All screening materials must be protected from
deterioration.  Foliage such as shrubs, bushes, and trees do not meet the
definition of FULLY SCREENED.  Waste containers must not be placed out for
pickup before 3:00 p.m. the day before the scheduled pickup day, must not be
placed in the street, and must be returned and placed in a proper location on
the same day of collection.



('72 Code, § 435:70)  (Am. Ord. 2008-1089, passed 6-23-08; Am. Ord.
2010-1110, passed 1-4-10)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.15  INCINERATORS.



   (A)   It is unlawful to operate an incinerator within the city for
the burning of garbage or refuse unless each incinerator complies with the
requirements of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.  An incinerator,
except for an incinerator for a residential dwelling unit, must not be
operated within the city unless the operation of the incinerator has been
licensed by the city as provided in this section or in other applicable city
ordinances.



   (B)   Applications for an incinerator license must be made to the
Clerk.  The application must state the name and address of the owner of the
property on which the incinerator is located, a description of the type of
incinerator, and except in renewal applications, a plan showing that the
incinerator will comply with applicable rules and regulations.



   (C)   The application must be accompanied by the required license
fee.



   (D)   Application for incinerator licenses may be granted by the
City Clerk if the City Clerk ascertains that the incinerator meets the
requirements of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and the ordinances of
the city. The City Clerk may, however, refer any such application to the
Council.  In the event of such referral to the Council the Council may grant
or deny the application.  It is grounds for denial of the application that
the applicant, or other persons occupying the premises at which the
incinerator is or would be located, have not complied with regulations of the
city relating to health, safety, building or zoning regulations applicable to
such incinerator.



   (E)   The license expires on the last day of December of each year.



('72 Code, § 435:75)  Penalty, see § 98.99



Cross-reference:



   Licensing and permit regulations; fees, revocation, and the like, see
Ch. 110



§ 98.16  BURNING AND BURNING PERMITS.



   It is unlawful to willfully burn or set fire to any grass, weeds or any
other natural ground cover, or any building, fixture, or appurtenances of
real property unless a permit therefor has been applied for, and approved, in
accordance with Article 11 of the Uniform Fire Code as adopted by §§ 93.25
et seq. of this chapter.



('72 Code, § 435:80)  (Am. Ord. 1995-784, passed 7-10-95)  Penalty, see §
98.99



§ 98.17  DISPOSAL AND DISCHARGE OF PROHIBITED MATERIALS.



   (A)   It is unlawful to dispose of, within the territorial land or
public water limits of the city, any garbage, refuse, rubbish, oils, bilge,
sludge, waste, or toxic and hazardous waste except in the manner authorized
in this chapter.



   (B)   It is unlawful to discharge from any source whatsoever such
quantities of air contaminants, smoke or other materials which cause injury,
detriment, nuisance or annoyance to a considerable number of persons or to
the public or which endangers the comfort, repose, health, or safety of any
such persons or the public or which causes or has a natural tendency to cause
injury or damage to business or property.



('72 Code, § 435:85)  Penalty, see § 98.99



RECYCLING



§ 98.30  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPROVED CONTAINER.  A container authorized by the City Manager or the
City Manager's designee for recycling use.



   CAN RECYCLABLES.  All disposable containers fabricated of tin,
aluminum, or any other metal.



   COLLECTION.  The aggregation of waste or recyclable materials from the
place at which it is generated and includes all activities up to the time
when delivered to a facility.



   COLLECTOR(S).  Any person(s) who owns, operates or leases vehicles for
the purposes of collection and transportation of any type of mixed municipal
solid waste, recyclables and/or yard waste.



   COMPOSTABLE MATERIAL.  Organic material consisting of grass clippings,
leaves and other forms of organic yard waste.



   CORRUGATED RECYCLABLES.  Paper products which are manufactured in
layered form with a core of ridges.



   DEPARTMENT.  The City of Brooklyn Park Department of Public Works.



   FACILITY.  Any resource recovery facility, or related transfer
station, or similar facility to which solid waste or recyclable materials are
delivered for disposal or processing.



   FIXED COSTS OF RECYCLING.  The costs of administration of the
recycling program, promotion, coordination, billing and provision of
containers.



   GARBAGE.  Animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



   GENERATION.  The act or process of producing waste (as defined in M.S.
§ 115A.03, Subd. 11).



   GENERATOR.  Any person who generates waste (as defined in M.S. §
115A.03, Subd. 12).



   GLASS RECYCLABLES.  Deemed to include jars, bottles and containers
which are transparent or translucent and primarily used for packaging and
bottling of various matter.



   HAULER.  A collector or transporter of mixed municipal solid waste,
recyclable materials, and/or yard waste.



   MIXED MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE.  Garbage, rubbish, refuse and other solid
waste from residential, commercial, industrial and community activities which
is generated and collected in aggregate, but does not include auto hulks,
street sweepings, ash, construction debris, mining waste, sludges, tree and
agricultural wastes, tires and other materials collected, processed and
disposed of as separate waste streams.



   MULTI-FAMILY FACILITY.  Any building containing more than four
dwelling units; but not including rooms in motels, hotels, nursing homes, or
boarding houses.



   PAPER RECYCLABLES.  Deemed to include paper of the type commonly
referred to as newsprint.  Expressly excluded, however, are all glossy paper
products such as magazines and similar items, and corrugated paper products,
and cardboard paper products such as is commonly used for food packaging.



   PERSON.  Any human being, any municipality or other public agency, any
public or private corporation, any partnership, any firm, association, or
other organization, any receiver, trustee, assignee, agent or other legal
representative of any of the foregoing or any other legal entity.



   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.  Materials that are separated from mixed
municipal solid waste by the generator and include all items of refuse
designated by the Hennepin County Department of Environment and Energy to be
part of an authorized recycling program and which are intended for
transportation, processing and remanufacturing or reuse.



   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS PROCESSING FACILITY.  A facility established and
used for the receiving, storage, preparing and/or processing of recyclable
materials for sale or reuse.



   RECYCLING.  The process of collecting and preparing recyclable
materials and reusing the materials in their original form or using them in
manufacturing processes.



   RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT.  Any building or one or more portions
thereof occupied or intended to be occupied for residence purposes; but not
including rooms in motels, hotels, nursing homes, boarding houses, tents,
recreation vehicles and trailers, or buildings containing more than four
dwelling units.



   SOLID WASTE.  Garbage, refuse, sludge from a water supply treatment
plant or air contaminant treatment facility, and other discarded waste
materials and sludges, in solid, semisolid, liquid, or contained gaseous
form, resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural
operations and from community activities, but does not include hazardous
waste; animal waste used as fertilizer; earthen fill, boulders, rock; sewage
sludge; solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage or other common
pollutants in water resources, such as silt, dissolved or suspended solids in
industrial waste water effluents or discharges which are point sources
subject to permits under Section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act, as amended, dissolved materials in irrigation return flows; source,
special nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of
1954, as amended.



   SOURCE SEPARATION.  The separation of recyclable materials and yard
wastes from mixed municipal solid waste at the source of generation.



   VARIABLE COSTS OF RECYCLING.  The costs of collection, processing and
marketing of recyclable materials, including, without limitation,
compensation paid to any recycling contractor hired by the city.



   WASTE TIRE.  A pneumatic tire or solid tire for motor vehicles as
defined in M.S. 169.01 and included in a Solid Waste Management Plan pursuant
to M.S. § 115A.46.



   YARD WASTE or COMPOSTABLE MATERIAL.  Organic material consisting of
grass clippings, leaves, and other forms of organic garden waste.



('72 Code, § 437:00)  (Ord. 1989-634(A), passed 9-25-89)



§ 98.31  PRE-COLLECTION AND COLLECTION.



   (A)   Pre-collection.



      (1)   All persons, who are owners, lessees, and occupants of
any building, commercial or residential, within the City of Brooklyn Park,
which generates mixed municipal solid waste, must separate from all solid
waste the recyclable materials and yard waste before disposal, removal or
collection as follows:



         (a)   Paper recyclables, must be separated, placed in
non-plastic bags or approved containers, in such a manner as to prevent them
from being blown or scattered, and must be maintained free of any other
substance.



         (b)   Glass recyclables must be separated, clean of all
contents, covers must be removed, and such recyclables must be placed in
non-plastic bags or approved containers.



         (c)   Can recyclables must be separated, clean of all
contents, paper labels must be removed, and such recyclables must be placed
in non-plastic bags or approved containers.



         (d)   Yard waste and compostable materials must be
placed in bags or approved containers.



         (e)   Corrugated recyclables must be separated, baled or
flattened and containerized or securely tied and bundled.



      (2)   All paper recyclables, glass recyclables, can
recyclables and compostable materials must be placed in separate non-plastic
bags or approved containers and not mixed with other forms of solid waste or
mixed municipal solid waste, all in a manner consistent with the rules,
regulations and procedures adopted by the city.



   (B)   Container and storage requirements.



      (1)   All persons who are owners, lessees, or occupants of any
building, commercial or residential must either utilize containers provided
by the city for recyclable materials, or must provide their own approved
containers for recyclable materials, and all containers for recyclable
materials must be:



         (a)   Maintained in a clean and sanitary condition in
accordance with all pertinent health statutes, ordinances, rules and
regulations;



         (b)   Located in such a manner so as to prevent them
from being overturned or obstructing pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic or
being in violation of any statute, ordinance, rule or regulations; and



         (c)   Adequate and substantial enough to contain the
recyclable materials.



      (2)   Collections of recyclable materials must be of
sufficient frequency as to avoid unsightliness, odor, insect infestations,
vermin infestations, and any other public health or public safety hazards.



   (C)   Collection and separation.  The collection, removal and
processing of recyclable materials must be supervised by the city, which has
the power to establish, by resolution, the time, method and routes of
service.  Special times for special collection projects may also be
designated.  Collection provisions include the following:



      (1)   Notice of dates and times of collection will be
published or otherwise made available to persons affected herein.



      (2)   The Department may establish drop-off or collection
sites where any person may deposit recyclable materials and/or yard waste at
such times and locations as determined.



      (3)   It is unlawful for any person other than employees of
the Department, or authorized persons, licensed collectors or haulers to
collect, remove or dispose of recyclable materials after the materials and/or
yard waste have been placed or deposited for collection.



      (4)   Nothing in this subchapter abridges the right of any
person to give or sell their recyclable materials and/or yard waste to any
recycling and composting program lawfully operated for profit, non-profit or
charitable purposes.



      (5)   Nothing in this subchapter abridges the right of any
authorized recycling or composting program to lawfully operate within
Hennepin County, subject to such other licenses or other regulations as may
be required by law.



      (6)   It is unlawful for a person to collect, remove or
dispose of mixed municipal solid waste which consists of recyclable materials
and/or yard waste combined with other forms of mixed municipal solid waste.



   (D)   Yard waste.  Yard wastes must be kept on site separate from
recyclable materials and from refuse as defined in § 98.01 of this
chapter.  If yard wastes are kept on site, yard wastes must be composted or
stored in an acceptable manner so as to not create an unreasonable odor or
other condition that is obtrusive or annoying to others.  If yard wastes are
removed from the site, they must be taken in a sanitary manner to an approved
yard waste recycling or composting site or removed by a licensed hauler by
placing the material in bags or approved containers and set out for
collection at the time and location prescribed by a licensed hauler. 
Non-compostable tree branches or brush must be cut and tied into bundles not
exceeding three feet in any dimension or 60 pounds in weight:  such bundles
must be disposed of as refuse as provided in § 98.02 of this chapter.



   (E)   Exception.  Nothing in this section prevents persons from
hauling recyclable materials from their own residences or business properties
provided the following rules are observed:



      (1)   That all recyclable materials are hauled in vehicles
with leak-proof bodies and completely covered or enclosed by canvas or other
means or material so as to completely eliminate the possibility of loss of
cargo.



      (2)   That recyclable materials may be disposed of at a
recycling facility, an organized recyclable drive or through a licensed
recyclable materials hauler.



      (3)   Recyclable materials must be stored so as to be out of
the public view insofar as possible.



('72 Code, § 437:05)  (Ord. 1989-634(A), passed 9-25-89)  Penalty, see §
98.99



§ 98.32  LICENSING OF COLLECTORS AND HAULERS OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.



   Recyclable materials hauler licenses are granted only upon the
condition that the licensed hauler have appropriate container vehicles in
good condition to prevent loss in transit of liquid or solid cargo, that the
vehicle be kept as clean and free from offensive odors as possible and not
allowed to stand in any street longer than reasonably necessary to collect
recyclables (see § 98.06 for other requirements).



('72 Code, § 437:10)  (Ord. 1989-634(A), passed 9-25-89)  Penalty, see §
98.99



Cross-reference:



   Licensing and permit regulations; fees, revocation, and the like, see
Ch. 110



§ 98.33  REGULATIONS FOR SUPERVISION AND CONTROL OF RECYCLING.



   (A)   The City Manager or designated representative, must prepare
regulations and rules for collectors and haulers concerning days and hours of
collection, type and location of containers for recyclable materials, and the
responsibilities of collectors and haulers licensed pursuant to § 98.06
pertaining to the collection, conveyance, and disposal of recyclable
materials.



   (B)   The City Manager must present the proposed regulations to the
City Council and the Council must call a public hearing to determine the
reasonableness of the proposed regulation.  All persons licensed under §
98.06 as haulers or collectors of recyclable materials must be served by
certified mail with a notice of the hearing at least ten days prior to the
date of the hearing.  Any person aggrieved by any proposed regulation of the
Manager has the right to present testimony to the Council and the Council may
confirm, modify, and adopt the proposed regulations.  Regulations adopted in
this manner are considered a condition to holding a license to collect
recyclable materials in the city and the city may refuse to grant a license
or may revoke or suspend any license issued pursuant to § 98.06 of the city
code if the licensee fails to comply with the terms of the adopted
regulations.



('72 Code, § 437:15)  (Ord. 1989-634(A), passed 9-25-89)



§ 98.34  CITATIONS.



   The Department or any of its duly authorized representatives have the
power to issue citations for violations of this subchapter, but this does not
permit such representatives to physically arrest or take into custody any
violator except on warrant duly issued.



   (A)   Form of citations.  Citations must contain at least the
following:



      (1)   The name and address of the person charged with the
violation or the owner or person in charge of the premises at which the
violation occurs.



      (2)   The date and place of the violation.



      (3)   A short description of the violation followed by the
section of this subchapter violated.



      (4)   The date and place at which the person receiving the
citation must appear and a notice that if the person does not respond, a
warrant may be issued for the person's arrest.



      (5)   The name of the person issuing the citation.



      (6)   Other information as the court may specify.



   (B)   Issuance of citations.  Whenever any representative of the
Department discovers any violation of this subchapter, the representative may
issue a citation to the person alleged to have committed the violation and
the citation must be in the form specified in division (A) of this section. 
A copy of such citation must be issued to the person alleged to have
committed the violation.



   (C)   Issuance.  The citation must be issued to the person charged
with the violation or in the case of a corporation or municipality, to any
officer or agent, expressly or implicitly authorized to accept such issuance.



   (D)   Criminal complaint.  In lieu of a citation the city may
proceed at any time by formal criminal complaint issued against any person
who fails to comply with this subchapter.



('72 Code, § 437:20(2))  (Ord. 1989-634(A), passed 9-25-89)



§ 98.35  REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.



   No remedy set forth in this subchapter for violation of this subchapter
is intended to be exclusive of any other available remedy or remedies, but
each and every such remedy is cumulative and is in addition to every other
remedy given under the city code or now or hereafter existing at law or in
equity or by statute.  No delay in the exercise of any remedy for any
violation of this subchapter shall later impair or waive any such right or
power of the city.



('72 Code, § 437:20(4))  (Ord. 1989-634(A), passed 9-25-89)



§ 98.36  INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



   In the event of a violation or a threat of violation of this
subchapter, the city may institute appropriate actions or proceedings
including application for injunctive relief, action to compel performance or
other appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such
violations or threatened violations.



('72 Code, § 437:20(5))  (Ord. 1989-634(A), passed 9-25-89)



§ 98.37  COSTS AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.



   If a hauler or any person within the city collects or disposes of
recyclables in violation of this subchapter, the city may take the necessary
steps to correct such violations and the costs thereof may be recovered in a
civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction or, at the discretion of
the City Council, the costs may be certified to the County Auditor as a
special assessment against the real property owned by the hauler or person.



('72 Code, § 437:20(6))  (Ord. 1989-634(A), passed 9-25-89)



§ 98.38  ESTABLISHMENT OF RECYCLING UTILITY.



   Pursuant to Chapter 13 of the City Charter and M.S. Chapter 429, the
city hereby establishes a recycling utility and authorizes the imposition of
just and reasonable charges for the use and availability of recycling to
residential dwelling units and to multi-family facilities.



('72 Code, § 437:25)  (Ord. 1989-634(A), passed 9-25-89)



§ 98.39  RATES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   Findings and determination.



      (1)   In the exercise of its governmental authority and in
order to promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare,
the city will facilitate the collection, processing and recycling of
recyclable materials in accordance with this subchapter of the city code.



      (2)   It is necessary and desirable to provide a method of
recovering the costs of operating the recycling service through the
imposition of charges as provided in this subchapter.  In imposing charges,
it is necessary to establish a methodology that undertakes to make them just
and equitable.  Taking into account that recycling costs include fixed and
variable costs and that variable costs will be a function of waste generation
volume and the number of recycling stops in the city, it is determined that
it would be just and equitable to apportion charges for some or all of the
costs of starting, operating, maintaining and improving the recycling service
according to the structure of fixed and variable costs.



   (B)   Charges.  The charge to a multiple-family is 100% of the
fixed costs and 100% of the variable costs of providing recycling; and
residential dwelling units are charged 100% of the fixed costs and 100% of
the variable costs for recycling. Recycling rates charges for each quarter
are established by the fee resolution set forth in the Appendix to this code.



   (C)   Public hearing and notice.  The city must hold a hearing
prior to adopting a resolution establishing charges for recycling services. 
Notice of such hearing must be published in the official city newspaper at
least ten days prior to the date of hearing.  Additional notice of such
public hearings must be mailed to subscribers or given in such manner as the
City Council may determine.  The failure to give mailed notice or any
defects in the notice does not invalidate the proceedings.  Additional
notice of such public hearings must be mailed to subscribers or given in such
manner as the City Council may determine.



   (D)   Payment of charges.  Recycling bills will be placed on the
utility accounts of all property and are payable in the manner established
for all utilities.



   (E)   Establishment of tax lien.  Any recycling service charges in
excess of 90 days past due on October 1 of any year may be certified to the
County Auditor for collection with real estate taxes as a special
assessment.  An administrative charge of $25 will be added to each recycling
service charge so certified.  In addition, the city has the right to bring a
civil action or to take other legal remedies to collect unpaid charges.



   (F)   Recalculation of charges.  If an owner or person responsible
for paying the recycling charge questions the correctness of such a charge,
the person may have the determination of the charge reviewed by written
request to the Director of Public Works.  The request must be made within 30
days of the mailing of the bill in question.  The Director of Public Works
or the Director’s designate has the authority to recompute the charge.



   (G)   Appeal.  The owner or person responsible for paying the
recycling charge has the right to appeal the decision of the Director of
Public Works or the Director’s designate to the City Council.  An appeal
must be made within ten days after notification of such decision.  The
Council must either affirm, modify or overrule the decision and must state
the reasons for such action.



   (H)   Charge for replacement of containers.  The city may supply
containers to certain residential dwelling units or multi-family facilities
for use in separating recyclable materials.  Any such containers are and
remain the property of the city.  The city must replace such containers when
rendered unserviceable through ordinary wear and tear.  When replacement is
necessary due to other causes, the owner or occupant may be charged the cost
of such container together with the administrative and delivery costs
incurred by the city.



('72 Code, §§ 437:30 - 437:65)  (Ord. 1989-634(A), passed 9-25- 89)



Cross-reference:



   Licensing and permit regulations; fees, revocation, and the like, see
Ch. 110



§ 98.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for
which no penalty is otherwise provided shall be subject to the penalty
provided in § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Civil penalty.  A violation of any provision of §§
98.30 et seq. shall result in a $25 penalty for each owner or occupant of a
single-family dwelling and two-family dwelling and a $100 penalty for each
owner of a multiple-family dwelling, commercial, industrial or institutional
property.  A violator shall be given a written warning for the initial
violation.  A civil penalty shall be imposed for each subsequent
violation.  Penalties that remain unpaid for more than 30 days shall be
charged to the utility account of the violator.  Any penalty that is placed
on a utility account may be an assessment against the violator's property. 
Such amount shall be certified to the County Auditor and collected in the
same manner as taxes and/or special assessments against the premises and may
be subject to a civil action initiated by the city.



      (2)   Misdemeanor.  Any person who fails to comply with the
provisions of §§ 98.30 et seq. may be charged with a violation not
exceeding a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in
§ 10.99 of this code.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



('72 Code, § 437:20(1),(3))  (Ord. 1989-634(A), passed 9-25-89)



CHAPTER 99:  SEWERS



Section




General Provisions




   99.01   Title



   99.02   Definitions



   99.03   Damage



   99.04   Inspection



   99.05   Liability



   99.06   Public sewer service connection



   99.07   Prohibiting discharges into the sanitary sewer system




Connections and Permits




   99.15   Connection charge required



   99.16   Permit application



   99.17   Costs




Rules and Regulations




   99.30   Prohibited waste water discharge



   99.31   Control manhole



   99.32   Standards



   99.33   Rates and charges



   99.34   Revenues



   99.35   Industrial user strength charge



   99.36   Metering; installation; extra supplying



   99.37   Information



   99.38   Estimated bills



   99.39   Beginning service



   99.40   Billing



   99.41   Unauthorized use of public sewer prohibited



   99.42   Building sewer



   99.43   Locating public sewer connection



   99.44   Excavations



   99.45   Contracts



   99.46   Owner responsibility



   99.47   Discontinue public sewer service



   99.48   Claims




Sewer Installers




   99.60   License required



   99.61   Application



   99.62   Bond



   99.63   Insurance



   99.64   Renewal



   99.65   Refusal to renew and revocation



   99.66   Fee




Rates and Charges




   99.75   Rates and charges established



   99.76   Sewer connection charges



   99.77   Permit and inspection fee



   99.78   Bills and meter readings



   99.79   Late charges



   99.80   Certification of delinquent accounts to county for collection



   99.81   Private sewer system permit fees



   99.82   Reinspection fee



   99.83   Sewer service availability charge



 



   99.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Private sewer and water systems, see §§ 101.01 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 99.01  TITLE.



   This chapter comprises and is referred to hereinafter as the “sewer
code.”



('72 Code, § 600:00)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 99.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of
terms in the sewer code is in accordance with the Minnesota State Building
Code, Chapter 4715, Plumbing Code, the Waste Discharge Rules for the
Metropolitan Disposal System (MDS), and as set forth as follows:



   INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.  An individual sewage disposal or
treatment system other than a public sewer system, and which receives sewage
from an individual establishment.



   NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or ground water.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.



   PUBLIC SEWER.  A sanitary sewer in which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights and is controlled by a public authority.



('72 Code, § 600:05)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 99.03  DAMAGE.



   It is unlawful for an unauthorized person to maliciously, willfully, or
negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage
works.  Any person violating this provision is guilty of a penal offense.



('72 Code, § 600:10)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
99.99



§ 99.04  INSPECTION.



   (A)   The City Building Official, and other duly authorized
employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are
permitted to enter upon all properties for the purposes of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the
provisions of the sewer code.



   (B)   Every person owning improved real estate that discharges into
the city’s sanitary sewer system must allow an employee of the city or the
city’s designated representative to inspect the buildings to confirm that
there is no sump pump or other prohibited discharge into the sanitary sewer
system. In lieu of having the city inspect their property, any person may
furnish a certificate from a licensed plumber certifying that their property
is in compliance with this section.



   (C)   Any person refusing to allow their property to be inspected or
refusing to furnish a plumber’s certificate within 14 days of the date city
employees or the city’s designated representatives are denied admittance to
the property, immediately becomes subject to the surcharge hereinafter
provided for. Any property owner found to violate this section must make the
necessary changes to comply with this section and furnish proof of the
changes to the city.



   (D)   All new homes are required to have a sump pump basket and
drain tile and be required to have their sump pump system inspected at final
inspection for certificate of occupancy and a certificate of compliance
completed.



   (E)   Each sump pump or other clear water conveyance device
connection identified will be reinspected on a yearly basis in conjunction
with a yearly water meter inspection. The city reserves the right to
reinspect all properties within the city for code violations.



('72 Code, § 600:15)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord.
1998-890, passed 12-14-98)



§ 99.05  LIABILITY.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of the sewer code becomes
liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by
reason of such violation, including attorney's fees.



('72 Code, § 600:25)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 99.06  PUBLIC SEWER SERVICE CONNECTION.



   (A)   Connection required.  Connection to the public sewer system
is required in accordance with the provisions of the Minnesota State Building
Code, Chapter 4715, Minnesota Plumbing Code, and the ordinances of the City
of Brooklyn Park.



   (B)   Private sewage treatment system repair.  At such time as a
public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage
treatment system, and the private system cannot be repaired or reconstructed
as provided in Chapter 101 of this title, a direct connection must be made to
the public sewer in compliance with this section, and any septic tanks,
cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities must be abandoned
and removed or filled with suitable material.  No individual sewage
treatment of disposal system is permitted to discharge into any public sewer
or natural outlet.



   (C)   Separate public sewer service connections required.



      (1)   All connections must be made in accordance with the
provisions of the Minnesota State Building Code, Chapter 4715, Minnesota
Plumbing Code, and Rule 4715.0310 thereof.  A separate and independently
connected building sewer must be provided for each property and for each unit
contained within a structure; i.e., a duplex must have two services from the
public sewer main to the building.  Exceptions to this provision may be
allowed subject to the approval of the Building Official.



      (2)   Where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no public sewer service connection can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the sewer
service connection from the front building may be extended to the rear
building and the whole considered as one sewer service connection except for
rate purposes.



      (3)   Connection of more than one property to a sewer service
extension of the public sewer that is intended for a single service
connection, is subject to the approval of the Building Official. Such a
connection must be made through a manhole constructed at the connection. 
The manhole, when required, must be located at the public utility easement,
right-of-way, or sewer service extension from the public sewer, must be
accessibly and safely located, and must be constructed in accordance with
plans approved by the Building Official.  The manhole must be installed by
the owner at the owner's expense, will become the property of the city and
maintained by the city so as to be safe and accessible at all times.



('72 Code, § 605:20)  (Am. Ord. 1988-587(A), passed 1-25-88; Am. Ord.
1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.07  PROHIBITING DISCHARGES INTO THE SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.



   (A)   Water from any roof, surface, ground water sump pump, footing
tile, swimming pool, or other natural precipitation must not be discharged
into the sanitary sewer system.  Dwellings and other buildings and
structures which require, because of infiltration or water into basements,
crawl spaces, and the like, a sump pump discharge system or other device
intended to convey clear water must have a permanently installed discharge
line which must not at any time discharge water into a sanitary sewer system.
A permanent installation is one which provides for year round discharge
capability to either the outside of the dwelling, building, or structure, or
is connected to the city storm sewer or discharges through the curb and
gutter to the street. It consists of a rigid discharge line without valving
or quick connections for altering the path of discharge, and if connected to
the city storm sewer line, include a check valve and an air gap located in a
small diameter structure as shown in the city's standard plates.



   (B)   Before February 1,1999, any person having a roof, surface,
ground water sump pump, footing tile or swimming pool now connected and/or
discharging into the sanitary sewer system shall disconnect and/or remove
same. Any disconnects or openings in the sanitary sewer shall be closed or
repaired in an effective, workmanlike manner, as approved by designated city
employee(s) or the city’s designated representative.



(Ord. 1998-890, passed 12-14-98)



CONNECTIONS AND PERMITS



§ 99.15  CONNECTION CHARGE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Connection charges.  It is unlawful to make or cause to be
made, any connection to the Brooklyn Park municipal sewer system, unless the
person has first paid to the city a connection charge in amounts set by the
City Council.



   (B)   Special assessments.  In addition, no permit may be issued to
tap or connect with any public sewer system main, either directly or
indirectly, from any lot or tract of land, unless:



      (1)   The property has been specially assessed for the public
sewer system, or equivalent sums have been paid to the city for the cost of
construction and maintenance of the public sewer system to which the
connection is made; or



      (2)   If no assessment has been levied for such construction
costs, that proceedings for levying such assessment have been or will be
commenced in due course; or



      (3)   That the cost of construction for the public sewer
system has been paid by the developer or builder platting the lot or tract of
land; this does not include lots or tracts of land served by the public sewer
system and which were not a part of the plat or tract developed; or



      (4)   If no assessment has been levied, and no assessment
proceedings will be completed in due course, and the developer or builder of
the lot or tract has not paid the cost of improving the lot or tract of land,
that the developer or builder develops must pay a sum equal to the portion of
the cost of constructing the public sewer system which would be assessable
against the lot or tract of land has been paid to the City of Brooklyn Park.



   (C)   Tax forfeited land - special assessments and reassessment. 
When a parcel of tax forfeited land is returned to private ownership and the
parcel is benefitted by sanitary sewer or any other improvement for which
special assessments were canceled because of the forfeiture, the city may,
upon notice and hearing as provided for the original assessment, make a
reassessment or a new assessment as to the parcel in an amount equal to the
amount remaining unpaid on the original assessment plus interest; or the city
may impose fees or charges for the use or availability or the improvement or
improvements or for connections therewith in an amount not to exceed the
amount remaining unpaid on the canceled assessment.



   (D)   Special connection charge.  If such special assessments have
not been paid, no such permit to connect to the public sewer system will be
issued, unless the applicant pays an additional connection fee which will be
equal to the portion of the cost of construction of the public sewer system
which would be assessable against the lot or tract to be served by the
connection.  The assessable cost is to be determined by the City Engineer,
upon the same basis per front foot or lot unit as any assessment previously
levied against other property for the public sewer system, or if no such
assessment has been levied, upon the basis of the uniform charge per front
foot or lot unit which may have been or which will be charged for similar
connections with the public sewer system, determined on the basis of the
total assessable cost of the main allocated on a frontage or lot unit basis.



('72 Code, § 610:00)  (Am. Ord. 1978-262(A), passed 4-24-78; Am. Ord.
1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.16  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   Permits for building sewers and connections will be granted to only
plumbers licensed by the State of Minnesota.



   (A)   Application for public sewer service connection must be made
on printed forms, must state the legal description, street and official house
numbers of the premises to be connected, and the nature of the improvement to
be done.  A permit and inspection fee in the amount set by the City Council
is payable to the city at the time the application is filed.



   (B)   The charges for connection to public sewer must be paid at the
time the application is submitted and before the service is connected.



   (C)   No person except a plumber or certified pipe layer duly
licensed by the State of Minnesota or a duly authorized employee of the city
will be permitted to do any work on connections to the public sewer system.



   (D)   The sewer service extension from the public sewer system main
to the public utility easement, or right-of-way is the property of the city
and all persons are forbidden to interfere with such extension.



   (E)   The charges for tapping public sewer mains must be paid at the
time the application is submitted and before the service is installed.



('72 Code, § 610:15)  (Am. Ord. 1978-262(A), passed 4-24-78; Am. Ord.
1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.17  COSTS.



   All costs and expense incidental to the installation and connection of
the building sewer to the public sewer system will be borne by the property
owner.  The property owner must  indemnify the city from any loss or damage
that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer.



('72 Code, § 610:30)  (Am. Ord. 1978-262(A), passed 4-24-78; Am. Ord.
1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



RULES AND REGULATIONS



§ 99.30  PROHIBITED WASTE WATER DISCHARGE.



   (A)   Storm water discharge. 



      (1)   It is unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged
any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof drainage, runoff, or
sub-surface drainage to any sanitary sewer.  Storm water and all other such
unpolluted drainage must be discharged to such drains as are specifically
designed as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the City
Engineer.  Potable clear water wastes may be discharged, upon approval of
the City Engineer, to a storm sewer, or natural outlet.  The use of dry
wells for the purpose of storm water disposal is prohibited. Any such
unauthorized discharge to the sanitary sewer system is considered a penal
offense.



      (2)   In addition to the penalties and surcharges for such
penal offenses, the city has the right to make any disconnections or repairs
necessary to cease the prohibited use of the city sanitary sewer system; to
receive the actual costs for disconnections and repairs made from the
property owner; and to recover the actual costs of the sanitary sewer
treatment and conveyance from the property owner as estimated and determined
by the City Manager or the City Manager's designee.



   (B)   Specific waters prohibited.  It is unlawful to discharge or
cause to be discharged to any public sewer, any waters or wastes prohibited
by the Minnesota State Building Code, Chapter 4715, Minnesota Plumbing Code;
or by the Waste Discharge Rules for the Metropolitan  Council Environmental
Services and promulgated by the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services
pursuant to M.S. Chapter 473, and under the control of Metropolitan Council
Environmental Services, effective July 1, 1994.



   (C)   Storm drains. It is unlawful for a person to  permit any
sewage to flow into any public storm drain from any premises owned by that
person or under the person’s control.



('72 Code, § 615:00)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord.
1998-890, passed 12-14-98)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.31  CONTROL MANHOLE.



   The owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes as defined in the Waste Discharge Rules for the
Metropolitan Council Environmental Services (MCES), must install a suitable
control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes.  The manhole, when required, must be accessibly
and safely located, and must be constructed in accordance with plans approved
by the City Engineer.  The manhole must be installed by the owner at the
owner's expense, and must be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.



('72 Code, § 615:33)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
99.99



§ 99.32  STANDARDS.



   All measurement tests and analyses of the characteristics of water and
wastes regulated by MCES, Waste Discharge Rules to which reference is made in
§ 99.30(B), must be determined in accordance with EPA approved methods as
specified by 40 C.F.R. Part 136, and must be determined at the control
manhole provided for in § 99.31, or upon representative samples taken at the
control manhole.  In the event that no special manhole has been required,
the control manhole is considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the
public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.



('72 Code, § 615:36)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 99.33  RATES AND CHARGES.



   Rates and charges for use and service of the sanitary sewer system are
as set by the City Council and §§ 99.75 et seq. of this chapter.



('72 Code, § 615:42)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 99.34  REVENUES.



   All revenues derived from these rates and charges are to be credited to
the Public Utilities Revenue Accounts.  Such revenue may be used only for
the purpose of paying the cost of operating and maintaining the public sewer
system and the water supply system, paying charges made by Metropolitan
Council Environmental Services, providing an adequate depreciation fund,
paying costs of meter-reading, billing, collection, and other similar or
related sewer operating expenses, provided that any surplus above such needs
may be transferred to the general funds.



('72 Code, § 615:44)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord.
1998-890, passed 12-14-98)



§ 99.35  INDUSTRIAL USER STRENGTH CHARGE.



   (A)   Recitals.  Metropolitan Council Environmental Services has
been organized and existing under the laws of the State of Minnesota, and has
determined to impose an industrial user sewer strength charge upon users of
the Metropolitan Disposal System (as defined in M.S. Chapter 473) to recover
operational costs of treatment works attributable to the strength of the
discharge of industrial waste, such sewer strength charge being in addition
to the base sewer volume charge.



   (B)   Administration and enforcement.  Administration and
enforcement of federal and state laws pertaining to industrial user strength
charges and the discharge of industrial wastes is by Metropolitan Council
Environmental Services.



('72 Code, § 615:46)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord.
1998-890, passed 12-14-98)



§ 99.36  METERING; INSTALLATION; EXTRA SUPPLYING.



   (A)   Metering.  A meter recording the use of water may be
installed on any non-residential lot, parcel or premises and thereafter the
rate must be based upon such use of water.  The City Manager or the City
Manager's designee may require and order the installation of such meter on
any such lot, parcel or premises where it determines that flat charges are
impractical to apply, or result in inequitable charges because insufficient
or excessive; and thereafter the rate will be based upon such use of water.



   (B)   Meter installation.  Any water meter installed for use or
used as a basis for the computation of sewer rates must be installed and
maintained in good operating condition at all times, such installation and
maintenance to be without expense to the city.  Any such meter must be of a
type obtained from the city, and must accurately measure all water received
on the premises.  Installation of and maintenance of such meter must be made
in accordance with plumbing regulations of this city.



   (C)   Extra meter supplying.  If the lot, parcel of land, or
premises discharge normal sewage or industrial waste into the sanitary
sewerage system, either directly or indirectly, and it can be shown to the
satisfaction of the Council that a portion of the water measured by the water
meter does not and cannot enter the sanitary sewerage system, then, and in
that event, the Council may permit or require the installation of other or
additional meters in such manner that the quantity of water which actually
could enter the sewer system may be determined.  In such case the charges or
rates will be based upon the amount of water which can enter the sanitary
sewerage system.



('72 Code, §§ 615:48 - 615:54)  (Am. Ord. 1995-774, passed 2-13- 95; Am.
Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 99.37  INFORMATION.



   The owner, occupant, or person in charge of any premises must supply
the city with such information as the city may reasonably require related to
use of water, use of sewer, or sewer rates.  Wilful failure to provide such
information or wilful falsification of such information constitutes a
violation of this chapter, as does wilful failure to comply with any
requirement or order issued pursuant to this chapter.



('72 Code, § 615:57)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
99.99



§ 99.38  ESTIMATED BILLS.



   If the owner, occupant or person in charge of any premises fails to
provide information as provided in § 99.37 hereof, or fails or refuses to
comply with any requirement of this chapter, the proper charge for such
premises will be estimated and billed in accordance with such estimate.



('72 Code, § 615:60)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 99.39  BEGINNING SERVICE.



   For a fraction of a quarter the charges and rates for non-metered units
will be based upon the amount of the established flat charge, provided,
however, that the actual month of beginning will be considered as having
begun on the first or fifteenth of the month, whichever is closer.



('72 Code, § 615:63)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 99.40  BILLING.



   Bills for charges for the use and service of the sewerage system will
be made out by the city in accordance with the usual and customary
practice.  All bills are payable to the City of Brooklyn Park and are
rendered quarterly.



('72 Code, § 615:66)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord.
1998-890, passed 12-14-98)



§ 99.41  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PUBLIC SEWER PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It is unlawful to make a connection to the public sewer system
without first obtaining permits required by the city.  It is unlawful to
discharge into the public sewer any wastes prohibited by this chapter.  Any
such unauthorized connection or use of the public sewer system is considered
a penal offense.



   (B)   In addition to penalties for such penal offense, the city has
the right to make any disconnections or repairs necessary to cease the
unauthorized use of the public sewer system, and to recover the actual costs
for the disconnections and repairs made as determined by the City Manager or
the City Manager's designee.



('72 Code, § 615:77)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord.
1998-890, passed 12-14-98)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.42  BUILDING SEWER.



   The building sewer and connections thereto extending from the building
or structure to the service extension of the public sewer at the public
utility easement or right-of-way are the property of the applicant and must
be protected and maintained by the applicant. In the event the applicant or
any consumer fails to make any necessary repairs to the pipes within 24 hours
after being notified to do so by a person designated by the City Manager,
this person designated by the City Manager must make such repairs and the
cost thereof will be charged to the owner of the premises or the consumer and
must be collected in the same manner as other bills for sewer services are
collected.



('72 Code, § 615:80)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord.
1998-890, passed 12-14-98)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.43  LOCATING PUBLIC SEWER CONNECTION.



   The plumber must assist the person designated by the City Manager in
making any measurements necessary in locating the public sewer connection.



('72 Code, § 615:85)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 99.44  EXCAVATIONS.



   All excavations and backfilling of excavations made within a public
easement or public right-of-way must be made in accordance with Chapter 96 of
this code.  All excavations and backfilling of excavations on private
properties within the city must be made in accordance with the State Building
Code.



('72 Code, § 615:90)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
99.99



§ 99.45  CONTRACTS.



   All contracts made under the provisions of this chapter must be made by
the city with the owner of the property to be served, or the owner's duly
appointed agent or attorney, and the owner of the property is liable to the
city for all rents accruing through the use of the public sewer upon the
owner's premises whether the same be personally used by the owner or the
owner's renter or lessees or other occupants of the premises.



('72 Code, § 615:95)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 99.46  OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.



   Each owner of premises desiring the use of the public sewer system
thereon must file with the city the name of the owner's agent, if the owner
desires to act through an agent, or the owner's address, and must direct in
the instrument the one to whom the bill is to be sent, and notices be given,
and the same is binding until a further notice differing therefrom is made in
writing and filed with the city. The contract made with the owner must
provide that any delinquencies in the payment of the public sewer service
provided on the premises are a lien and charge against the premises so served
regardless of whether the same is a homestead or not.  The lien, in case of
a delinquency, must be reported to the County Auditor by the city at the same
time and in the same manner as special assessments on real estate for street
improvements, and must be collected in the same manner as taxes against real
estate provided, however, that nothing in this section is intended to prevent
the city from cutting off sewer service to premises for delinquent payments
in accordance with other provisions of this code, city policies, or other
applicable state or federal laws.



('72 Code, § 616:00)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord.
1998-890, passed 12-14-98; Am. Ord. 2007-1076, passed 8-20-07)



§ 99.47  DISCONTINUE PUBLIC SEWER SERVICE.



   Any person desiring to discontinue the use of the public sewer must
notify the city. No person other than a plumber duly licensed by the State of
Minnesota or a duly authorized employee of the city will be permitted to make
disconnections from the public sewer system.  The public sewer service
extension will be disconnected, capped and abandoned in a manner approved by
the Building Official or other designated city employee(s).



('72 Code, § 616:05)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord.
1998-890, passed 12-14-98)



§ 99.48  CLAIMS.



   No claim is to be made against the city for reason of the breaking of
any public sewer main or building sewer pipe or for any other interruption of
the public sewer service, by reason of the breaking of machinery or stoppage
for necessary repair.



('72 Code, § 616:10)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



SEWER INSTALLERS



§ 99.60  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful to engage in the business of installing, repairing,
pumping or performing percolation rate tests and soil evaluations for on-site
sewage treatment systems within Brooklyn Park, without first obtaining a
license to carry on such operation.  Persons applying for the issuance of a
license are required to show evidence of their competency.  Such competency
may be demonstrated by evidence of certification from the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency or other evidence acceptable to the City Health Authority.



('72 Code, § 470:00)  (Am. Ord. 1984-474(A), passed 12-17-84)  Penalty,
see § 99.99



Cross-reference:



   Licensing and permit regulations; fees, revocation, and the like, see
Ch. 110



§ 99.61  APPLICATION.



   Application for a license must be made annually on a form furnished by
the Clerk.  The form must contain information as determined to be necessary
by the City's Health Authority.



('72 Code, § 470:05)  (Am. Ord. 1984-474(A), passed 12-17-84)



§ 99.62  BOND.



   Applicants must procure and post with the City Clerk at the time of
application a bond in the amount of $2,000 in favor of the municipality and
the public, conditioned upon the faithful performance of contracts and
compliance with this chapter.



('72 Code, § 470:10)



§ 99.63  INSURANCE.



   The licensee must also file with the City Clerk a certificate showing
liability insurance coverage with a company doing business in Minnesota;
liability insurance coverage for sewer installers is required in the amounts
of $50,000 for property damage and $200,000/$600,000 for bodily injury.



('72 Code, § 470:15)  (Am. Ord. 1984-474(A), passed 12-17-84)



§ 99.64  RENEWAL.



   The license is renewable annually on or before January 1.



('72 Code, § 470:20)



§ 99.65  REFUSAL TO RENEW AND REVOCATION.



   Any such license may be revoked or refused by the Clerk for cause. 
Any installation, repair, pumping, percolation rate test or soil evaluation
on or for construction for an on-site sewage treatment system by a licensee
in violation of the provisions of this chapter or refusal on the part of a
licensee to correct such defective work performed by such licensee, is cause
for revocation of or refusal to renew a license.  Persons licensed under
this chapter must inform the Health Authority of the location and date of
service when they pump septic tanks.  If the City Clerk refuses to issue a
license or to renew a license or revokes a license, the applicant or licensee
has a right to appeal to the City Council.



('72 Code, § 470:25)  (Am. Ord. 1984-474(A), passed 12-17-84)



§ 99.66  FEE.



   The annual license fee is in the amount set by the Council from time to
time and as contained in §§ 99.81 and 99.82 of this chapter.



('72 Code, § 470:30)  (Am. Ord. 1986-540(A), passed  - - )



RATES AND CHARGES



§ 99.75  RATES AND CHARGES ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   Rates and charges for use and service of the city sanitary
sewer system are established.  Such charges and rates to be made against
each lot, parcel of land, unit or premises which may have connection directly
or indirectly into the city sanitary sewer system and which discharges only
normal sewage into such system.



   (B)   Effective on the first day of February 1999 and on the first
day of each calendar year thereafter for all sewage produced in the billing
quarter by city sanitary sewer system users, sanitary sewer charges for each
quarter year are established by the resolution establishing fees and charges
as set forth in the Appendix to this code.



   (C)   Basis of rates and charges.



      (1)   The residential rates established are to provide
sanitary sewer charges based on a service charge plus a usage charge based on
the amount of water metered during the winter quarter or actual use if
less.  Customers may at their written direction be allowed to use the water
meter readings for each quarter as a basis for calculating usage.



      (2)   All metered residential units (residential means
single-family, two-family, townhouses or any complex of housing units which
have individual sewer and water connections for each unit) include a service
charge per quarter plus the usage to the nearest measured unit times the
usage charge rate.  Non-metered residential units are charged a flat service
charge per quarter.



      (3)   Multi-family, industrial, commercial and institutional
charges are based on the water meter reading for each quarter.



      (4)   All metered commercial, multi-family, industrial and
institutional units are the service charge per quarter times the meter
equivalent plus the usage to the nearest measured unit times the usage charge
rate.  Non-metered multi-family, commercial, institutional and industrial
units are charged the appropriate service charge per quarter based on the
water meter size which would be needed if the property were to be connected
to the municipal water system plus a reasonable estimate of the water
consumed per quarter.



   (D)   Meters.  The city will install water meters on non-metered
residential properties at the request of the property owner, for a charge for
sanitary sewer metering only, in an amount as established by the fee
resolution set forth in the Appendix to this code.



   (E)   Surcharge for noncompliance.  A surcharge in the amount
established in the fee resolution set forth in the Appendix to this code is
imposed on every sewer bill mailed on or after February 1, 1999, to property
owners who are not in compliance with the regulations relating to clear water
discharges outlined in these code sections or who have refused to allow their
property to be inspected to determine if there is compliance. All properties
found during reinspection to have violated these code sections are subject to
the $100 per month penalty for all months between the two most recent
inspections. The surcharge will be added every month until the property is in
compliance. The surcharge will continue to be levied monthly on properties
not complying with these code sections.



('72 Code, § 510:00)  (Am. Ord. 1979-301(A), passed 10-9-79; Am. Ord.
1981-375(A), passed 12-14-81; Am. Ord. 1995-774, passed 4- 24-95; Am. Ord.
1998-890, passed 12-14-98)



§ 99.76  SEWER CONNECTION CHARGES.



   (A)   In all areas where sanitary sewer service is available,
connection charges must be paid before a building permit is issued.



   (B)   In all areas and for all uses where sanitary sewer service is
available, whenever service availability charge(s) (SAC unit/s) must be
charged and paid to Metropolitan Council Environmental Services, a sewer
connection charge must be paid to the city in the amount established in the
fee resolution set forth in the Appendix to this code except as otherwise
allowed to be deferred pursuant to the city’s Sewer Availability Charge and
Water Access Charge Payment Deferral Program.



('72 Code, § 510:05)  (Am. Ord. 1986-511(A), passed 1-27-86; Am. Ord.
1993-744, passed 11-22-93; Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord.
1998-890, passed 12-14-98; Am. Ord. 2015-1197, passed 9-28-15)



§ 99.77  PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEE.



   (A)   A sewer connection permit and inspection fee in the amounts
established in the fee resolution set forth in the Appendix to this code must
be paid to the city at the time the application is filed.



   (B)   Any property installing a sump pump or other devices to
control clear water discharges to the sanitary sewer is required to receive a
permit from the city to ensure compliance with these code sections. The city
will issue the permit upon receipt of an application and the fees as
established by the city from time to time. Failure to secure a permit for
sump pump installation and/or other devices intended to redirect clear water
is considered a violation of City Code and subjects the property owner to the
surcharges outlined in these code sections.



('72 Code, § 510:10)  (Am. Ord. 1977-240(A), passed 2-28-77; Am. Ord.
1993-744, passed 11-22-93; Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed 12-14- 98)



§ 99.78  BILLS AND METER READINGS.



   All bills for sanitary sewage disposal as furnished and supplied by the
city are payable quarterly.



('72 Code, § 510:11)  (Am. Ord. 1995-774, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord.
1998-890, passed 12-14-98; Am. Ord. 2007-1076, passed 8-20-07)



§ 99.79  LATE CHARGES.



   There is a late charge of 10% of the unpaid balance or a minimum of $1
for sewer billings not paid within 20 days after the billing date. Late
charges also apply to the surcharges provided for in § 99.75(E).



('72 Code, § 510:15)  (Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed 12-14-98)



§ 99.80  CERTIFICATION OF DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS TO COUNTY FOR COLLECTION.



   The City Council may make any delinquent charges a lien against the
property and certify unpaid charges to the County Auditor with taxes against
the property served for collection as other taxes are collected, all pursuant
to M.S. § 444.075, Subd. 3.  If the delinquent charges are certified for
collection with the property taxes, the city will add a fee as established in
the resolution set forth in the Appendix to this code to each delinquent
account to cover the administrative costs incurred by the city in collecting
the delinquent charges.



('72 Code, § 510:16)  (Am. Ord. 1980-346(A), passed 12-8-80; Am. Ord.
1981-375(A), passed 12-14-81; Am. Ord. 1993-744, passed 11- 22-93; Am. Ord.
1998-890, passed 12-14-98)



§ 99.81  PRIVATE SEWER SYSTEM PERMIT FEES.



   At the time an application is filed for a private sewer system permit,
a permit fee for a private sewer system must be paid to the city as
established  in the fee resolution as set forth in the Appendix to this code.



('72 Code, § 510:20)  (Am. Ord. 1980-346(A), passed 12-8-80; Am. Ord.
1985-487(A), passed 8-26-85; Am. Ord. 1986-540(A), passed 8- 18-86)



§ 99.82  REINSPECTION FEE.



   In the event a reinspection is necessary, the fee is in the amount
established in the fee resolution set forth in the Appendix to this code. 
This fee also applies for reinspection regarding sump pumps and other clean
water discharge devices.



('72 Code, § 510:25)  (Am. Ord. 1985-487(A), passed 8-26-85; Am. Ord.
1986-540(A), passed 8-18-86; Am. Ord. 1993-744, passed 11- 22-93; Am. Ord.
1998-890, passed 12-14-98)



§ 99.83  SEWER SERVICE AVAILABILITY CHARGE.



   (A)   Charge imposed.  There is imposed on each new building
constructed within the city and to each existing building connecting to the
municipal sewer system a sewer service availability charge.  This charge is
imposed to assist the city in meeting its obligations to the Metropolitan
Council Environmental Services pursuant to M.S. Chapter 473C.



   (B)   Amount of charge.  The sewer service availability charge
established by Metropolitan Council Environmental Services is used as the
basis for payments made to Metropolitan Council Environmental Services by the
city.



   (C)   Credits against charge.  The sewer service availability
charge(s) may be reduced by the principal amount of any special assessment
for interceptor sanitary sewers financed in whole or in part by Metropolitan
Council Environmental Services, or their predecessors in authority, and
levied against the parcel of record upon which the building to be charged for
such service is or will be located.  The city may reduce the charge by
amounts previously levied and paid or still unpaid against the parcel. 
There must be no reduction in the sewer service availability charges levied
against any parcel, for trunk, sub-trunk lateral or sewer service
connection.  If the interceptor assessment exceeds the amount of the sewer
service availability charge, the city must not pay out or reduce assessments
by the amounts.



   (D)   Administration.  An applicant for a permit for a new building
construction or for connection to the sewer system must pay the sewer service
availability charge to the city together with other fees required for the
issuance of a building permit or sewer connection permit.  The Building
Official may not issue a building or sewer connection permit unless the
charge is paid.



('72 Code, § 510:30)  (Am. Ord. 1973-136, passed 2-12-73; Am. Ord.
1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed 12-14- 98)



§ 99.99  PENALTY.



   Anyone who violates any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is provided shall be punished as set forth in § 10.99.



CHAPTER 100:  WATER



Section




General Provisions





   100.01   Title





   100.02   Definitions





   100.03   Damage





   100.04   Inspection





   100.05   Liability





   100.06   Revenues





Connections and Permits





   100.15   Service connections





   100.16   Charges and assessments





   100.17   Permit application





   100.18   Costs





Rules and Regulations





   100.30   Inspection and waste of water





   100.31   Lawn sprinkling





   100.32   Unauthorized use of the municipal water supply system
prohibited





   100.33   Opening hydrants





   100.34   Water meters





   100.35   Water service pipe





   100.36   Turn on





   100.37   Locating tap and curb stop





   100.38   Excavations





   100.39   Contracts





   100.40   Owner and consumer responsibility





   100.41   Discontinue service





   100.42   Claims





Rates and Charges





   100.55   Rates established





   100.56   Fire suppression and extinguishing water usage





   100.57   Permit and inspection fee; starting service





   100.58   Tapping charges





   100.59   Private fire hydrant maintenance charges





   100.60   Meter testing service





   100.61   Meter disconnection/reconnection of service





   100.62   Water meter installation fee





   100.63   Water access charge (WAC charge)





   100.64   City hydrant use charge





   100.65   Temporary meter use charge




Cross-reference:



   Private sewer and water systems, see §§ 101.01 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 100.01  TITLE.



   This chapter comprises and is referred to hereunder as the “water
code.”



('72 Code, § 675:00)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 100.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of
terms in the water code are in accordance with the Minnesota State Building
Code, Chapter 4715, Plumbing Code and as otherwise set forth as follows:



   MUNICIPAL WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM.  All facilities for collecting,
pumping, and distributing water, in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights and is controlled by this public authority.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.



('72 Code, § 675:02)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 100.03  DAMAGE.



   It is unlawful for any person to maliciously, willfully, or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the municipal water supply
system.



('72 Code, § 675:03)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 100.04  INSPECTION.



   The City Building Official and other duly authorized employees of the
city bearing proper credentials and identification are permitted to enter
upon all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of the water code.



('72 Code, § 675:04)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord.
1998-890, passed 12-14-98)



§ 100.05  LIABILITY.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of the water code becomes
liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by
reason of such violation, including attorney's fees.



('72 Code, § 675:07)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 100.06  REVENUES.



   All revenues derived from these rates and charges are credited to the
Public Utilities Revenue Accounts.  Such revenue must be used only for the
purpose of paying the cost of operating and maintaining the public sewer
system and the water supply system, paying charges made by Metropolitan
Council Environmental Services, providing an adequate depreciation fund,
paying costs of meter-reading, billing, collection, and other similar or
related sanitary sewer and water operating expenses, provided that any
surplus above such needs may be transferred to the general funds.



('72 Code, § 675:09)  (Am. Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord.
1998-890, passed 12-14-98)



CONNECTIONS AND PERMITS



§ 100.15  SERVICE CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   Connection required.  Connection to the municipal water
supply system is required in accordance with the provisions of the Minnesota
State Building Code, Chapter 4715, Minnesota Plumbing Code, and the
ordinances of the City of Brooklyn Park.



   (B)   Private well water system repair.  At such time as the
municipal water supply system becomes available to a property served by a
private well water system, and the private system cannot be repaired as
provided in §§ 101.01 et seq. of this title, a direct connection must be
made to the municipal water supply system in compliance with this chapter,
and any private wells taken out of service must be sealed in accordance with
state law and §§ 101.01 et seq. of this title.



   (C)   Separate water service connections required.



      (1)   All connections must be made in accordance with the
provisions of the Minnesota State Building Code, Chapter 4715, Minnesota
Plumbing Code, and Rule 4715.0310 thereof.



      (2)   A separate and independently connected water service
must be provided for each property and for each unit contained within a
structure; i.e., a duplex must have two services from the municipal water
supply system main to the building.  Exceptions to this provision may be
allowed subject to the approval of the City Engineer.



      (3)   Where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no separate municipal water service connection can be
connected to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or
driveway, the building water service from the front building may be extended
to the rear building and the whole considered as one water service connection
except for rate purposes.



      (4)   Connection of more than one property to a water service
extension of the municipal water supply system that is intended for a single
service connection, is subject to the approval of the City Engineer.  Such a
connection requires for each property, the installation of separate stop
cock, box and cover at the public utility easement, right-of-way, or water
service extension from the municipal water supply system main.  Such
separate stop cock, box and cover, when required, must be accessibly and
safely located, and must be constructed in accordance with plans approved by
the City Engineer.  The stop cock, box and cover must be installed by the
owner at the owner's expense, becomes the property of the city, and must be
maintained by the city so as to be safe and accessible at all times.



('72 Code, § 677:05)  (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 100.16  CHARGES AND ASSESSMENTS.



   (A)   Connection charges.  It is unlawful to make or cause to be
made, any connection to the municipal water supply system unless the person
has first paid any connection charges, charges for tapping municipal water
supply system mains and the amount of the water usage deposit hereinafter
specified, in amounts set by the City Council.  No water will be turned on
until all charges against the premises are paid.



   (B)   Special assessments.  In addition, no permit will be issued
to tap or connect with any municipal water supply system main, either
directly or indirectly, from any lot or tract of land, unless:



      (1)   The property has been specially assessed for the cost of
construction of the municipal water supply system with which the connection
is made; or



      (2)   If no assessment has been levied for such construction
costs, that proceedings for levying such assessment have been or will be
commenced in due course; or



      (3)   That the cost of construction for the municipal water
supply system has been paid by the developer or builder platting the lot or
tract of land; this does not include lots or tracts of land served by the
municipal water supply system and which were not a part of the plat or tract
developed; or



      (4)   If no assessment has been levied, and no assessment
proceedings will be completed in due course, and the developer or builder of
the lot or tract has not paid the cost of improving the lot or tract of land,
that a sum equal to the portion of the cost of constructing the municipal
water supply system which would be assessable against the lot or tract of
land has been paid to the City of Brooklyn Park.



   (C)   Tax forfeited land - special assessment and reassessment. 
When a parcel of tax forfeited land is returned to private ownership and the
parcel is benefitted by the municipal water supply system or any other public
improvement for which special assessments were canceled because of the
forfeiture, the city may, upon notice and hearing as provided for the
original assessment, make a reassessment or a new assessment as to the parcel
in an amount equal to the amount remaining unpaid on the original assessment
plus interest; or the city may impose fees or charges for the use or
availability of the improvement or improvements or for connections therewith
in an amount not to exceed the amount remaining unpaid on the canceled
assessment.



   (D)   Special connection charge.  If such assessments have not been
paid, no such permit to tap or connect to any water municipal water supply
system main will be issued, unless the applicant pays an additional
connection fee which is equal to the portion of the cost of construction of
the main which would be assessable against the lot or tract to be served by
such tapping or connection.  The assessable cost is to be determined by the
City Engineer, upon the same basis per front foot or lot unit as any
assessment previously levied against other property for the main, or, if no
such assessment has been levied, upon the basis of the uniform charge per
front foot or lot unit which may have been or which will be charged for
similar connections with the main, determined on the basis of the total
assessable cost of the main allocated on a frontage or lot unit basis.



('72 Code, § 678:00)  (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 100.17  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   Permits for water connections will be granted to only plumbers licensed
by the State of Minnesota.



   (A)   Application for municipal water supply system service
connection must be made on printed forms, must state the legal description,
street and official house numbers of the premises to be connected, and the
nature of the improvement to be done.  A permit and inspection fee in the
amount set by the City Council must be payable to the city at the time the
application is filed.



   (B)   The charges for connection to the municipal water supply
system mains must be paid at the time the application is submitted and before
the service is connected.



   (C)   No person except a plumber duly licensed by the State of
Minnesota or a duly authorized employee of the city will be permitted to do
any work on connections to the municipal water supply system.



   (D)   The curb box and water service extension from the municipal
water supply system to the public utility easement or right-of-way are the
property of the city and all persons are forbidden to interfere with such
extension.



   (E)   The charges for tapping municipal water service mains and the
amount of the water usage deposit must be paid at the time the application is
submitted and before the service is installed.  No water will be turned on
until all charges against the premises are paid.



('72 Code, § 678:15)  (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 100.18  COSTS.



   All costs and expense incidental to the installation and connection of
the building water supply system to the municipal water supply system must be
borne by the property owner.  The property owner must indemnify the city
from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building water supply system.



('72 Code, § 678:20)  (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



RULES AND REGULATIONS



§ 100.30  INSPECTION AND WASTE OF WATER.



   The city employees designated by the City Manager have full access, at
all reasonable hours, to premises to ascertain the location or condition of
all hose connections, pipes and plumbing fixtures which in the employee's
opinion is causing unnecessary waste of water.  The employee must promptly
notify the owner or occupant of such in the event any such designated repairs
are not made within 24 hours after such notification.  The person designated
by the City Manager must make such repairs or cause the same to be made and
the cost thereof will be charged to the owner or occupant of said premises
and collected in the same manner herein provided for the collection of other
bills to the city.



('72 Code, § 682:00)  (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890,
passed 12-4-98)



§ 100.31  LAWN SPRINKLING.



   To protect the health and safety of the consumers and the general
welfare of the city, the City Manager or the City Manager's designee may
place in effect and enforce a lawn sprinkling ban and/or restriction.  The
sprinkling ban shall provide:



   (A)   All lawn sprinkling using the municipal water supply system is
prohibited as prescribed by public notice from the City Manager or the City
Manager's designee to all municipal water consumers.



   (B)   Revocation of a sprinkling ban may be made by the City Manager
or the City Manager's designee.



   (C)   At all times of the year, in case of fire in any part of the
city all sprinkling and other unnecessary use of water must be stopped.



   (D)   An odd-even sprinkling restriction based on street address
numbers is in effect May 1 - September 30. Residents with even-numbered
addresses water on even days; odd numbers water on odd days. Residents should
avoid sprinkling their lawns between the hours of 4:00 and 10:00 p.m., when
demand on the water supply system is at its peak. Newly seeded or sodded
lawns and irrigation wells are exempt from this restraint.



   (E)   Violators of this section are guilty of a petty offense.



('72 Code, § 682:05)  (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890,
passed 12-14-98)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 100.32  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF THE MUNICIPAL WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It is unlawful to make a connection to the municipal water
supply system or to any water service pipe without first obtaining permits
required by the city.  Unless authorized by the City Manager or the City
Manager's designee, it is unlawful to draw water from the municipal water
supply system for any purpose other than for fire suppression and
extinguishing purposes, without making payment as required by city for water
drawn.  Any such unauthorized connection or use of the municipal water
supply system is considered a penal offense.



   (B)   In addition to penalties for such penal offense, the city has
the right to make any disconnections or repairs necessary to cease such
unauthorized use of the municipal water supply system; to recover the actual
costs for such disconnections and repairs made; and to recover the actual
costs of water consumed or the costs of water estimated to have been consumed
as determined by the City Manager or the City Manager’s designee.



('72 Code, § 682:10)  (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890,
passed 12-14-98)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 100.33  OPENING HYDRANTS.



   No person except the person designated by the City Manager, or a member
of the Fire Department in case of fire, is allowed to open any fire hydrant
for any purpose whatsoever, without first securing a permit from the person
designated by the City Manager.  A copy of the permit must be in the
possession of the person operating or opening the hydrant.  The fees for
water and supplies are as determined by City Council.



('72 Code, § 682:15)  (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 100.34  WATER METERS.



   (A)   The city exclusively owns and controls the water meter and
yoke to be used in the water system.



      (1)   Meter location in the structure, valve types, electrical
grounding, installation and location of remote read wire and read device must
be as per requirements of the Operations and Maintenance Department/Public
Utilities Division policies.



      (2)   A domestic service and fire service must be separate and
must be controlled by separate valves outside the structure.



      (3)   Commercial, industrial and multi-family buildings must
have separate domestic and irrigation meters.



   (B)   If any meters are damaged by freezing, hot water, and the
like, either by carelessness or neglect of the owner or occupant of the
premises or their agents, the owner or occupants must pay for the repairs of
such damages.  The cost of ordinary maintenance and repairs of all meters
owned by the city will be borne by the Operations Maintenance
Department/Public Utilities Division.



   (C)   At the written request of any owner or consumer a person
designated by the City Manager will test or cause to be tested the meter
supplying the premises of such owner, or consumer.  A deposit in the amount
established by the City Council will be required before the meter is
disconnected which will be returned to the owner or consumer if the meter is
not found to be registering correctly within ten percent, otherwise the
deposit so made will be retained by the city to cover the cost of the test. 
The owner or consumer may, if the owner or consumer desires, be present at
the time any such test is made.  The result of any such test must be
reported to the owner or consumer in every case.



   (D)   If the testing of a meter, as hereinabove provided, indicates
that it registers in excess of 10% error, the charge to the consumer for
water consumed and used during the quarter within which the test is made
shall be the corresponding quarter of the previous year; if the consumer was
not receiving service during the corresponding quarter of the previous year,
or if for any other reason the charge for such corresponding period cannot be
justly applied, the charge so made for the quarter within which such test
occurred must be equitably adjusted by the person designated by the City
Manager.



   (E)   The customer is prohibited from obstructing the meter so as to
prohibit the reading or repairing of the meter.



   (F)   It is unlawful for anyone intentionally to misread any meter
so as to avoid the payment of just charges for water, and it is unlawful for
anyone to tamper with any meter so as to avoid just charges for water.



   (G)   So as to provide uniformity throughout the municipality, no
water meter and yoke will be installed except when obtained from the
municipality for that purpose and use in single-family dwellings.  Meters
and yokes required for larger users must contact the Building Official.
Anyone wishing to install a water meter must obtain the meter and yoke from
the Building Official and reimburse the city for the cost thereof as
determined by § 100.62 of this chapter.  Payment therefor is not construed
as giving title to anyone other than the municipality.



('72 Code, § 682:20)  (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890,
passed 12-14-98)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 100.35  WATER SERVICE PIPE.



   The water service pipe and connections thereto including the outlet
connection at the curb stop or box, extending from the building or structure
to the service extension of the municipal water supply system at the public
utility easement or right-of-way are the property of the applicant and must
be protected and maintained by the applicant. In the event the applicant or
any consumer fails to make any necessary repairs to such service connections
or pipe within 24 hours after being notified to do so by a person designated
by the City Manager, this designated person must make such repairs and the
cost thereof will be charged to the owner of the premises or the consumer and
must be collected in the same manner as other bills for water consumption are
collected.  Installations of water service must comply with all requirements
set forth in § 100.15(C), requiring separate services.  Irrigation systems
or subsystems must have only one water service source.



('72 Code, § 682:25)  (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890,
passed 12-14-98; Am. Ord. 2007-1076, passed 8-20-07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 100.36  TURN ON.



   It is unlawful to turn on municipal water after connection to the
municipal water supply system is made without first obtaining permission from
the person designated by the City Manager who must see that a meter has been
placed on the service and in such manner that it will register all water
consumed, and that all other parts of the plumbing and pipe fitting in and
about the premises have been in full compliance with the rules and
regulations of this chapter and all other rules and regulations which the
city makes.



('72 Code, § 682:30)  (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890,
passed 12-14-98)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 100.37  LOCATING TAP AND CURB STOP.



   The plumber must assist the person designated by the City Manager in
making any measurements necessary in locating the tap in the main and curb
stop.



('72 Code, § 682:35)  (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 100.38  EXCAVATIONS.



   All excavations and backfilling of excavations made within a public
easement or public right-of-way must be made in accordance with Chapter 96 of
this code.  All excavations and backfilling of excavations on private
properties within the city must be made in accordance with the State Building
Code.



('72 Code, § 682:40)  (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 100.39  CONTRACTS.



   All contracts made under the provisions of this chapter must be made by
the city with the owner of the property to be served, or the owner's duly
appointed agent or attorney, and the owner of the property is liable to the
city for all rents accruing through the use of water upon the owner's
premises whether the same is personally used by the owner or the owner's
renter or lessees or other occupants of the premises.



('72 Code, § 682:45)  (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 100.40  OWNER AND CONSUMER RESPONSIBILITY.



   Each owner of premises desiring the use of water thereon must file with
the city the name of the owner's agent, if the owner desires to act through
an agent, or the owner's own address, and must direct in the instrument the
one to whom the bill is to be sent, and notices be given, and the same will
be binding until a further notice differing therefrom is made in writing and
filed with the city.  The contract made with the owner must provide that any
delinquencies in the payment of the water consumed on the premises are a lien
and charge against the premises so served regardless of whether the same is a
homestead or not.  The lien, in case of a delinquency, must be reported to
the County Auditor by the city at the same time and in the same manner as
special assessments on real estate for street improvements, and must be
collected in the same manner as taxes against real estate provided, however,
that nothing in this section is intended to prevent the city from cutting off
water service to premises for delinquent payments in accordance with other
provisions of this code, city policies, or applicable state or federal laws.



('72 Code, § 682:50)  (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95 ; Am. Ord. 1998-890,
passed 12-14-98; Am. Ord. 2007-1076, passed 8-20-07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 100.41  DISCONTINUE SERVICE.



   Any person desiring to discontinue the use of the municipal water
supply system must notify the city and the service will be shut off at the
curb cock and the water meter removed.  No person other than a duly
authorized employee of the city will be permitted to make disconnections from
the municipal water supply system.  A fee in the amount established by the
City Council will be required to disconnect the meter. An additional fee in
the amount established by the City Council will be required when the meter is
reinstalled and water service resumed.  The municipal water supply system
service extension will be turned off, disconnected, capped and abandoned in a
manner approved by the Building Official.



('72 Code, § 682:55)  (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890,
passed 12-14-98; Am. Ord. 2007-1076, passed 8-20-07)



§ 100.42  CLAIMS.



   No claim is to be made against the city for reason of the breaking of
any water main or service pipe or fixture or for any other interruption of
the supply, by reason of the breaking of machinery or stoppage for necessary
repair.



('72 Code, § 682:60)  (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



RATES AND CHARGES



§ 100.55  RATES ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   (1)   Effective on the first day of February, 1999 and on
the first day of each calendar year thereafter for all water consumed in the
first billing quarter by city water system users, water rates charged for
each quarter year are established by the fee resolution, set forth in the
Appendix to this code.



      (2)   These rates may be modified by the Council from time to
time.



   (B)   (1)   All bills for water furnished and supplied by the
city are payable quarterly. 



      (2)   There is a late charge of 10% of the unpaid balance or a
minimum of $1.00 for water billings not paid within 20 days after the billing
date.



   (C)   At the end of each quarter from date of the notice or
statement all bills not paid become delinquent.  The City Council may make
any such charges a lien against the property and certify unpaid charges to
the County Auditor with taxes against the property served for collection as
other taxes are collected, all pursuant to M.S. § 444.075, Subd. 3.  If the
delinquent charges are certified for collection with the property taxes, the
city will add $50 to each delinquent account to cover the administrative
costs incurred by the city in collecting the delinquent charges.



   (D)   In all cases where the water has been turned off for
non-payment of water bills or for violation of any rules or regulations of
the city, the water will not be again turned on unless and until the bills
have been fully paid, all delinquencies removed and a charge in the amount
established in the fee resolution set forth in the Appendix to this code, 
paid into the city for reinstating water service.  The water service will be
reinstated only during regular working hours.  In addition, if payment is
not received by the shut-off deadline for payments, a service charge will be
imposed, in the amount established by the fee resolution as set forth in the
Appendix to this code.



   (E)   Schedule of water maintenance and fire protection charges is
as established by the fee resolution, set forth in the Appendix to this code.



('72 Code, § 515:00)  (Am. Ord. 1993-748, passed 12-20-93; Am. Ord.
1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1996-818, passed 5-28-96; Am. Ord.
1998-890, passed 12-14-98; Am. Ord. 2007-1076, passed 8-20-07)



§ 100.56  FIRE SUPPRESSION AND EXTINGUISHING WATER USAGE.



   Water used for the purposes of suppressing or extinguishing fires is
without charge to the consumer or premises.



('72 Code, § 515:04)  (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 100.57  PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEE; STARTING SERVICE.



   A permit and inspection fee in the amount established by the fee
resolution, set forth in the Appendix to this code, must be paid at the time
of applying for water service.



('72 Code, § 515:05)  (Am. Ord. 1985-487(A), passed 8-26-85; Am. Ord.
1993-748, passed 12-20-93; Am. Ord. 1994-755, passed 4-11- 94; Am. Ord.
1998-890, passed 12-14-98)



§ 100.58  TAPPING CHARGES.



   Charges for making taps for all service pipes are established by the
fee resolution as set forth in the Appendix to this code.  Rates for pipes
larger in diameter than one inch will be determined by the City Manager or
the City Manager’s designee upon the basis of the actual costs to the city.



('72 Code, § 515:10)  (Am. Ord. 1977-240(A), passed 2-28-77; Am. Ord.
1985-487(A), passed 8-26-85; Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed 12- 14-98)



§ 100.59  PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANT MAINTENANCE CHARGES.



   (A)   The City Manager or the City Manager’s designee has the
authority to enter into agreements with private property owners to maintain
private fire hydrants.



   (B)   Effective January 1, 1993, an annual maintenance fee will be
charged for such maintenance in the amounts established by the fee resolution
as set forth in the Appendix to this code.



   (C)   The charges will be billed in first billing quarter of 1994
and in the first billing quarter of each year thereafter.



('72 Code, § 515:12)  (Am. Ord. 1993-748, passed 12-20-93; Am. Ord.
1998-890, passed 12-14-98)



§ 100.60  METER TESTING SERVICE.



   A deposit in an amount as established by the fee resolution, set forth
in the Appendix to this code, will be made for disconnecting, testing and
repair of a meter.



('72 Code, § 515:15)  (Am. Ord. 1985-477(A), passed 2-11-85; Am. Ord.
1985-487(A), passed 8-26-85; Am. Ord. 1993-748, passed 12- 20-93; Am. Ord.
1998-890, passed 12-14-98)



§ 100.61  METER DISCONNECTION/RECONNECTION OF SERVICE.



   A fee  in an amount as established by the fee resolution, set forth in
the Appendix to this code, must be paid for disconnecting a water meter or
connecting a meter.



('72 Code, § 515:20)  (Am. Ord. 1985-477(A), passed 2-11-85; Am. Ord.
1993-748, passed 12-20-93; Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed 12-14- 98)



§ 100.62  WATER METER INSTALLATION FEE.



   Upon application for water service, a fee must be paid for the city to
supply and install water meters.  The fee will be determined by the City
Manager or the City Manager’s designee on the basis of the actual costs to
the city.



('72 Code, § 515:25)  (Am. Ord. 1993-748, passed 12-20-93; Am. Ord.
1998-890, passed 12-14-98)



§ 100.63  WATER ACCESS CHARGE (WAC CHARGE).



   (A)   In all areas and for all uses where city water service is
available, at the time an application is filed with the city for a new or
enlarged water service, or fire suppression system water service, a water
access charge (WAC) must be paid to the city except as otherwise allowed to
be deferred pursuant to the city’s Sewer Availability Charge and Water
Access Charge Payment Deferral Program.  This charge does not apply to water
service maintenance work unless the water service is enlarged.



   (B)   Effective on the first day of June of each calendar year
beginning June 1, 1999, the WAC is established in the amounts as established
by the fee resolution, set forth in the Appendix to this code.  A credit for
previously paid WAC may be given when a building is remodeled or demolished.



('72 Code, § 515:30)  (Am. Ord. 1993-748, passed 12-20-93; Am. Ord.
1996-800, passed 3-25-96; Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed 12-14-98; Am. Ord.
2007-1076, passed 8-20-07 Am. Ord. 2015-1197, passed 9-28-15)



§ 100.64  CITY HYDRANT USE CHARGE.



   As set forth in § 100.33 of this chapter, a permit is required to open
any fire hydrant and fees are to be charged for water and supplies.  A meter
deposit  must be made and a per day charge for rental of the meter must be
paid by the permit holder during the first 30 days and a per day amount
thereafter, with a  minimum rental, all in amounts as established by the fee
resolution, set forth in the Appendix to this code. All water used will be
billed at the current irrigation rate per 1,000 gallons used.



('72 Code, § 515:35)  (Am. Ord. 1996-800, passed 3-25-96)



§ 100.65  TEMPORARY METER USE CHARGE.



   As set forth in § 100.32 of this chapter, a permit is required to
request a temporary meter for uses such as a construction trailer.  A meter
deposit must be made and fees for connecting and disconnecting a meter paid,
all in amounts as established by the fee resolution, set forth in the
Appendix to this code.  All water used will be billed at the current
multi-family, commercial, industrial and institutional meter charge and rate
per 1,000 gallons used.



(Ord. 2007-1076, passed 8-20-07)



CHAPTER 101:  PRIVATE SEWER AND WATER SYSTEMS



Section



   101.01   Water well construction



   101.02   Individual sewage treatment standards adopted



   101.03   Enforcement



   101.04   Administration



   101.05   Permits



§ 101.01  WATER WELL CONSTRUCTION.



   Water well construction is regulated by the Minnesota Department of
Health.



('72 Code, § 620:01)  (Ord. 1984-473(A), passed 12-17-83; Am. Ord.
1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 101.02  INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE TREATMENT STANDARDS ADOPTED.



   Minnesota Pollution Control Agency Chapter 7080.0060 through 7080.0315,
individual sewage treatment systems, is adopted by reference and made a part
of this title except as amended below:



   (A)   Amendments.



      (1)   Whenever the word “agency” appears, it will be
deleted and “City” inserted.  Whenever the word “Executive Director”
or “director” appears, it will be deleted and “Building Official”
inserted.



      (2)   Sections C1 and C3 are deleted.



      (3)   Section F26(1) delete 2 or less 750; change 3 or 4 to 4
or less.  E Table 11 in Section H2a(2) is amended by deleting Columns II,
III, and IV.



   (B)   Additional standards.  The following standards will also
apply:  existing nonconforming systems may be utilized as long as:



      (1)   The system serves an existing, single family dwelling
that is owner occupied.



      (2)   The system may be required to be brought into conformity
when the finished living space is increased or the house is sold.



      (3)   No nuisance, surface discharge or ground water
contamination occur as a result of the operation of the system.



('72 Code, § 620:06)  (Ord. 1984-473(A), passed 12-17-84; Am. Ord.
1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 101.03  ENFORCEMENT.



   In addition to the criminal penalties for violation of this ordinance,
any dwelling served by a well or individual sewage system not in conformity
with this ordinance is considered to be a dangerous building under Minnesota
Statutes and must be dealt with accordingly.  No building not served by a
municipal sewer and/or water system may be occupied nor will any certificate
of occupancy be issued by the Building Official unless the provisions of this
ordinance are complied with.



('72 Code, § 620:11)  (Ord. 1984-473(A), passed 12-17-84; Am. Ord.
1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed 12-14- 98)



§ 101.04  ADMINISTRATION.



   This ordinance will be administered by the Building Official.



('72 Code, § 620:16)  (Ord. 1984-473(A), passed 12-17-84; Am. Ord.
1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed 12-14- 98)



§ 101.05  PERMITS.



   It is unlawful to repair, install, construct, pump or modify any
individual sewage treatment or disposal system unless the person has first
obtained a permit from the Building Official. It is the responsibility of the
permittee to obtain the necessary inspections before doing the work.



('72 Code, § 620:21)  (Ord. 1984-473(A), passed 12-17-84; Am. Ord.
1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1998-890, passed 12-14- 98)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



CHAPTER 102:  RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT



Section




   102.20   Findings, purpose, and intent





   102.21   Election to manage the public rights-of-way





   102.22   Definitions





   102.23   Administration





   102.24   Utility Coordination Committee





   102.25   Registration and right-of-way occupancy





   102.26   Registration information





   102.27   Reporting obligations





   102.28   Permit requirement





   102.29   Permit applications





   102.30   Issuance of permit; conditions





   102.31   Permit fees





   102.32   Right-of-way patching and restoration





   102.33   Joint applications





   102.34   Supplementary applications





   102.35   Other obligations





   102.36   Denial of permit





   102.37   Installation requirements





   102.38   Inspection





   102.39   Work done without a permit





   102.40   Supplementary notification





   102.41   Revocation of permits





   102.42   Mapping data





   102.43   Undergrounding





   102.44   Location and relocation of facilities





   102.45   Pre-excavation facilities location





   102.46   Interference by other facilities





   102.47   Right-of-way vacation; reservation of right





   102.48   Indemnification and liability





   102.49   Abandoned facilities





   102.50   Appeal




§ 102.20  FINDINGS, PURPOSE, AND INTENT.




   (A)   To provide for the health, safety and welfare of its citizens,
and to ensure the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the
rights-of-way, the city strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good
repair and free from unnecessary encumbrances.




   (B)   This subchapter imposes reasonable regulation on the placement
and maintenance of facilities and equipment currently within the city's
rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some future time.  It is intended
to complement the regulatory roles of state and federal agencies.  Under
this subchapter, persons excavating and obstructing the rights-of-way will
bear financial responsibility for their work through the recovery of
out-of-pocket and projected costs from persons using the public rights-of-way.



   (C)   This subchapter shall be interpreted consistently with 1997
Session Laws, Chapter 123, substantially codified in M.S. §§ 237.16,
237.162, 237.163, 237.79, 237.81, and 238.086 (the “Act”) and the other
laws governing applicable rights of the city and users of the right-of-way. 
This subchapter shall also be interpreted consistent with Minn. Rules
7819.0050, et seq. where possible.  To the extent that any provision of this
subchapter cannot be interpreted consistently with the Minn. Rules, the
interpretation most consistent with the Act and other applicable statutory
and case law is intended.




(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.21  ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY. 



   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal
statutory, administrative and common law, the city elects pursuant M.S. §
237.163, Subd. 2(b), to manage rights-of-way within its jurisdiction.




(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.22  DEFINITIONS. 




   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.





   ABANDONED FACILITY.  A facility no longer in service or physically
disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other
facility, that is in use or still carries service.  A facility is not
abandoned unless declared so by the right-of-way user.





   APPLICANT.  Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a
right-of-way.





   CITY.  The City of Brooklyn Park, Minnesota.




   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION.  To install, mount, maintain, modify,
operate, or replace a small wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent
to an existing wireless support structure or utility pole that is owned
privately, or by the city or other governmental unit.



   COMMISSION.  The Minnesota Public Utilities Commission.



   CONGESTED RIGHT-OF-WAY.  A crowded condition in the subsurface of the
public right-of-way that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between
existing underground facilities does not allow for construction of new
underground facilities without using hand digging to expose the existing
lateral facilities in conformance with M.S. § 216D.04, Subd. 3, over a
continuous length in excess of 500 feet.




   CONSTRUCTION PERFORMANCE BOND.  Any of the following forms of security
provided at permittee's option:





      (1)   Individual project bond, including a “license and
permit” bond;





      (2)   Cash deposit;





      (3)   Security of a form listed or approved under M.S. §
15.73;





      (4)   Letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the city;





      (5)   Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the city;





      (6)   A blanket bond for projects within the city, or other
form of construction bond, for a time specified and in a form acceptable to
the city.





   DEGRADATION.  A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused
by excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be required if the
excavation or disturbance did not occur.





   DEGRADATION COST.  Subject to Minn. Rules 7819.1100, the cost to
achieve a level of restoration as determined by the city at the time the
permit is issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration shown in plates 1 to
13, set forth in Minn. Rules 7819.9900, et seq.





   DEGRADATION FEE.  The estimated fee established at the time of
permitting by the city to recover costs associated with the decrease in the
useful life of the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals
the degradation cost.





   DELAY PENALTY.  The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays
in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration as
established by permit.





   DEPARTMENT INSPECTOR.  Any person authorized by the city to carry out
inspections related to the provisions of this subchapter.





   DIRECTOR.  The City Manager, or his or her designee.





   EMERGENCY.  A condition that (1) poses a danger to life or health, or
of a significant loss of property; or (2) requires immediate repair or
replacement of facilities in order to restore service to a customer.





   EQUIPMENT.  Any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain
facilities in any right-of-way.





   EXCAVATE.  To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or
penetrate any part of a right-of-way.





   EXCAVATION PERMIT.  The permit which, pursuant to this subchapter,
must be obtained before a person may excavate in a right-of-way.  An
EXCAVATION PERMIT allows the holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way
described in such permit.





   EXCAVATION PERMIT FEE.  Money paid to the city by an applicant to
cover the costs as provided in § 102.31.





   FACILITY or FACILITIES.  Tangible asset in the public right-of-way
required to provide utility service.  The term does not include FACILITIES
to the extent the location and relocation of such FACILITIES are preempted by
M.S. § 161.45, governing utility facility placement in state trunk highways.





   FIVE-YEAR PROJECT PLAN or CIP.  Projects adopted by the city for
construction within the next five years under the Capital Improvement Plan
(“CIP”).





   HIGH DENSITY CORRIDOR.  A designated portion of the public
right-of-way within which telecommunications right-of-way users having
multiple and competing facilities may be required to build and install
facilities in a common conduit system or other common structure.





   HOLE.  An excavation in the right-of-way, with the excavation having a
length less than the width of the pavement or adjacent pavement.





   LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE.  A local person or persons, or designee of such
person or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make
decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this
subchapter.





   MANAGEMENT COSTS.  The actual costs the city incurs in managing its
rights-of-way, including such costs, if incurred, as those associated with
registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way or
small wireless facility permit applications; inspecting job sites and
restoration projects; maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user
facilities during right-of-way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way
restoration; restoring work inadequately performed after providing notice and
the opportunity to correct the work; and revoking right- of-way or small
wireless facility permits. Management costs do not include payment by a
telecommunications right-of-way user for the use of the right-of-way,
unreasonable fees of a third-party contractor used by the city including fees
tied to or based on customer counts, access lines, or revenues generated by
the right-of-way or for the city, the fees and cost of litigation relating to
the interpretation of Minnesota Session Laws 1997, Chapter 123; M.S. §
237.162 or § 237.163 or any ordinance enacted under those sections, or the
city fees and costs related to appeals taken pursuant to § 102.50.





   OBSTRUCT.  To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to
hinder free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.





   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT.  The permit which, pursuant to this subchapter,
must be obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the
holder to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that
right-of-way, for the duration specified therein, including a blanket permit
for a period of time and for types of work specified by the Director, if
deemed appropriate in his or her discretion.





   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE.  Money paid to the city by a permittee to
cover the costs as provided in § 102.28.





   PATCH or PATCHING.  A method of pavement replacement that is temporary
in nature.  A patch consists of (1) the compaction of the subbase and
aggregate base, and (2) the replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement
for a minimum of two feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all
directions.  A patch is considered full restoration only when the pavement
is included in the city's five-year project plan.





   PAVEMENT.  Any type of improved surface that is within the public
right-of-way and that is paved or otherwise constructed with paver blocks,
bituminous, concrete, aggregate, or gravel.





   PERMIT.  Same as “right-of-way permit” in M.S. § 237.162.





   PERMITTEE.  Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a
right-of-way has been granted by the city under this subchapter.





   PERSON.  An individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of this
state, however organized, whether public or private, whether domestic or
foreign, whether for profit or nonprofit, and whether natural, corporate, or
political. 





   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Same as M.S. § 237.162, Subd. 3.





   REGISTRANT.  Any person who (1) has or seeks to have its equipment or
facilities located in any right-of-way, or (2) in any way occupies or uses,
or seeks to occupy or use, the right-of-way or place its facilities or
equipment in the right-of-way.





   RESTORE or RESTORATION.  The process by which an excavated
right-of-way and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is
returned to the same condition and life expectancy that existed before
excavation.





   RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT.  Either the excavation permit or the obstruction
permit, or both, depending on the context, required by this subchapter.





   RIGHT-OF-WAY USER.  (1) A telecommunications right-of-way user as
defined by M.S. § 237.162, Subd. 4; or (2) a person owning or controlling a
facility in the right-of-way that is used or intended to be used for
providing utility service, and who has a right under law, franchise, or
ordinance to use the public right-of-way.





   SERVICE or UTILITY SERVICE.  (1) Services provided by a public utility
as defined in M.S. § 216B.02, Subd. 4 and Subd. 6; (2) services of a
telecommunications right-of-way user, including transporting of voice or data
information; (3) services of a cable communications system as defined in M.S.
§ 238.02, Subd. 3; (4) natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications
services provided by a local government unit; (5) services provided by a
cooperative electric association organized under M.S. Chapter 308A; and (6)
water, sewer, steam, cooling or heating services.




   SERVICE LATERAL.  An underground facility that is used to transmit,
distribute or furnish gas, electricity, communications, or water from a
common source to an end-use customer. A service lateral is also an
underground facility that is used in the removal of wastewater from a
customer's premises.



   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY.  A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications:



      (1)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more
than six cubic feet in volume or could fit within such an enclosure; and



      (2)   All other wireless equipment associated with the small
wireless facility provided such equipment is, in aggregate, no more than 28
cubic feet in volume, not including electric meters, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, battery backup power systems, grounding
equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical
cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and any equipment
concealed from public view within or behind an existing structure or
concealment.



   SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION.  An application made to excavate or
obstruct more of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit
that had already been issued.



   TELECOMMUNICATION RIGHT-OF-WAY USER.  A person owning or controlling a
facility in the right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the
right-of-way, that is used or is intended to be used for providing wireless
service, or transporting telecommunication or other voice or data
information. For purposes of this subchapter, a cable communication system
defined and regulated under M.S. Chapter 238, and telecommunication
activities related to providing natural gas or electric energy services
whether provided by a public utility as defined in M.S. § 216B.02, a
municipality, a municipal gas or power agency organized under M.S.  Chapters
453 and 453A, or a cooperative electric association organized under M.S.
Chapter 308A, are not telecommunications right-of-way users for purposes of
this subchapter, except to the extent such entity is offering wireless
service.



   TEMPORARY SURFACE. The compaction of subbase and aggregate base and
replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the
excavation. It is temporary in nature except when the replacement is of
pavement included in the city's CIP, in which case it is considered full
restoration.



   TRENCH.  An excavation in the right-of-way, with the excavation having
a length equal to or greater than the width of the pavement or adjacent
pavement.



   WIRELESS FACILITY.  Equipment at a fixed location that enables the
provision of wireless services between user equipment and a wireless service
network, including equipment associated with wireless service, a radio
transceiver, antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and a small wireless facility, but not including wireless support
structures, wireline backhaul facilities, or cables between utility poles or
wireless support structures, or not otherwise immediately adjacent to and
directly associated with a specific antenna.



   WIRELESS SERVICE. Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless
spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or by means
of a mobile device, that is provided using wireless facilities. Wireless
service does not include services regulated under Title VI of the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, including cable service.



   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE.  A new or existing structure in a
right-of-way designed to support or capable of supporting small wireless
facilities, as reasonably determined by the city.




(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.23  ADMINISTRATION.




   The Director is the principal city official responsible for the
administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way permits, and the ordinances
related thereto.  The Director may delegate any or all of the duties
hereunder.





(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.24  UTILITY COORDINATION COMMITTEE.




   The city may create an advisory Utility Coordination Committee. 
Participation on the committee is voluntary.  It will be composed of any
registrants that wish to assist the city in obtaining information and by
making recommendations regarding use of the right-of-way, and to improve the
process of performing construction work therein.  The city may determine the
size of such committee and shall appoint members from a list of registrants
that have expressed a desire to assist the city.





(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.25  REGISTRATION AND RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY.




   (A)   Registration.  Each person who occupies, uses, or seeks to
occupy or use, the right-of-way or place any equipment or facilities in or on
the right-of-way, including persons with installation and maintenance
responsibilities by lease, sublease or assignment, must register with the
city.  Registration will consist of providing application information and
paying a registration fee.





   (B)   Registration prior to work.  No person may construct,
install, repair, remove, relocate, or perform any other work on, or use any
facilities or any part thereof in any right-of-way without first being
registered with the city.





   (C)   Exceptions.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to
repeal or amend the provisions of a city ordinance establishing the rights of
and limitations placed on persons to plant or maintain boulevard plantings or
gardens in the area of the right-of-way between their property and the street
curb.  Persons carrying out or requesting the following work shall not be
deemed to use or occupy the right-of-way within the meaning of this section,
and shall not be governed by this section.  Such work by non-right-of-way
users shall be regulated under the City Code chapter noted below, unless
provided otherwise.





      (1)   Other surface landscaping works;





      (2)   Planting or maintaining boulevard plantings or gardens;





      (3)   Construction and maintenance of driveways, sidewalks,
curb and gutter, or parking lots, except repairs or restoration necessitated
by utility cuts or other work;





      (4)   Construction or maintenance of street furnishings, bus
stop benches, shelters, or posts and pillars;





      (5)   Construction and maintenance of irrigation systems
provided that the system does not connect directly to water mains in the
right-of-way.





   (D)   Gopher One Call.  Nothing herein relieves a person from
complying with the provisions of M.S. Chapter 216D, Gopher One Call Law.





(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)





Cross-reference:





   Streets and sidewalks, see Ch. 96





   Grass, weed and tree regulations, see Ch. 97




§ 102.26  REGISTRATION INFORMATION.




   (A)   Information required.  The information provided to the city
at the time of registration shall include, but not be limited to:





      (1)   Each registrant's name, Gopher One Call facility owner
code number or other One Call identifier, address and e-mail address, and
telephone and facsimile numbers;





      (2)   The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and
telephone and facsimile numbers of a local representative.  The local
representative or designee shall be accessible for consultation at all
times.  Current information regarding how to contact the local
representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time of registration;





      (3)   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:





         (a)   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued
to the registrant by an insurance company authorized to do business in the
State of Minnesota, or a form of self-insurance acceptable to the city;





         (b)   Verifying that the registrant is insured against
claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property
damage arising out of the (i) use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the
registrant, its officers, agents, employees and permittees, and (ii)
placement and use of facilities and equipment in the right-of-way by the
registrant, its officers, agents, employees and permittees, including, but
not limited to, protection against liability arising from completed
operations, damage of underground facilities and collapse of property;




         (c)   Either naming the city as an additional insured as
to whom the coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for
whom defense will be provided as to all such coverages or otherwise providing
evidence satisfactory to the Director that the city is fully covered and will
be defended through registrant's insurance for all actions included in Minn.
Rule 7819.1250;



         (d)   Requiring that the city be notified 30 days in
advance of cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage
term;



         (e)   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage,
automobile liability coverage, workers’ compensation and umbrella coverage
established by the city in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the
public and to carry out the purposes and policies of this section;



         (f)   The city may require a copy of the actual
insurance policies if necessary to ensure the Director that the policy
provides adequate third-party claim coverage and city indemnity and defense
coverage for all actions included in the indemnity required by Minn. Rule 
7819.1250;



         (g)   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the
certificate required to be filed under Minnesota law as recorded and
certified by the Secretary of State;



         (h)   Such evidence as the Director may require that the
person is authorized to do business in Minnesota;



         (i)   A copy of the person's order granting a
certificate of authority from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or
other authorization or approval from the applicable state or federal agency
to lawfully operate, where the person is lawfully required to have such
authorization or approval from said commission or other state or federal
agency.



   (B)   Notice of changes.  The registrant shall keep all of the
information listed above current at all times by providing to the city
information as to changes within 15 days following the date on which the
registrant has knowledge of any change.




(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.27  REPORTING OBLIGATIONS.




   (A)   Operations.





      (1)   Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and
by December 1 of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan
for underground facilities with the city.  Such plan shall be submitted
using a format designated by the city and shall contain the information
determined by the city to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and
reduction in the frequency of excavations and obstructions of
rights-of-way.  If by December 1 the registrant has not developed its
construction and maintenance information for the coming year, the registrant
shall file such information with the city thereafter as soon as it is
developed. The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:





         (a)   The locations and the estimated beginning and
ending dates of all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year
(in this section, a “next-year project”); and





         (b)   To the extent known, the tentative locations and
estimated beginning and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the
five years following the next calendar year (in this section, a “five-year
project”).





      (2)   The term “project” in this section shall include
both next-year projects and five-year projects.





      (3)   By March 1 of each year and subject to the Minnesota
Data Practices Act the city will have available for inspection in the city's
office a composite list of all projects of which the city has been informed
of the annual plans.  All registrants are responsible for keeping themselves
informed of the current status of this list.  Thereafter, by March 1, each
registrant may change any project in its list of next-year projects, and must
notify the city and all other registrants of all such changes in said list.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a registrant may at any time join in a
next-year project of another registrant listed by the other registrant.





   (B)   Additional next-year projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
the city will not deny an application for a right-of-way permit for failure
to include a project in a plan submitted to the city if the registrant has
used commercially reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project.





(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.28  PERMIT REQUIREMENT.




   (A)   Permit required.  Except as otherwise provided in this code,
no person may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way without first having
obtained the appropriate right-of-way permit from the city to do so. 





      (1)   An excavation permit is required by a registrant to
excavate that part of the right-of-way described in such permit and to hinder
free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by
placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration
specified therein. 





      (2)   An obstruction permit is required by a registrant to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way
by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the extent and
for the duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not required if
a person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same project. 




      (3)   A small wireless facility permit is required by a
registrant to erect or install a wireless support structure, to collocate a
small wireless facility, or to otherwise install a small wireless facility in
the specified portion of the right-of-way, to the extent specified therein,
provided that such permit shall remain in effect for the length of time the
facility is in use, unless lawfully revoked.



      (4)   Other permits may be required for persons in accordance
with Chapter 96.  (See § 102.25(C)).



      (5)   Permits for installation, repair or otherwise work on
above-ground facilities within the meaning of M.S. § 237.163, Subd. 6(b)(4)
will be obstruction permits, notwithstanding the need for excavation,
provided the excavation is augered or hand-dug for the purpose of placing a
pole-type structure.



   (B)   Permit extensions.  No person may excavate or obstruct the
right-of-way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless (i) such
person makes a supplementary application for another right- of-way permit
before the expiration of the initial permit, or requests a verbal extension,
and (ii) a new permit or permit extension is granted.  Verbal extensions may
be granted by the Director for a period no greater than 48 hours or for
emergencies.



   (C)   Delay penalty.  In accordance with Minn. Rule 7819.1000,
Subp. 3, the city shall establish and impose a delay penalty for unreasonable
delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration. 
The delay penalty shall be established from time to time by City Council
resolution.  A delay penalty will not be imposed for delays due to force
majeure, including inclement weather, civil strife, acts of God, or other
circumstances beyond the control of the applicant.



   (D)   Permit display.  Permits issued under this subchapter shall
be conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the
indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by the city. 



   (E)   Routine maintenance not requiring excavation.  Routine
obstructions are permitted without separate notice and separate compensation
for such projects.  Projects that do not involve excavation and that last
less than eight hours in duration may, in the Director's discretion, be
considered routine maintenance and include by way of example, switching,
replacing fuses, replacing transformers, placing line guards, animal
protection, leak surveys and inspections.




(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.29  PERMIT APPLICATIONS.




   Application for a permit is made to the city.  Right-of-way permit
applications shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon
compliance with the requirements of the following provisions:





   (A)   Registration with the city pursuant to this subchapter;





   (B)   Submission of a completed permit application form, including
all required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location and area
of the proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed
facilities owned or operated by the applicant;





   (C)   Payment of money due the city for:





      (1)   Permit fees, estimated restoration costs and other
management costs; 





      (2)   Prior obstructions or excavations; 





      (3)   Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the
city because of applicant’s prior excavations or obstructions of the
rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the city;





   (D)   Payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting security
or depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least 100% of the
amount owing;





   (E)   Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond
for additional facilities when applicant requests an excavation permit to
install additional facilities and the city deems the existing construction
performance bond inadequate under applicable standards.





(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.30  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.




   (A)   Permit issuance.  If the applicant has satisfied the
requirements of this subchapter, the city shall issue a permit  within five
business days of receiving a completed application.





   (B)   Conditions.  The city may impose reasonable conditions upon
the issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the health, safety and welfare or when necessary to protect the
right-of-way and its current use.




      (1)   Small wireless facility conditions. In addition to
division (B) above, the erection or installation of a wireless support
structure, the collocation of a small wireless facility, or other
installation of a small wireless facility in the right-of-way, shall be
subject to the following conditions: A small wireless facility shall only be
collocated on the particular wireless support structure, under those
attachment specifications, and at the height indicated in the applicable
permit application.



      (2)   No new wireless support structure installed within the
right-of-way shall exceed 50 feet in height without the city's written
authorization, provided that the city may impose a lower height limit in the
applicable permit to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to
protect the right-of-way and its current use, and further provided that a
registrant may replace an existing wireless support structure exceeding 50
feet in height with a structure of the same height subject to such conditions
or requirements as may be imposed in the applicable permit.



      (3)   No wireless facility may extend more than ten feet above
its wireless support structure.



      (4)   Where an applicant proposes to install a new wireless
support structure in the right-of-way, the city may impose separation
requirements between such structure and any existing wireless support
structure or other facilities in and around the right-of-way.



      (5)   Where an applicant proposes collocation on a decorative
wireless support structure, sign or other structure not intended to support
small wireless facilities, the city may impose reasonable requirements to
accommodate the particular design, appearance or intended purpose of such
structure.



      (6)   Where an applicant proposes to replace a wireless
support structure, the city may impose reasonable restocking, replacement, or
relocation requirements on the replacement of such structure.



   (C)   Notification. The permittee shall notify in writing in a form
approved by the Director all residents specified by the Director whose
property is adjacent to the right-of-way where the proposed work is to be
done indicating start and completion dates.  Written notification is not
required for routine obstruction and maintenance projects described in §
102.28(E).



   (D)   Small wireless facility agreement. A small wireless facility
shall only be collocated on a small wireless support structure owned or
controlled by the city, or any other city asset in the right-of-way, after
the applicant has executed a standard small wireless facility collocation
agreement with the city. The standard collocation agreement may require
payment of the following:



      (1)   Up to $150 per year for rent to collocate on the city
structure;



      (2)   $25 per year for maintenance associated with the
collocation;



      (3)   A monthly fee for electrical service as follows:



         (a)   $73 per radio node less than or equal to 100
maximum watts;



         (b)   $182 per radio node over 100 maximum watts; or



         (c)   The actual costs of electricity, if the actual
cost exceed the foregoing.



The standard collocation agreement shall be in addition to, and not in lieu
of, the required small wireless facility permit, provided, however, that the
applicant shall not be additionally required to obtain a license or franchise
in order to collocate. Issuance of a small wireless facility permit does not
supersede, alter or affect any then-existing agreement between the city and
applicant.



   (E)   Action on small wireless facility permit applications.



      (1)   Deadline for action. The city shall approve or deny a
small wireless facility permit application within 90 days after filing of
such application. The small wireless facility permit, and any associated
building permit application, shall be deemed approved if the city fails to
approve or deny the application within the review periods established in this
section.



      (2)   Consolidated applications. An applicant may file a
consolidated small wireless facility permit application addressing the
proposed collocation of up to 15 small wireless facilities, or a greater
number if agreed to by a local government unit, provided that all small
wireless facilities in the application:



         (a)   Are located within a two-mile radius;



         (b)   Consist of substantially similar equipment; and



         (c)   Are to be placed on similar types of wireless
support structures.



In rendering a decision on a consolidated permit application, the city may
approve some small wireless facilities and deny others, but may not use
denial of one or more permits as a basis to deny all small wireless
facilities in the application.



      (3)   Tolling of deadline. The 90-day deadline for action on a
small wireless facility permit application may be tolled if:



         (a)   The city receives applications from one or more
applicants seeking approval of permits for more than 30 small wireless
facilities within a seven-day period. In such case, the city may extend the
deadline for all such applications by 30 days by informing the affected
applicants in writing of such extension.



         (b)   The applicant fails to submit all required
documents or information and the city provides written notice of
incompleteness to the applicant within 30 days of receipt the application.
Upon submission of additional documents or information, the city shall have
ten days to notify the applicant in writing of any still-missing information.



         (c)   The city and a small wireless facility applicant
agree in writing to toll the review period.




(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.31  PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Fee schedule and fee allocation. The city's permit fee
schedule shall be available to the public and established in advance where
reasonably possible. The permit fees shall be designed to recover the city's
actual costs incurred in managing the right-of-way and shall be based on an
allocation among all users of the right-of- way, including the city. 



   (B)   Excavation permit fee. The city shall establish an excavation
permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:



      (1)   City management costs;



      (2)   Degradation costs, if applicable.



   (C)   Obstruction permit fee.  The city shall establish the
obstruction permit fee and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the
city management costs.



   (D)   Small wireless facility permit fee. The city shall impose a
small wireless facility permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover:



      (1)   City management costs;



      (2)   City engineering, make-ready, and construction costs
associated with collocation of small wireless facilities.



   (E)   Payment of permit fees.  No excavation permit or obstruction
permit shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit
fees.  The city may allow applicant to pay such fees within 30 days of
billing, or on some other payment plan agreed to by the Director at his or
her discretion.



   (F)   Non-refundable.  Permit fees that were paid for a permit that
the city has revoked for a breach as stated in § 102.41 are not refundable.



   (G)   Application to franchises.  Unless otherwise agreed to in a
franchise, management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to
the franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.




(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.32  RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION.




   (A)   Timing.  The work to be done under the excavation permit, and
the patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under §
102.35.





   (B)   Patch and restoration.  Permittee must patch its own work. 
The city may choose either to have the permittee restore the surface and
subgrading portions of right-of-way or to restore the surface portion of
right-of-way itself in which the city will be reimbursed through the
permittees bond.  Patching must be completed within 48 hours of the
excavation within the street.





      (1)   Permittee restoration.  If the permittee restores the
right-of-way itself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation
permit post a construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions
of Minn. Rule 7819.3000.





      (2)   City restoration.  If the city restores the surface
portion of right-of-way, permittee shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days
of billing. If, following such restoration, the pavement settles or otherwise
fails for reasons not caused by city's failure to properly restore, the
permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, all costs
associated with correcting the defective work.





      (3)   Degradation fee in lieu of restoration.  In lieu of
right-of-way restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation
fee. However, the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for replacing
and compacting the subgrade and aggregate-based material in the excavation
and the degradation fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these
responsibilities.





   (C)   Standards. The permittee shall perform patching and
restoration according to the standards and with the materials specified by
the city and shall comply with Minn. Rule 7819.1100.





   (D)   Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects
in patching, or restoration performed by permittee or its agents.  Upon
notification from the city, permittee shall correct all restoration work to
the extent necessary, using the method required by the city.  Unless
otherwise agreed to by the Director, said work shall be completed within 14
calendar days of receipt of the notice from the city, not including days
during which work cannot be done because of circumstances constituting force
majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under
§ 102.35.




   (E)   Failure to restore. If the permittee fails to restore the
right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the city, or
fails to satisfactorily and promptly complete all restoration required by the
city, the city shall notify the permittee in writing of the specific alleged
failure or failures and shall allow the permittee 48 hours from receipt of
said written notice to cure said failure or failures, unless otherwise
extended by the Director.  In the event the permittee fails to cure, the
city may at its option perform the necessary work and permittee shall pay to
the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the
right-of-way.  If permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise
its rights under the construction performance bond.




(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.33  JOINT APPLICATIONS.




   (A)   Joint application.  Registrants may jointly apply for permits
to excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time.





   (B)   Shared fees.  Registrants who apply for permits for the same
obstruction or excavation, which the city does not perform, may share in the
payment of the obstruction or excavation permit fee.  In order to obtain a
joint permit, registrants must agree among themselves as to the portion each
will pay and indicate the same on their applications.





   (C)   With city projects.  Registrants who join in a scheduled
obstruction or excavation performed by the city, whether or not it is a joint
application by two or more registrants or a single application, are not
required to pay the excavation or obstruction and degradation portions of the
permit fee, but a permit would still be required.





(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.34  SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.




   (A)   Limitation on area.  A right-of-way permit is valid only for
the area of the right-of-way specified in the permit.  No permittee may do
any work outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein.
Any permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in
the permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that
greater area (i) make application for a permit extension and pay any
additional fees required thereby, and (ii) be granted a new permit or permit
extension.





   (B)   Limitation on dates.  A right-of-way permit is valid only for
the dates specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the
permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the
end date.  Except in the case of verbal extensions, if a permittee does not
finish the work by the permit end date, it must apply for a new permit for
the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit or an extension of
the old permit before working after the end date of the previous permit. 
This supplementary application must be submitted before the permit end date.





(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.35  OTHER OBLIGATIONS.




   (A)   Compliance with other laws.  Obtaining a right-of-way permit
does not relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits,
licenses, and authority and to pay all fees required by the city or other
applicable rule, law or regulation.  A permittee shall comply with all
requirements of local, state and federal laws, including M.S. §§ 216D.01,
et seq. (Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System).  A permittee shall
perform all work in conformance with all applicable codes and established
rules and regulations, and is responsible for all work done in the
right-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the work.





   (B)   Prohibited work.  Except in an emergency, or with the
approval of the city, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done
when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work.





   (C)   Interference with right-of-way.  A permittee shall not so
obstruct a right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water
through the gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with, unless
otherwise approved by the Director.  Private vehicles of those doing work in
the right-of-way may not be parked within or next to a permit area, unless
parked in conformance with city parking regulations.  The loading or
unloading of trucks must be done solely within the defined permit area unless
specifically authorized by the permit.




   (D)   Traffic control.  A permittee shall implement traffic control
measures in the area of the work and shall use traffic control procedures in
accordance with the most recent manuals on uniform traffic control, traffic
control devices and traffic zone layouts published by the State of Minnesota,
the city may require a traffic control plan prior to issuance of a permit.




(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.36  DENIAL OF PERMIT.




   The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and
conditions of this subchapter or if the city determines that the denial is
necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its current use.





(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.37  INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.



   The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other
work performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minn.
Rules 7819.1100, 7819.5000 and 7819.5100 and other applicable local
requirements such as the Brooklyn Park Standard Specifications, in so far as
they are not inconsistent with the M.S. § 237.162 and § 237.163. 
Installation of service laterals shall be performed in accordance with Minn.
Rules, Chapter 7560 and these ordinances. Service lateral installation is
further subject to those requirements and conditions set forth by the city in
the applicable permits and/or agreements.




(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.38  INSPECTION.




   (A)   Site inspection.  Permittee shall make the work site
available to the city and to all others as authorized by law for inspection
at all reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the
work. 





   (B)   Authority of director.





      (1)   At the time of inspection the Director may order the
immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life,
health, safety or well-being of the public.





      (2)   The Director may issue an order to the permittee to
correct any work that does not conform to the terms of the permit or other
applicable standards, conditions, or code.  If the work failure is a
“substantial breach” within the meaning of M.S. § 237.163, Subd. 4(c),
the order shall state that failure to correct the violation will be cause for
revocation of the permit after a specified period determined by the
Director.  The permittee shall present proof to the Director that the
violation has been corrected within the time period set forth by the Director
in the order.  Such proof shall be provided no later than the next business
day following the day of completion.  If such proof has not been presented
within the required time, the Director may revoke the permit pursuant to §
102.41.





(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.39  WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.



   (A)   Emergency situations.  Each registrant shall immediately
notify the Director of any event regarding its facilities that the registrant
considers to be an emergency.  The registrant may proceed to take whatever
actions are necessary to respond to the emergency.  Within two business days
after the occurrence of the emergency, unless the Director allows a longer
time, the registrant shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees
associated therewith and fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary to
bring itself into compliance with this subchapter for the actions it took in
response to the emergency. If the Director concludes that a registrant is
required to perform work at the facility solely because of an emergency
created by another registrant and the work is performed in the immediate area
of the emergency work, the Director may waive the permit otherwise required
by the registrant(s) called to the emergency created by another party. If the
city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant's facilities, the
city will contact the registrant's emergency phone number as registered with
the city or listed in the phone directory.  The city will make the area
safe, as necessary.  If there is no response from the registrant, the city
may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the
cost of which shall be borne by the permittee or registrant whose facilities
occasioned the emergency.



   (B)   Non-emergency situations.  Except in an emergency, any person
who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or
excavates a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit, pay an
unauthorized work permit fee in an amount established from time to time by
the City Council, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any
damage to the right-of-way and comply with all of the requirements of this
subchapter.




(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.40  SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.




   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or
ends sooner than the date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the
city of the accurate information as soon as this information is known.





(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.41  REVOCATION OF PERMITS.




   (A)   Substantial breach.  The city reserves its right to revoke
any right-of-way permit, without a fee refund, if there is a substantial
breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance, rule or
regulation, or any material condition of the permit.  A substantial breach
by permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:





      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the
right-of-way permit;





      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of
the right-of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any
fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens;





      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the
application for a right-of-way permit;





      (4)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner;
unless a permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work
is due to reasons beyond the permittee's control; or





      (5)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that
does not conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to §
120.30.





   (B)   Written notice of breach.  If the city determines that the
permittee has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any
statute, ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit the city
shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. 
The demand shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation
of the permit.  A substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city
to place additional or revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and
remedy the breach. 




   (C)   Response to notice of breach.  Within a time established by
the Director following permittee's receipt of notification of the breach,
permittee shall provide the city with a plan to cure the breach, acceptable
to the city.  Permittee's failure to submit a timely and acceptable plan, or
permittee's failure to timely implement the approved plan, shall be cause for
immediate revocation of the permit. 



   (D)   Reimbursement of city costs.  If a permit is revoked, the
permittee shall also reimburse the city for the city's reasonable costs,
including restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred in connection with such revocation.




(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.42  MAPPING DATA. 




   Each registrant and permittee shall provide mapping information in a
form required by the city in accordance with Minn. Rules 7819.4000 and
7819.4100.





(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.43  UNDERGROUNDING.




   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to promote the
health, safety and general welfare of the public and is intended to foster
(i) safe travel over the right-of-way, (ii) non-travel related safety around
homes and buildings where overhead feeds are connected and (iii) orderly
development in the city.  Location and relocation, installation and
reinstallation of facilities in the right-of-way or in or on other public
ground must be made in accordance with this section.  This section is
intended to be enforced consistently with state and federal law regulating
right-of-way users, specifically including but not limited to M.S. §§
161.45, 237.162, 237.163, 300.03, 222.37, 238.084 and 216B.36 and the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 U.S.C. § 253.





   (B)   Undergrounding of facilities.  Facilities newly installed,
constructed or otherwise placed in the public right-of-way or in other public
property held in common for public use must be located and maintained
underground pursuant to the terms and conditions of this section and in
accordance with applicable construction standards, subject to the exceptions
below.  Above-ground installation, construction, modification, or
replacement of meters, gauges, transformers, street lighting, pad mount
switches, capacitor banks, re-closers and service connection pedestals shall
be allowed.  The requirements of this section shall apply equally outside of
the corporate limits of the city coincident with city jurisdiction of
platting, subdivision regulation or comprehensive planning as may now or in
the future be allowed by law. 





   (C)   Undergrounding of permanent replacement, relocated or
reconstructed facilities.  If the city finds that one or more of the
purposes set forth in division (A) would be promoted, the city may require a
permanent replacement, relocation or reconstruction of a facility of more
than 300 feet to be located, and maintained underground, with due regard for
seasonal working conditions.  For purposes of this section, reconstruction
means any substantial repair of or any improvement to existing facilities. 
Undergrounding may be required whether a replacement, relocation or
reconstruction is initiated by the right-of-way user owning or operating the
facilities, or by the city in connection with (1) the present or future use
by the city or other local government unit of the right-of-way or other
public ground for a public project, (2) the public health or safety, or (3)
the safety and convenience of travel over the right-of-way.





   (D)   Exceptions to undergrounding.  The following exceptions to
the strict application of this section shall be allowed upon the conditions
stated:





      (1)   Transmission lines.  Above-ground installation,
construction, or placement of those facilities commonly referred to as
“high voltage transmission lines” shall be allowed unless the Council
requires undergrounding of the facilities after providing the right-of-way
user notice and an opportunity to be heard.  This provision shall not be
construed as waiving the requirements of any other ordinance or regulation of
the city as the same may apply to any such proposed project.





      (2)   Technical/economic feasibility; promotion of policy. 
Above-ground installation, construction, or placement of facilities shall be
allowed in residential, commercial and industrial areas where the Council,
following consideration and recommendation by the Planning Commission, finds
that:





         (a)   Underground placement would place an undue
financial burden upon the landowner, ratepayers, or right-of-way user or
would deprive the landowner of the preservation and enjoyment of substantial
property rights; or,





         (b)   Underground placement is impractical or not
technically feasible due to topographical, subsoil or other existing
conditions which adversely affect underground facilities placement; or





         (c)   The right-of-way user clearly and convincingly
demonstrates that none of the purposes under division (A) would be advanced
by underground placement of facilities on the project in question, or the
city determines on its own review that undergrounding is not warranted based
on the circumstances of the proposed undergrounding.





      (3)   Temporary service.  Above-ground installation,
construction, or placement of temporary service lines shall only be allowed:





         (a)   During new construction of any project for a
period not to exceed 24 months;





         (b)   During an emergency in order to safeguard lives or
property within the city;





         (c)   For a period of not more than seven months when
soil conditions make excavation impractical.




   (E)   Developer responsibility.  All owners, platters, or
developers are responsible for complying with the requirements of this
section, and prior to final approval of any plat or development plan, shall
submit to the Director written instruments from the appropriate right-of-way
users showing that all necessary arrangements with said users for
installation of such facilities have been made.




(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.44  LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.




   (A)   Placement, location, and relocation of facilities must comply
with the Act, with other applicable law, and with Minn. Rules 7819.3100,
7819.5000 and 7819.5100, to the extent the rules do not limit authority
otherwise available to cities.




      (1)   Relocation notification procedure.  The Director shall
notify the utility owner at least three months in advance of the need to
relocate existing facilities so the owner can determine if relocation or
replacement is required and plan any required work.  The Director shall
provide a second notification to the owner one month before the owner needs
to begin the relocation.  The utility owner shall begin relocation of the
facilities within one month of the second notification.  To the extent
technically feasible, all utilities shall be relocated within one month or in
a time frame determined by the Director.  The Director may allow a different
schedule if it does not interfere with the city's project.  The utility
owner shall diligently work to relocate the facilities within the above
schedule.



      (2)   Delay to city project.  The Director shall notify the
utility owner if the owner's progress will not meet the relocation
schedule.  If the owner fails to meet the relocation schedule due to
circumstances within the utility's control, the city may charge the utility
owner for all costs incurred by the city because the relocation is not
completed in the scheduled timeframe.



      (3)   Joint trenching.  All facilities shall be placed in
appropriate portions of right-of-way so as to cause minimum conflict with
other underground facilities.  When technically appropriate and no safety
hazards are created, all utilities shall be installed, constructed or placed
within the same trench. Notwithstanding the foregoing, gas and electric lines
shall be placed in conformance with Minn. Rules 7819.5100, Subd. 2, governing
safety standards. 



   (B)   Corridors.  The city may assign a specific area within the
right-of-way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each
type of facilities that are or, pursuant to current technology, the city
expects will be located within the right-of-way.  All excavation,
obstruction, or other permits issued by the city involving the installation
or replacement of facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the
facilities at issue. A typical crossing section of the location for utilities
may be on file at the Director's office.  This section is not intended to
establish “high density corridors.”  Any registrant who has facilities
in the right- of-way in a position at variance with the corridors established
by the city may remain at that location until the city requires facilities
relocation to the corridor pursuant to relocation authority granted under
Minn. Rules 7819.3100 or other applicable law.



   (C)   Limitation of space.  To protect the public health, safety,
and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current
use, the city shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new
or additional facilities within the right-of-way.  In making such decisions,
the city shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and
potential users of the right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by
considerations of the public interest, the public's needs for the particular
utility service, the condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with
respect to essential utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the
right-of-way, and future city plans for public improvements and development
projects which have been determined to be in the public interest.



   (D)   Service laterals.  All permits issued for the installation or
repair of service laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in Minn.
Rules 7560.0150, Subp. 2, shall require the permittee's use of appropriate
means of establishing the horizontal locations of installed service laterals
and the service lateral vertical locations in those cases where the director
reasonably requires it. Permittees or their subcontractors shall submit to
the director evidence satisfactory to the director of the installed service
lateral locations. Compliance with this subdivision and with applicable
Gopher State One Call law and Minnesota Rules governing service laterals
installed after December 31, 2005 shall be a condition of any city approval
necessary for:



      (1)   Payments to contractors working on a public improvement
project including those under M.S. Chapter 429; and



      (2)   City approval under development agreements or other
subdivision or site plan approval under M.S. Chapter 462. The director shall
reasonably determine the appropriate method of providing such information to
the city. Failure to provide prompt and accurate information on the service
laterals installed may result in the revocation of the permit issued for the
work or future permits to the offending permittee or its subcontractors.




(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.45  PRE-EXCAVATION FACILITIES LOCATION.



   In addition to complying with the requirements of M.S. §§ 216D.01, et
seq. (One Call Excavation Notice System) before the start date of any
right-of-way excavation, each registrant who has facilities or equipment in
the area to be excavated shall be responsible to mark the horizontal
placement of all said facilities, to the extent technically feasible. To the
extent its records contain such information, each registrant shall provide
information regarding the approximate vertical location of their facilities
to excavators upon request.  Nothing in this section is meant to limit the
rights, duties and obligations of the facility owners or excavators as set
forth in M.S. § 216D.01, et seq.




(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.46  INTERFERENCE BY OTHER FACILITIES.



   When the city does work in the right-of-way in its governmental
right-of-way management function and finds it necessary to maintain, support,
or move a registrant's facilities to carry out the work without damaging
registrant's facilities, the city shall notify the local representative as
early as is reasonably possible.  The city costs associated therewith will
be billed to that registrant and must be paid within 30 days from the date of
billing.  Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any
facilities in the right-of-way which it or its facilities damages.




(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.47  RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION; RESERVATION OF RIGHT.



   If the city vacates a right-of-way that contains the facilities of a
registrant, the registrant's rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed
by Minn. Rules 7819.3200.




(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.48  INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.




   By registering with the city, or by accepting a permit under this
subchapter, a registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the city
in accordance with the provisions of Minn. Rule 7819.1250.





(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.49  ABANDONED FACILITIES.




   (A)   Discontinued operations.  A registrant who has decided to
discontinue all or a portion of its operations in the city must provide
information satisfactory to the city that the registrant’s obligations for
its facilities in the right-of-way under this subchapter have been lawfully
assumed by another registrant.





   (B)   Removal.  Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any
right-of-way shall remove them from that right-of-way pursuant to Minn. Rule
7819.3300, unless the requirement is waived by the Director.





(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




§ 102.50  APPEAL.




   A right-of-way user that: (1) has been denied registration; (2) has
been denied a permit; (3) has had permit revoked; or (4) believes that the
fees imposed are not in conformity with M.S. § 237.163, Subd. 6 may have the
denial, revocation, or fee imposition reviewed, upon written request, by the
City Council.  The City Council shall act on a timely written request at its
next regularly scheduled meeting.  A decision by the City Council affirming
the denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be in writing and supported by
written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision.





(Ord. 2003-1005, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 2017-1225, passed 12-4-17)




CHAPTER 103:  BUILDING CODE



Section




General Provisions




   103.01   Building Code



   103.02   Fees and charges



   103.03   Public utilities; underground installation



   103.04   Parking lot permits



   103.05   Temporary residences




Dangerous Buildings




   103.60   Dangerous buildings defined



   103.61   Standards for repair, vacation or demolition



   103.62   Notice




Mechanical and Plumbing Contractor Licenses




   103.75   License requirements



   103.76   Application



   103.77   License fee



   103.78   Surety bond



   103.79   Insurance provisions



Cross-reference:



   Board of Appeals and Adjustment, see §§ 31.15 et seq.



   Planning Commission, see §§ 31.60 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 103.01  BUILDING CODE.



   (A)   Codes adopted by reference. The Minnesota State Building Code
("MSBC"), as adopted by the Commissioner of Labor and Industry pursuant to
M.S. §§ 16B.59 to 16B.75, including all of the amendments, rules and
regulations established, adopted and published from time to time by the
Minnesota Commissioner of Labor and Industry, through the Building Codes and
Standards Unit, is hereby adopted by reference with the exception of the
optional chapters, unless specifically adopted in this section. The Minnesota
State Building Code is hereby incorporated in this section as if fully set
out in full.



   (B)   Application, administration and enforcement.  The
application, administration and enforcement of the building code shall be in
accordance with Minnesota State Building Code. The code shall be enforced
within the extraterritorial limits permitted by M.S. § 16B.62, Subd. (1), if
so established by this section.  The code enforcement agency of the city is
the Building Inspection Division.  The building code shall be enforced by
the city's Certified Building Official, as designated by M.S. § 16B.65,
Subd. (1).



   (C)   Permits and fees.  The issuance of permits and the collection
of fees shall be as authorized in M.S. § 16B.62, Subd. (1).  Permit fees
shall be assessed for work governed by the code in accordance with the fee
schedule adopted by the City Council.  In addition, a surcharge fee shall be
collected on all permits issued for work governed by this code in accordance
with M.S. § 16B.70.



      (1)   Building valuation.  Building valuation for the purpose
of establishing building permit fees is as set forth by the most current
Building Valuation Data published by the Minnesota Department of Labor and
Industry, Building Codes and Standards Unit.



      (2)   Residential contractor license check.  As provided by
M.S. Ch. 306, for any residential building contractor required to be licensed
by the state, the applicant for a building permit for residential work must
pay a fee  for a building permit for administration and review of
residential contractor licenses.  The fee is in an amount as established by
the fee resolution, set forth in the Appendix to this code.



   (D)   Violations and penalties.  It is unlawful to perform any work
subject to the building code for which a permit is required without obtaining
the permit and having paid the fees required herein.  Permits, inspections,
and collections of fees are as authorized in M.S. § 16B.62, Subd. (1).  A
violation of the building code is a misdemeanor.



   (E)   Building code optional chapters.  The Minnesota State
Building Code, established pursuant to M.S. §§ 16B.59 to 16B.75, allows
cities to adopt by reference and enforce certain optional chapters of the
most current edition of the Minnesota State Building Code.  The following
optional provisions identified in the most current edition of the State
Building Code are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the building
code for the city:



      (1)   Chapter 1306 -   Special Fire Protection Systems
option,  incorporating subpart 2 (Existing and New Buildings).



('72 Code, § 315:00)  (Am. Ord. 1993-744, passed 11-22-93; Am. Ord.
1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 1996-830, passed 12-16-96; Am. Ord.
1998-891, passed 12-14-98; Am. Ord. 2003-999, passed 6-2-03; Am. Ord.
2007-1075, passed 8-20-07)



§ 103.02  FEES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   Basic fees. 



      (1)   The fee for any building permit is determined by the
Building Official in accordance with the provisions of § 103.01.  The fees
established and set forth therein or in other sections of the city code must
be collected where applicable by the Building Official before the issuance of
any permits.  The Building Official must not issue any such permits for
which the payment of a fee is required by the schedules until the fee is
paid.  Applications must be filed as required by this code or as established
by the Building Official.  All fees collected must be paid to the Finance
Director by the Inspection Department daily, or as soon after collection as
practicable.



      (2)   Prior to the issuance of any building permit which
requires on-site improvements, including but not limited to the construction
of parking facilities, garbage refuse pickup stations, lighting, landscape,
fencing, or items spelled out in a conditional use permit, the City Council
or the Building Official must require a contract and a surety bond
guaranteeing to the city the actual construction and installation of the
improvements within the period specified in the contract and bond, not
exceeding two years.



('72 Code, § 505:00)  (Am. Ord. 1980-346(A), passed 12-8-80; Am. Ord.
1981-351(A), passed 11-22-93; Am. Ord. 1993-744, passed 11- 22-93)



   (B)   Miscelaneous fees required.  The Building Official must not
issue permits for any construction, maintenance, reconstruction,
improvements, or uses governed by the MSBC without collecting the fees as
established in the schedule set forth in the Appendix to this code.



   (C)   Moving and routing.  Moving of any structure and the routing
thereof must be cleared through the Director of Public Works with
notification to the Police Department for approval of the route and time of
the move.  All permits must comply with Section 364.12 and the provisions of
Section 446 of the city code and M.S. § 221.81, as amended.



   (D)   Demolition and moving of buildings; fees required.  Before
issuing any building moving permit or a permit for the demolition of any
building or structure, the Building Official must require the payment, by the
applicant, of fees in accordance with the schedule established by the fee
resolution, set forth in the Appendix to this code.



   (E)   Underground liquid storage system permit fees.  Fees for the
installation, alteration, reconstruction, removal, or repair of any
underground liquid storage system are computed and based upon valuations in
accordance with the schedule set forth in the Appendix to this code.



   (F)   Fire suppression system/fire alarm system permit; fees
required.  The installation of any fire suppression sprinkler equipment or
system requires the payment by the applicant of fees in the amount provided
by the fee resolution, set forth in the Appendix to this code.  No permit
for the installation of any fire suppression equipment or system or
installation of any fire alarm equipment or system will be issued until the
applicant files with the Building Official a complete set of plans for such
system and approval obtained by the Fire Chief.



   (G)   False statements, violations, and penalties.  It is unlawful
to make any false statement in connection with the securing of any permit
from the Inspection Department. It is unlawful to violate any provision of
§§ 103.02, 93.30 et seq., 93.50 et seq., 99.75 et seq., 100.55 et seq.,
92.37(B), 151.014, 99.01 et seq., 99.15 et seq., or 99.30 through 99.41, or
make any false statement in the affidavit as sworn statement made, as
required by this code, in connection with the securing of any permit from the
Inspection Department.  Any person who violates any of the provisions of
this code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who violates or
fails to comply with any order made thereunder, or who builds in violation of
any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no
appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed
or modified by the Building Inspector or by a court of competent
jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, severally for each and every such
violation and noncompliance respectively is guilty of a misdemeanor.  The
imposition of one penalty for any violation does not excuse the violation or
permit it to continue; and all such persons are required to correct or remedy
the violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise
specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained constitute
a separate offense.  The application of the above penalty is not held to
prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.



('72 Code, § 505:10)  (Ord. 1977-237(A), passed 2-28-77; Am. Ord.
1989-630(A), passed 8-28-89; Am. Ord. 1990-660(A), passed 10-8- 90; Am. Ord.
1993-744, passed 11-22-93; Am. Ord. 2003-999, passed 6-2-03)



§ 103.03  PUBLIC UTILITIES; UNDERGROUND INSTALLATION.



   (A)   Applicability of provisions.  The section applies to all
buildings in the process of being erected on and after its effective date.



   (B)   Underground installation.  Utility lines for telephone, cable
television, streetlights or other exterior lighting, and all electrical
service from existing above-ground trunk systems to the structure must be
placed underground.  The building official may make appropriate allowance
for appurtenances and associated equipment including, but not limited to,
surface- mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes, and meter
cabinets.  All such installation must be made in conformance with the
Minnesota State Building Code, city ordinances, and standards supplemental to
this section as deemed necessary by the City Engineer.



   (C)   Intent.  It is the intent of this section to supplement the
provisions of § 151.086(J) and (K) by requiring underground installation of
electrical and other utility service from existing above-ground trunk systems
to the structure in all new building construction in the city.  Areas of
residential housing which are clearly serviced by existing overhead wires and
onto which a new building is being constructed are exempt from the provisions
of this section.



('72 Code, § 315.60)  (Ord. 1974-161(A), passed 2-11-74; Am. Ord. 1995-779,
passed 4-24-95)



§ 103.04  PARKING LOT PERMITS.



   (A)   In all zoning districts in the city it is illegal to expand or
create new parking areas in excess of 3000 square feet without first
obtaining a permit from the City Planning Director, unless the parking area
has been approved as part of a new or amended conditional use permit or has
received approval as part of the building permit process.



   (B)   All plans for new or expanded parking areas in excess of 3000
square feet must be prepared by a licensed professional engineer and must
adhere to all applicable provisions contained in the Zoning Code relative to
off-street parking areas.  A person must not begin work to construct such a
parking area for which a permit is required without obtaining the permit and
having paid the fees required herein.  Fees collected for the permit are in
accordance with a fee schedule established by the City Council by resolution
set forth as an Appendix to this code.



('72 Code, § 315.75)  (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 103.05  TEMPORARY RESIDENCES.



   (A)   Special approval permit.  Temporary special approval permits
may be issued by the City Council for the use of a recreational vehicle or
manufactured home as a principal residence when it can be demonstrated by the
applicant that the main residence is uninhabitable due to either manmade or
natural disasters.  The purpose of this section is to allow temporary
housing for residents on their property while the main residence is being
repaired or rebuilt.  This subsection does not apply to on-site construction
offices or construction related trailers used in residential development or
utility or industrial building projects.



   (B)   Permit application.  Application for a special approval
permit must be made to the Community Development Department under the
provisions of this section, and must be forwarded to the City Council.  An
administrative decision may be allowed to be made regarding the temporary
occupancy of a trailer, recreational vehicle, or manufactured home prior to
City Council action if a situation is deemed to be an emergency and within
the scope of this section.



   (C)   Information required.  The application for a temporary
special approval permit must be accompanied by the following items:



      (1)   A letter stipulating the proposed length of occupancy in
the temporary residence.



      (2)   The type, size, and facilities of the trailer,
recreational vehicle, or manufactured home to be occupied.



      (3)   A description of how on-site septic disposal will be
treated.



      (4)   A map showing the location of where the temporary
residence is to be located.



      (5)   A statement setting forth the cause of disaster and
extent of damages to the residence.



   (D)   City Council action.  Any affirmative City Council action
must stipulate a maximum period of time that the permit will be in effect,
sanitation concerns, and any special conditions that will provide protection
for the applicant or surrounding landowners relevant to their health, safety,
or general welfare.



('72 Code, § 315.80)  (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



DANGEROUS BUILDINGS



§ 103.60  DANGEROUS BUILDINGS DEFINED.



   (A)   Any building or structure which has any or all of the
following defects may be deemed a dangerous building:



      (1)   Those whose walls or other structural members list, lean
or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of
gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base.



      (2)   Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33% or
more, of damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members, or 50%
of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or
covering.



      (3)   Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the
floors or roofs, or in which the same are overloaded, or which have
insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.



      (4)   Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other
causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals, or the general
health and welfare of the occupant or the people of this municipality.



      (5)   Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed,
unsafe, unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities
essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or are
likely to cause sickness or disease, or to work injury to the health, morals,
safety or general welfare of those occupying or using the same.



      (6)   Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which
are inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of
human beings who live or may live therein.



      (7)   Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of
fire or panic.



      (8)   Those which have parts thereof which are so attached
that they may be dangerous to and injure members of the public or the
property of others.



      (9)   Those which because of their condition are unsafe,
unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of
the people of this city.



      (10)   Those buildings existing in violation of any provision
of any ordinance of the city relating to the construction of buildings, or
the installation therein or thereon of heating, plumbing or electrical
equipment, appliances or devices.



   (B)   All dangerous buildings within the terms of this section are
hereby declared to be public and private nuisances and they must be repaired,
vacated or demolished as hereinafter provided.



('72 Code, § 1005:00)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 103.61  STANDARDS FOR REPAIR, VACATION OR DEMOLITION.



   The following standards must be followed in substance by the Building
Official and the Council in ordering, repair, vacation or demolition:



   (A)   If the “dangerous building” can reasonably be repaired so
that it will no longer constitute a dangerous building under this subchapter,
it will be ordered repaired.



   (B)   If the “dangerous building” is in such condition as to
make it dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of its
occupants, it will be ordered to be vacated.



   (C)   Any “dangerous building” ordered to be vacated must also
be ordered to be either repaired or demolished.



   (D)   In all cases where a “dangerous building” cannot be
repaired so that it will no longer exist as a “dangerous building” under
the terms of this subchapter, it must be ordered to be demolished in
accordance with the provisions of M.S. §§ 463.17 through 463.25.



   (E)   In any case where a “dangerous building” is 50% damaged,
decayed or deteriorated from its original condition and construction, it must
be ordered to be demolished in accordance with the provisions of M.S.Chapter
463.



   (F)   In each case when a “dangerous building” is ordered to be
repaired, vacated and repaired, vacated and demolished, or demolished if
already vacant, a reasonable time must be specified within which the ordered
action may readily be accomplished.



('72 Code, § 1005:10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 103.62  NOTICE.



   In the event that any “dangerous building” is found within this
city, the Council or such officer as may be designated by the Council, must
notify in writing by mail, the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent and
all other persons having an interest in the building as shown by the records
of the County Auditor of the County of Hennepin, of any building so found. 
The notice must state the requirement that the owner must vacate or demolish
the building in accordance with the terms of the notice and this subchapter;
the occupant or lessee must vacate said building, or may have it repaired in
accordance with the notice and remain in possession, or the mortgagees,
agents or other persons having an interest in said building may at their own
risk, repair, vacate or demolish the building or have the work or act done,
and the notice must state that such persons must be given such reasonable
time as may be necessary to do or have done the work or act required by the
notice provided for herein.



('72 Code, § 1005:15)



MECHANICAL AND PLUMBING CONTRACTOR LICENSES



§ 103.75  LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.



   It is unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to engage in
businesses regulated by the Minnesota State Building Code (MSBC), Chapter
1346, or Chapter 4715, Minnesota Plumbing Code, for any purpose whatsoever in
this city without first having procured a license therefor as herein provided.



   (A)   Mechanical contractor license.  It is unlawful for a person
to engage in any businesses regulated by MSBC Chapter 1346, without first
having procured a license therefore from the City Building Official.  The
license will be issued only to persons who show a thorough understanding of
the laws and regulations governing such work and who demonstrate sufficient
knowledge, skill and training as to enable them to carry on the work covered
by their license.



   (B)   Plumbing contractor license.  Persons engaged in businesses
regulated by MSBC Chapter 4715, Minnesota Plumbing Code, must be licensed by
the State of Minnesota pursuant to M.S. Chapter 326.



('72 Code, § 323:00)  (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 2003-999,
passed 6-2-03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   General business licenses, see Ch. 110



§ 103.76  APPLICATION.



   Application for a license must be made to the Building Official and the
license will be granted on proof of the applicant's qualifications
therefor.  The term of a license is from January 1 through December 31 of
each calendar year.



('72 Code, § 323:10)  (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 103.77  LICENSE FEE.



   The license fee is in the amount set by the City Council  in the
schedule set forth in the Appendix to this code. No license fee is charged
for plumbing contractors licensed by the State of Minnesota.



('72 Code, § 323:15)  (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 2003-999,
passed 6-2-03)



§ 103.78  SURETY BOND.



   (A)   The applicant for a license or permit must furnish a surety
bond to the city in the total penal sum of $2,000 for mechanical and $25,000
for pipe layers and plumbers, which is conditioned upon the faithful and
lawful performance of all work entered upon within the city.  The bond is
for the benefit of persons injured or suffering financial loss by reason of
failure of performance.  The term of the bond must be concurrent with the
term of the license.  The bond must be written by a corporate surety
licensed to do business in the State of Minnesota.



   (B)   The bond must be filed with the city prior to licensure,
except that the applicant may provide to the city a certificate evidencing
that the applicant has given bond to the State of Minnesota, pursuant to M.S.
§ 326.40, Subd. 2, and that the bond is in force and on file with the
Secretary of State.  If said certificate is provided, a separate bond is not
required by the city.



('72 Code, § 323:20)  (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



§ 103.79  INSURANCE PROVISIONS.



   (A)   No license or permit will be issued unless and until the
applicant first provides evidence to the city of public liability insurance,
including products liability insurance with limits of at least $50,000 per
person and $100,000 per occurrence and property damage insurance with limits
of at least $10,000. The insurance must be written by an insurer licensed to
do business in the State of Minnesota and each licensee must maintain on file
with the city a certificate evidencing the insurance and providing that the
insurance must not be cancelled without the insurer first giving 15 days
written notice to the city.  The term of the insurance must be concurrent
with the term of the license.



   (B)   The certificate evidencing insurance must be filed with the
city prior to licensure, except that the applicant may provide to the city a
certificate evidencing that the applicant has filed evidence of insurance
with the State of Minnesota, pursuant to M.S. § 326.40, Subd. 2 and that the
evidence of insurance is in force and on file with the State Commissioner of
Health.  If the certificate is provided, then separate evidence of insurance
is not required by the City of Brooklyn Park.



('72 Code, § 323:25)  (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)



CHAPTER 104:  ILLICIT DISCHARGE



Section



   104.01   Purpose



   104.02   Definitions



   104.03   Applicability



   104.04   Responsibility for administration



   104.05   Severability



   104.06   Ultimate responsibility



   104.07   Lawn fertilizer restrictions



   104.08   Discharge prohibitions



   104.09   Watercourse protection



   104.10   Industrial or construction activity discharges



   104.11   Monitoring of discharges



   104.12   Best management practices



   104.13   Notification of spills



   104.14   Enforcement



   104.15   Appeal of notice of violation



   104.16   Enforcement measures after appeal



   104.17   Cost of abatement of the violation



   104.18   Injunctive relief



   104.19   Violations deemed a public nuisance



§ 104.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Brooklyn Park
through the regulation of non-storm water discharges to the storm drainage
system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state
law. This chapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of
pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to
comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit process.



   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:



      (1)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by storm water discharges by any
user.



      (2)   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the
municipal separate storm sewer system.



      (3)   To establish legal authority to carry out all
inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure
compliance with this chapter.



(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)



§ 104.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY.  The City of Brooklyn Park.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS). Schedules of activities, prohibitions
of practices, general good house keeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
storm water, receiving waters, or storm water conveyance systems. BMPS also
include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from
raw materials storage.



   CLEAN WATER ACT. The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §
1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.



   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY.  Activities subject to NPDES Construction
Permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of
one acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and
grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.



   ILLICIT CONNECTION. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system
including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-storm water
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the
storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor
drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been
previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement
agency or, any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans,
maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.



   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to
the storm drain system, except as exempted in this chapter.



   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as
defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14).



   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). The system of conveyances
(including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) owned and
operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying storm
water, and is not used for collecting or conveying sewage.



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER
DISCHARGE PERMIT.  A permit issued by EPA (or by a State under authority
delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342 (b)) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable
on an individual group, or general area-wide basis.



   NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drain system that
is not composed entirely of storm water.



   PERSON. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and action as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.



   POLLUTANT.  Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
POLLUTANTS may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded
or abandoned objects, pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes and residues that result from constructing a building
or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.



   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.



   STORM DRAIN SYSTEM. Publicly-owned facilities by which storm water is
collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm
drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.



   STORM WATER.  Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting
entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from
such precipitation.



   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN.  A document which describes the
best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or
business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the
actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to storm water, storm
water conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent
practicable.



   WASTEWATER.  Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
storm water, discharged from a facility.



(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)



§ 104.03  APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed or undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by
the City of Brooklyn Park.



(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)



§ 104.04  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.



   The City of Brooklyn Park shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon city
may be delegated in writing by the City Engineer to persons or entities
acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the city.



(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)



§ 104.05  SEVERABILITY.



   The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If
any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be
held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or
application of this chapter.



(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)



§ 104.06  ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.



   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter
and minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend or imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.



(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)



§ 104.07  LAWN FERTILIZER RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Timing of fertilizer application. No lawn fertilizer shall be
applied when the ground is frozen and in no event during the period of
November 15 through April 1 of the succeeding year.



   (B)   Impervious surfaces.  Lawn fertilizer shall not be applied,
spilled or otherwise deposited on any impervious surfaces.  Any lawn
fertilizer applied, spilled or deposited, either intentionally or
accidentally, on impervious surface shall be immediately and completely
picked up.



   (C)   Buffer zones.  No lawn fertilizer shall be applied within any
established wetland buffer zone or within 20 feet of the edge of any wetland,
pond, river, creek or lake.



   (D)   Lawn fertilizer content and application rate.  No lawn
fertilizer containing any amount of phosphorus or other compounds containing
phosphorus, such as phosphate shall be applied to any turf within the city
except when the following conditions apply:



      (1)   Newly established turf areas for the turf's first
growing season; or



      (2)   In turf areas which a soil test confirms that the turf
area is below phosphorus levels established by the University of Minnesota
Extension Service. The fertilizer to be applied shall not contain an amount
of phosphorus that exceeds the amount of phosphorus and the appropriate
application rate recommended in the soil test evaluation.



   (E)   Notice requirement.  Retail businesses selling lawn
fertilizer containing phosphorus shall post a notice in a conspicuous
location near the lawn fertilizer notifying customers of the limitation on
the use of lawn fertilizer containing phosphorous contained in this section.



   (F)   Violations. For the first 12 months following the effective
date of this section, no penalty shall attach to its violation. Thereafter, a
person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a petty
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties imposed by
Minnesota Statutes for petty misdemeanor offenses.



(Ord. 2-17-1217, passed 7-10-17)



§ 104.08  DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge
or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or
watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters
containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of
applicable water quality standards, other than storm water. The commencement,
conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is
prohibited except as described as follows:



      (1)   The following discharges are exempt from discharge
prohibitions established by this chapter: water line flushing or other
potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream
flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains,
uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not
including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air
conditioning condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles,
natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, dechlorinated swimming pools, and
any other water source not containing pollutants.



      (2)   Discharges specified in writing by the authorized by the
city as being necessary to protect public health and safety.



      (3)   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a
verbal notification to the city agency prior to the time of the test.



      (4)   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water
discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order
issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the
Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full
compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.



   (B)   Prohibition of illicit connections.



      (1)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued
existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.



      (2)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation,
illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time
of the connection.



      (3)   A person is considered to be in violation of this
chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows
such a connection to continue.



      (4)   Improper connections in violation of this chapter must
be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite
wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval from
the city.



      (5)   Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in
plans, maps, or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer
system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon
receipt of written notice of violation from the city requiring that such
locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period
within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be determined,
that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer, or
that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system,
sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of
these investigations are to be documented and provided to the city.



(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)



§ 104.09  WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.



   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or
such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse
within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other
obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow
of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall
maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a
watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use,
function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.



(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)



§ 104.10  INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.



   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
storm water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to
the City Council prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.



(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)



§ 104.11  MONITORING OF DISCHARGES.



   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that
have storm water discharges associated with industrial activity, including
construction activity.



   (B)   Access to facilities.



      (1)   The city or their designee shall be permitted to enter
and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this chapter as often as
may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. If a discharger
has security measures in force which require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the
necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city.



      (2)   Facility operators shall allow the city ready access to
all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of
an NPDES permit to discharge storm water, and the performance of any
additional duties as defined by state and federal law.



      (3)   The city shall have the right to set up on any permitted
facility such devises as are necessary in the opinion of the city to conduct
monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's storm water discharge.



      (4)   The city has the right to require the discharger to
install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devises used to
measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy.



      (5)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy
access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall
not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
operator.



      (6)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a
permitted facility are a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of
this chapter. A person who is the operator of the facility with a NPDES
permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity commits
an offense if the person denies the city reasonable access to the permitted
facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by
this chapter.



      (7)   If the city has been refused access to any part of the
premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the city is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with
this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public
health, safety and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance
of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)



§ 104.12  BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.



   The city will adopt requirements identifying best management practices
(BMPs) of any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute
to pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm drain system, or
waters of the U.S. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial
establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the
municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these
structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a
property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge,
may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural
and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system.  Compliance with all terms and
conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm water
associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be
deemed compliant with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be
part of a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for
compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.



(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)



§ 104.13  NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.



   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm drain
system, or water of the U.S. said person shall take all necessary steps to
ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event
of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify
emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch
services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person
shall notify the city in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the
next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by
written notice addressed and mailed to the city within three business days of
the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a
commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such
establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge
and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be
retained for at least three years.



(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)



§ 104.14  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Notice of violation.



      (1)   Whenever the city finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the city may
order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. 
The notice of violation shall contain:



         (a)   The name and address of the alleged violator;



         (b)   The address when available or a description of the
building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has
occurred;



         (c)   A statement specifying the nature of the violation;



         (d)   A description of the remedial measures necessary
to restore compliance with this chapter in a time schedule for the completion
of such remedial action;



         (e)   A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall
or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed;



         (f)   A statement that the determination of violation
may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 15
days of service of notice of violation; and



         (g)   A statement specifying that, should the violator
fail to restore compliance within the established time schedule, the work
will be done by the city or their designee and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.



      (2)   Such notice may require without limitation:



         (a)   The performance of monitoring, analysis, and
reporting;



         (b)   The elimination of illicit connections or
discharges;



         (c)   That violating discharges, practices, or
operations shall cease and desist;



         (d) The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution
or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;



         (e)   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and
remediation costs;



         (f)   The implementation of source control or treatment
BMPs.



   (B)   Compensatory action. In lieu of enforcement proceedings,
penalties, and remedies authorized by this chapter, the city may impose upon
a violator alternative compensatory action, such as storm drain stenciling,
attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.



   (C)   Suspension of MS4 access.



      (1)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency
situations. The city may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access
to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to
the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or
waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a
suspension order issued in an emergency, the city may take such steps as
deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the
United States, or to minimize danger to persons.



      (2)   Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge.
Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have their
MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit
discharge. The city will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its
MS4 access. The violator may petition the city for reconsideration and a
hearing.  A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to
premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of
the city.



   (D)   Criminal prosecution. Any person that has violated or
continues to violate this chapter shall be liable to criminal prosecution to
the fullest extent of the law, and shall be subject to a criminal penalty of
$1,000 per violation per day and/or imprisonment for a period of time not to
exceed 90 days. The city may recover all attorneys' fees, court costs, and
other expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter, including
sampling and monitoring expenses.



(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)



§ 104.15  APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination
of the city. The notice of appeal must be received within 15 days from the
date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate
authority or his/her designee shall take place within 15 days from the date
of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the city or their
designee shall be final.



(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)



§ 104.16  ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL.



   If the violation had not been corrected pursuant to the requirements
set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within
15 days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of
the city, then representatives of the city shall enter upon the subject
private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to
abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any
person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to
allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the
premises for the purposes set forth above.



(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)



§ 104.17  COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION.



   Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the
property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative
costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount
of the assessment within 15 days. If the amount due is not paid within a
timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority, the
charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall
constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.  Any
person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to
the city by reason of such violation.



(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)



§ 104.18  INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated
and continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the city may
petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person
from activities which would create further violations or compelling the
person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.



(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)



§ 104.19  VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions
of this Chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is
declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at
the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.



(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)



CHAPTER 105:  SWIMMING POOLS



Section



   105.01   Public swimming pools



   105.02   License required



   105.03   Permits required



   105.04   Fencing of swimming pools



   105.05   Inspections



   105.06   Additional provisions



Cross-reference:



   General business licenses, see Ch. 110



§ 105.01  PUBLIC SWIMMING POOLS.



   Public swimming pools, spas and hot tubs must be installed and
maintained in accordance with rules and regulations of the Minnesota
Department of Health relating to public swimming pools and entitled Public
Swimming Pools, Chapter 4717.



('72 Code, § 432:00)  (Ord. 1972-106, passed 5-8-72; Am. Ord. 1995-779,
passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 105.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   All public swimming pools in the city as defined in the regulations
must be licensed annually and inspected by the city.



   (A)   Application.  Application for a license must be made to the
Licensing Division.  The term of a license is from May 1 through April 30 of
each calendar year.



   (B)   License fee.  The license fee is in the amount set by the
City Council in the fee resolution as set forth in the Appendix to this code.



   (C)   No person may construct or operate a public swimming pool
without first having obtained a license from the city under this chapter and
without first having received plan review approval from the Minnesota
Department of Health.



('72 Code, § 432:02)  (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95; Am. Ord. 2012-1135,
passed 3-26-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 105.03  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   Unless exempt under the provisions of Minnesota State Building Code, it
is unlawful to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, or locate any swimming pool,
spa or hot tub on any property within the city or cause the same to be done
without first obtaining a building permit from the City Building Official. 
This requirement applies to any public swimming pool, and to any private
swimming pool constructed above or below ground level if the depth of the
pool is in excess of 24 inches.



('72 Code, § 432:05)  (Ord. 1995-779, passed 4-24-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 105.04  FENCING OF SWIMMING POOLS.



   (A)   Barrier required.  Every person in possession of land within
the city either as owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant or
licensee, upon which is situated a swimming pool including permanent swimming
pools, portable pools, spas and hot tubs must at all times provide and
maintain barriers for swimming pools, spas and hot tubs as required herein.



   (B)   Public pool barriers.  For public pools, barriers must be
installed and inspected and approved in accordance with Rule 4717.1550,
“Pool Access Restriction; Fencing,” as authorized by M.S. Chapter 144.05.



   (C)   Private pool barriers.  For private pools in excess of 24
inches in depth, barriers must be installed in accordance with the following:



      (1)   The barrier must be constructed of corrosion and decay
resistant materials or other materials approved by the City Building
Official.  The barrier must not be less than four feet in height and must
have no intermediate openings through which a four inch sphere may pass. 
The bottom of the barrier must be not more than four inches above the
sidewalk or finished grade.  For barriers constructed in excess of six feet
six inches in height, the City Building Official may require that the barrier
be designed or certified by a Minnesota Licensed Professional Engineer to
withstand a minimum basic wind speed of 80 miles per hour.



      (2)   Gates and doors through the barrier must not exceed four
feet in width unless approved by the City Building Official.  A gate serving
a driveway must not be used to meet the barrier requirements of this
section.  All gates or doors opening through the barrier must be equipped
with self-closing and self- latching devices capable of keeping the doors or
gates securely closed at all times; provided, however, that doors accessing
the pool area from a dwelling and forming any part of the barrier need not be
so equipped.  Gates and doors through the barrier must be capable of being
securely locked when the pool is not in use.  All latches or locking devices
on doors and gates required by this section must be installed not less than
four feet above the adjoining walks, steps, or ground level.



      (3)   Where an above ground pool structure is used as a
barrier, or when the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, the
barrier must comply with subdivisions (1) and (2) above.  Where the means of
access is by ladder or steps, then the ladder or steps must be capable of
being secured, locked or removed to prevent access or the ladder or steps
must be surrounded by a barrier which meets the requirements of subdivisions
(1) and (2) above.  When the ladder or steps are secured, locked or removed,
any opening created must be protected by a barrier complying with
subdivisions (1) and (2) above.



      (4)   The requirements of this section requiring a barrier or
other solid structure surrounding a swimming pool on all sides, may be waived
to the extent that the topographical features of the land upon which the pool
is constructed or is proposed to be constructed are such as to make the pool
area inaccessible and unapproachable from outside the pool area.



('72 Code, § 432:10)  (Ord. 1972-115, passed 7-10-72; Am. Ord. 1985-496(A),
passed 9-23-85; Am. Ord. 1996-830, passed 12-16-96)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 105.05  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The city will inspect each public swimming pool in connection
with:



      (1)   New construction;



      (2)   Remodeling;



      (3)   A complaint investigation; or



      (4)   A routine inspection. 



   (B)   Access to premises.  The person operating the public swimming
pool must, upon request of the Health Authority and after proper
identification, permit access to all parts of the swimming pool, its related
equipment to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter. 



   (C)   Removal and correction of violations.  The owner or operator
of a public swimming pool, upon receipt of a report giving notification of
violations with the provisions of this chapter, must correct or remove each
violation in a reasonable length of time as determined by the city.  Failure
to remove or correct each violation within the time period noted on the
inspection report constitutes a violation of this chapter. The city may issue
enforcement actions to ensure compliance with this chapter.



(Ord. 2012-1135, passed 3-26-12)



§ 105.06  ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.



   Except as otherwise modified in this chapter, the following provisions,
including all future revisions to them, in Minnesota Statutes and Minnesota
Rules, are adopted by reference into this chapter:



   (A)   M.S. Chapter 157, except § 157.16;



   (B)   M.S. § 144.1222, except Subdivisions 1 and 1a; and



   (C)   Minn. Rules parts 4717.0150 through 4717.3975.



(Ord. 2012-1135, passed 3-26-12)



CHAPTER 106: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE



Section



   106.01   Adoption of the International Property Maintenance Code



   106.02   Amendments to International Property Maintenance Code



§ 106.01  ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.



   The 2012 International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), as promulgated
by the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted by reference and
incorporated into the city code in whole as if it was set out in full,
subject to the amendments contained in this chapter.



(Ord. 2001-955, passed 8-13-01; Am. Ord. 2009-1104, passed 9-8-09; Am. Ord.
2016-1207, passed 9-12-16)



§ 106.02  AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.



   The following amendments are made to the 2012 International Property
Maintenance Code:



   (A)   Section 101.1 Title.  These regulations shall be known as the
Property Maintenance Code of the City of Brooklyn Park, hereinafter referred
to as “this code.”



   (B)   Section 102.3 Application of other codes.  Repairs, additions
or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy shall be done in
accordance with the procedures and provisions of the Minnesota State Building
Code (MSBC), established pursuant to M.S. §§ 326B.101 to 326B.194, as
adopted by the city. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel,
modify or set aside any provision of the MSBC or the City of Brooklyn Park
Zoning Code.



   (C)   Section 102.7 Referenced codes and standards.  The codes and
standards referenced in this code shall be those listed in Chapter 8, those
listed in the MSBC, and considered part of the requirements of this code to
the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between
provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this
code shall apply to the extent permitted by law and regulation.



   (D)   Section 103.1 General.  The City Manager or his or her
designee is responsible for administering the provisions of this code, and
the executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the Code Official.



   (E)   Section 103.2 Appointment.  The Code Official shall be
appointed by the chief appointing authority of the jurisdiction.



   (F)   Section 103.5 Fees.  The fees for activities and services
performed in carrying out  responsibilities under this code shall be in
amounts set forth by the City Council.



   (G)   Section 106.4 Violation penalties.  Any person who shall
violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of
the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by
state or local laws. Each day a violation continues after due notice has been
served may be deemed a separate offense.



   (H)   Section 106.6 Execution of compliance orders by public
authority.  Upon failure to comply with a compliance order within the time
set therein (and no appeal having been taken), or upon failure to comply with
a modified compliance order within the time set therein, the criminal penalty
established hereunder notwithstanding, the City Council, after due notice to
the owner, may by resolution cause the cited deficiency to be remedied as set
forth in the compliance order. The cost of such remedy is a lien against the
subject real estate. Such a lien may be levied and collected as a special
assessment in the manner provided by M.S. Chapter 429.  It may be levied for
any of the reasons set forth in M.S § 429.101, Subd. 1, and specifically for
the removal or elimination of public health or safety hazards from private
property. However, the assessment must be payable in a single installment. It
is the intent of this section to authorize the city to utilize all of the
provisions of M.S. § 429.101 to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare.



   (I)   Section 108.4 Placarding.  Upon failure of the owner or
person responsible to comply with the notice provisions within the time
given, the code official shall post on the premises or on defective equipment
a placard and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the
premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard.



   (J)   Section 111. Not adopted. 



   (K)   Section 112.4 Failure to comply.  Any person who shall
continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or
unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than collectable by
the city charter but less than 100%.



   (L)   Section 201.3 Terms defined in other codes.  Where terms are
not defined in this code and are defined in the MSBC and the City of Brooklyn
Park  Zoning Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
those codes.



   (M)   Section 202 General definitions. 



      CODE OFFICIAL. The official charged with the administration and
enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized representative. For the
purpose of administration and enforcement of this code, the Building Official
shall be the CODE OFFICIAL.



      UNSANITARY.  Failure to maintain a property in such a manner
that creates a danger or hazard to the health of persons occupying or
frequenting it.  Conditions caused by deterioration or improper
installation, methods or materials of construction, equipment, lighting,
heating, ventilation, or plumbing, or from existing conditions related to
trash, debris, or moisture that may cause infestation or mold.



   (N)   Section 302.4 Weeds.  Not adopted.



   (O)   Section 304.19 Gates.  In accordance with the MSBC, gates
required to be self-closing and self-latching shall be maintained such that,
when released, they will positively close and latch.



   (P)   Section 302.8 Motor vehicles.  Not adopted.



   (Q)   Section 302.9 Defacement of property.  Not adopted.



   (R)   Section 304.3 Premises identification.  Buildings shall have
approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and
visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall: 
contrast with their background, be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters, and
be a minimum of six inches high with a minimum stroke width of one-half inch.



   (S)   Section 304.1.1 Unsafe conditions.  The following conditions
shall be determined as unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced to comply
with the MSBC or the International Existing Building Code as required for
existing buildings:



      1.   The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded
by nominal loads, the load effects or the required strength;



      2.   The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns,
and of walls and columns to foundations is not capable of resisting all
nominal loads or load effects;



      3.   Structures or components thereof that have reached their
limit state;



      4.   Siding and masonry joints including joints between the
building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights are not
maintained, weather resistant or water tight;



      5.   Structural members that have evidence of deterioration or
that are not capable of safely supporting all nominal loads and load effects;



      6.   Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by
footings, are not plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, are not
properly anchored or are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and
resisting all load effects;



      7.   Exterior walls that are not anchored to supporting and
supported elements or are not plumb and free of holes, cracks or breaks and
loose or rotting materials, are not properly anchored or are not capable of
supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;



      8.   Roofing or roofing components that have defects that
admit rain, roof surfaces with inadequate drainage, or any portion of the
roof framing that is not in good repair with signs of deterioration, fatigue
or without proper anchorage and incapable of supporting all nominal loads and
resisting all load effects;



      9.   Flooring and flooring components with defects that affect
serviceability or flooring components that show signs of deterioration or
fatigue, are not properly anchored or are incapable of supporting all nominal
loads and resisting all load effects;



      10.   Veneer, cornices, belt courses, corbels, trim, wall
facings and similar decorative features not properly anchored or that are
anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and
resisting all load effects;



      11.   Overhang extensions or projections including, but not
limited to, trash chutes, canopies, marquees, signs, awnings, fire escapes,
standpipes and exhaust ducts not properly anchored or that are anchored with
connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all
load effects;



      12.   Exterior stairs, decks, porches, balconies and all
similar appurtenances attached thereto, including guards and handrails, are
not structurally sound, not properly anchored or that are anchored with
connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all
load effects; or



      13.   Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks and similar
appurtenances not structurally sound or not properly anchored, or that are
anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and
resisting all load effects.



      Exceptions:



         1.   When substantiated otherwise by an approved method.



         2.   Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted
when approved by the code official.



   (T)   Section 304.14 Insect screens.  During the period from May 15
to October 15, every door, window and other outside opening required for
ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas,
or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human
consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be
supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per
inch. Every swinging door shall also have a self-closing device in good
working condition.



   (U)   Section 305.1.1 Unsafe conditions.  The following conditions
shall be determined as unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced to comply
with the MSBC or the International Existing Building Code as required for
existing buildings:



      1.   The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded
by nominal loads, the load effects or the required strength;



      2.   The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns,
and of walls and columns to foundations is not capable of resisting all
nominal loads or load effects;



      3.   Structures or components thereof that have reached their
limit state;



      4.   Structural members are incapable of supporting nominal
loads and load effects;



      5.   Stairs, landings, balconies and all similar walking
surfaces, including guards and handrails, are not structurally sound, not
properly anchored or are anchored with connections not capable of supporting
all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;



      6.   Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by
footings are not plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, are not properly
anchored or are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all
load effects.



      Exceptions:



         1.   When substantiated otherwise by an approved method.



         2.   Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted
when approved by the code official.



   (V)   Section 403.4 Process ventilation.  In accordance with the
MSBC and the State Fire Code (SFC), where injurious, toxic, irritating or
noxious fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust
ventilation system shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at its
source. Air shall be exhausted to the exterior and not be re-circulated to
any space.



   (W)   Section 403.5 Clothes dryer exhaust.  Clothes dryer exhaust
systems shall be independent of all other systems, and shall be exhausted in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and the State Mechanical
Code (SMC).



   (X)   Section 502.3 Hotels. Not adopted. 



   (Y)   Section 504.1 General.  All plumbing fixtures shall be
properly installed and maintained in working order.  They shall be kept free
from obstructions, leaks and defects, capable of performing the functions for
which they were designed. In accordance with the Minnesota State Plumbing
Code (MSPC), all plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary
and functional condition.



   (Z)   Section 505.1  Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower,
drinking fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly
connected to either a public water system or an approved private water
system.  In accordance with the MSPC, all kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry
facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with cold and hot or
tempered running water.



   (AA)   Section 602.1 Facilities required.  Heating facilities shall
be provided in structures as required by this section and the MSBC.



   (BB)   Section 602.2 Residential occupancies.  Dwellings shall be
provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of
68° F in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. This is based on
the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality indicated in the
Minnesota State Energy Code (MSEC). Cooking appliances shall not be used to
provide space heating to meet the requirements of this section.



   (CC)   Section 602.3 Heat supply.  During the period from September
15 to May 15, every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or
lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guestroom on
terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof
shall supply heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 68° F in all
habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms.



      EXCEPTION: When the outdoor temperature is below the winter
outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room
temperature shall not be required, provided that the heating system is
operating at its full design capacity.



   (DD)   Section 602.4 Occupiable work spaces. When occupied during
the period from September 15 to May 15, indoor occupiable work spaces shall
be supplied with heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 68° F.



   (EE)   Section 603.5 Combustion air.  In accordance with the
Minnesota State Mechanical Code (MSMC ), a supply of air shall be provided
for complete fuel combustion and for ventilation of the space containing the
fuel-burning equipment.



   (FF)   Section 604.1 Facilities required.  Every occupied building
shall be provided with an electrical system in compliance with the
requirements of this section, Section 605 of the IPMC, and the National
Electrical Code (NEC) as adopted by the MSBC.



   (GG)   Section 604.2 Service.  In accordance with the NEC, the size
and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining
the need for additional facilities. Dwelling units shall be served by a
three-wire, 120/240-volt, single-phase electrical service with a rating of
not less than 60 amperes.



   (HH)   Section 604.3.1.1 Electrical equipment.  Electrical
distribution equipment, motor circuits, power equipment, transformers, wire,
cable, flexible cords, wiring devices, ground fault circuit interrupters,
surge protectors, molded case circuit breakers, low-voltage fuses,
luminaires, ballasts, motors and electronic control, signaling and
communication equipment that have been exposed to water shall be replaced in
accordance with the provisions of the NEC and the MSBC.



   (II)   Section 604.3.2.1 Electrical equipment. Electrical switches,
receptacles and fixtures, including furnace, water heating, security system
and power distribution circuits, that have been exposed to fire, shall be
replaced in accordance with the provisions of the NEC and the MSBC.



   (JJ)   Section 701. Scope.  Under the provisions of this chapter,
the MSFC shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for fire safety
relating to structures and exterior premises, including fire safety
facilities and equipment to be provided.



   (KK)   Section 702.1 General.  A safe continuous and unobstructed
path of travel shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to
the public way. Means of egress shall comply with the Minnesota State
Building Code.



   (LL)   Section 702.2 Aisles.  In accordance with the MSFC, the
required width of aisles shall be unobstructed.



   (MM)   Section 702.3 Locked doors.  All means of egress doors shall
be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the
need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware
conforms to that permitted by the MSBC.



   (NN)   Section 702.4 Emergency escape openings.  Required emergency
escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room,
without the use of keys or tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices
are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings.
However, such devices must provide a minimum net clear opening size that
complies with the MSBC. They shall also be releaseable or removeable from the
inside, without the use of a key, tool, or force greater than that required
for the normal operation of the escape and rescue opening. Where such bars,
grilles, grates or similar devices are installed in existing buildings, smoke
detectors shall be installed in accordance with Section 704 of the IPMC.



   (OO)    Section 704.1 General. All systems, devices and equipment to
detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any
combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times
in accordance with the MSBC.



   (PP)   Section 800 General references.  Whenever this code refers
to the International Codes, such references shall be deemed to be to the
comparable applicable code as adopted by the state. Whenever this code refers
to the International Zoning Code, such references shall be deemed to be the
City of Brooklyn Park Zoning Ordinance.



(Ord. 2001-955, passed 8-13-01; Am. Ord. 2009-1104, passed 9-8-09; Am. Ord.
2016-1207, passed 9-12-16)



CHAPTER 107:  GRAFFITI



Section



   107.01   Findings and purpose



   107.02   Definitions



   107.03   Prohibited acts



   107.04   Graffiti as nuisance



   107.05   Removal of graffiti



   107.06   Abatement procedure



 



   107.99   Penalties



§ 107.01  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   The City Council of the city is enacting this chapter to help
prevent the spread of graffiti vandalism and to establish a program for the
removal of graffiti from public and private property.



   (B)   The Council finds that graffiti is a public nuisance and
destructive of the rights and values of property owners as well as the entire
community.  Graffiti perpetrators are often associated with other criminal
activities, including violent crimes.  Unless the city acts to remove
graffiti from public and private property, the graffiti tends to remain. 
Other properties then become the target of graffiti and entire neighborhoods
are affected and become less desirable places in which to be, all to the
detriment of the city.



   (C)   The City Council intends, through the adoption of this
chapter, to provide additional enforcement tools to protect public and
private property from acts of graffiti vandalism and defacement of public and
private property.  The council does not intend for this chapter to conflict
with any existing anti-graffiti state laws or  "criminal damage to property"
laws.



(Ord. 2002-972, passed 5-13-02)



§  107.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words will have the
meaning provided to them, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning.



   AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER .  Any aerosol container that is adapted or
made for the purpose of applying spray paint or other substances capable of
defacing property.



   BROAD-TIPPED MARKER .  Any felt tip indelible marker or similar
implement with a flat or angled writing surface that, at its broadest width,
is greater than one-fourth of an inch, containing ink or other pigmented
liquid that is not water soluble.



   ETCHING EQUIPMENT .  Any tool, device, or substance that can be used
to make permanent marks on any natural or man-made surface.



   GRAFFITI .  Any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting,
symbol, or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched,
sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface
of public or private property by any graffiti implement, to the extent that
the graffiti was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant of the
property, or despite advance authorizations otherwise deemed a public
nuisance by the City Council.



   GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT .  An aerosol paint container, a broad-tipped
marker, gum label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or
any other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural
or man-made surface.



   PAINT STICK OR GRAFFITI STICK .  Any device containing a solid form of
paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied
to a surface by pressure and leaving a mark of at least one-fourth of an inch
in width.



(Ord. 2002-972, passed 5-13-02)



§ 107.03  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   Defacement.  It is unlawful for any person to apply graffiti
to any natural or man-made surface on any publicly owned property or, without
the permission of the owner or occupant, on any privately owned property.



   (B)   Possession of graffiti implements.  Unless otherwise
authorized by the owner or occupant, it is unlawful for any person to possess
any graffiti implement while:



      (1)   Within 200 feet of any graffiti located in or on a
public facility, park, playground, swimming pool, recreational facility,
bridge, or other public building or structure owned or operated by a
governmental agency; or



      (2)   Within 200 feet of any graffiti located in any public
place or on private property, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.



(Ord. 2002-972, passed 5-13-02)  Penalty, see § 107.99



§ 107.04  GRAFFITI AS NUISANCE.



   (A)   Declaration.  The existence of graffiti on public or private
property in violation of this chapter is expressly declared to be a public
nuisance and, therefore, is subject to the removal and abatement provisions
specified in this chapter.



   (B)   Duty of property owner.  It is the duty of both the owner of
the property to which the graffiti has been applied and any person who may be
in possession or who has the right to possess such property to at all times
keep the property clear of graffiti.



   (C)   Repeat violations.  If a property is subject to three or more
occurrences of graffiti within a year, application of anti-graffiti material
of a type and nature that is acceptable to the city may be required for each
of the publicly viewable surfaces after notification by the city, or imposed
during improvements or construction activities to the site as determined by
the city.



(Ord. 2002-972, passed 5-13-02)  Penalty, see § 107.99



§ 107.05 REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI.



   (A)   By perpetrator.  The city may require any person applying
graffiti on public or private property to either remove or pay for all costs
for removal of the graffiti within 24 hours after notice by the city or
property owner.  The removal must be performed in a manner prescribed by the
city, with materials and colors compatible with existing surfaces, and to a
comparable or improved condition before the graffiti application as
determined by the city.  Where graffiti is applied by a person under 18
years old, the parents or legal guardian will also be responsible for such
removal or for payment for the costs of removal.  Failure of any person to
remove graffiti or pay for the removal will constitute an additional
violation of this chapter.



   (B)   By property owner or city.  In lieu of the procedure set
forth in division (A), the city may order that the graffiti be removed by the
property owner or any person who may be in possession or who has the right to
possess such property, pursuant to the nuisance abatement procedure herein. 
Graffiti removal and corrections must be performed with materials and colors
compatible with existing surfaces as determined by the city.  If the
property owner or responsible party fails to remove offending graffiti within
the time specified by the city, the city may commence abatement and cost
recovery proceedings for the graffiti removal in accordance with this chapter.



(Ord. 2002-972, passed 5-13-02)



§ 107.06 ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Abatement by city.  If the owner, occupant, or other
responsible party does not comply with the notice within the time specified,
the city may abate the public nuisance.



   (B)   Notice and Hearing.  The following notification must be
conducted prior to city abatement of the public nuisance.  Whenever it is
determined that a public nuisance is being maintained or exists on a
property, the Manager or authorized designee must give ten day's written
notice through service by mail, by posting a notice on the property, or by
personal delivery to the owner of or person in control of the property on
which the public nuisance is located.  When the property is occupied,
service upon the occupant is deemed service upon the owner.  Where the
property is unoccupied or abandoned, service may be by mail to the last known
owner of record of the property or by posting on the property.  The notice
must state:



      (1)   A description of the public nuisance;



      (2)   That the public nuisance must be corrected within ten
days of the service of the notice;



      (3)   That if the public nuisance is not properly removed or
corrected as ordered, the public nuisance will be abated by the city and the
costs of abatement will be specially assessed to the property taxes;



      (4)   That the owner of or person in control of the property
on which the public nuisance is located may in writing request a hearing
before the City Manager or authorized designee.



   (C)   Hearing, action.  If a hearing is requested during the
ten-day period, the City Manager or authorized designee must promptly
schedule the hearing, and no further action on the abatement of the public
nuisance may be taken until the manager's decision is rendered.  At the
conclusion of the scheduled hearing, the manager or authorized designee may
cancel the notice to remove or correct the public nuisance, modify the
notice, or affirm the notice to remove or correct the public nuisance.  If
the notice is modified or affirmed, the public nuisance must be disposed of
in accordance with the city's written order.



   (D)   Summary abatement.  The enforcing officer may provide for
abating a public nuisance without following the procedure required in
division (B) when:



      (1)   There is an immediate threat to the public health or
safety;



      (2)   There is an immediate threat of serious property damage;



      (3)   A public nuisance has been caused by private parties on
public property; or



      (4)   Any other condition exists that violates state or local
law and that is a public health or safety hazard.



   A reasonable attempt must be made to notify the owner, occupant, or
other responsible party of the intended action and the right to appeal the
abatement and cost recovery at the next regularly scheduled City Council
meeting.



   (E)   Cost recovery.  The owner of property on which a nuisance has
been abated by the city, or a person who has caused a public nuisance on
property not owned by that person, is personally liable to the city for the
cost of the abatement, including administrative costs.  As soon as the work
has been completed and the cost determined, an appropriate official will
prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner or other responsible
party.  The amount is immediately due and payable to the city.



   (F)   Assessment.  If the cost, or any portion of it, has not been
paid within 30 days after the date of the bill, the council may certify the
unpaid cost against the property to which the cost is attributable in
accordance with the process set forth in § 94.07 of this Code.



(Ord. 2002-972, passed 5-13-02)



§ 107.99 PENALTIES.



   (A)   Any violation of this section is a misdemeanor, punishable in
accordance with state law.



   (B)   Any violation of this chapter may be subject to civil
penalties in accordance with Chapter 37 of the city code.



   (C)   This chapter is not intended to prohibit a private property
owner from seeking additional penalties or remedies.



(Ord. 2002-972, passed 5-13-02)



CHAPTER 108:  STORM SEWER UTILITY



Section



   108.01   Statutory authority



   108.02   Findings and purpose



   108.03   System established



   108.04   Rates and charges



   108.05   Use of revenues



§ 108.01  STATUTORY AUTHORITY.



   M.S. §  444.075 ("the Act"), authorizes cities to impose just and
reasonable charges for the use and availability of storm sewer facilities
("charges").  By this chapter, the city elects to exercise such authority.



(Ord. 2002-981, passed 11-25-02)



§ 108.02  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.



   In providing for such charges, the following findings and
determinations are made:



   (A)   In the exercise of its governmental authority and in order to
promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare, the city
has constructed, operated and maintained a storm sewer system (the
"system").  This chapter is adopted in the further exercise of such
authority.



   (B)   The system, as constructed, heretofore has been financed and
paid for through the imposition of special assessments and ad valorem
taxes.  Such financing methods were appropriate to the circumstances at the
time they were used.  It is now necessary and desirable to provide an
alternative method of recovering some or all of the future costs of
operating, maintaining and improving the system through the imposition of
charges as provided in this section.



   (C)   In imposing charges, it is necessary to establish a
methodology that undertakes to make them just and equitable.  Taking into
account the status of completion of the system, past methods of recovering
system costs, and other relevant factors, it is determined that it would be
just and equitable to assign responsibility for some or all of the future
costs of operating, maintaining and improving the system on the basis of the
expected storm water runoff from the various parcels of land within the city.



   (D)   Assigning costs and making charges based upon expected typical
storm sewer runoff cannot be done with mathematical precision but can only be
accomplished within reasonable and practical limits based upon use.



(Ord. 2002-981, passed 11-25-02)



§ 108.03  SYSTEM ESTABLISHED



   A city storm sewer system is hereby established.  The system consists
of all storm sewer conduits, manholes and catch basins, ditches and ponds
within the public right-of-way and storm sewer conduits, manholes and catch
basins in public purpose easements as of January 1, 2003, and any additional
storm sewer facilities acquired by the city in the future.



(Ord. 2002-981, passed 11-25-02)



§ 108.04  RATES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   Land use rate calculation.  Rates and charges for the use and
availability of the system are to be determined through the use of a
"residential equivalent factor" which is defined as the ratio of the average
volume of surface water runoff coming from one acre of land subjected to a
particular use, to the average volume of runoff coming from one acre of land
subject to typical single-family residential use within the city during a
standard rainfall event.  All developed single-family parcels shall be
considered to have an acreage of one-third acre per unit.  Calculations for
stormwater utility rates for various land uses are based upon their
residential equivalent factor (REF).  The REF values for various land uses
are as follows:



 

Land Use Class
 
REF


Single Family Residential
 
1.00


Townhouse/Two-Family Residential
 
1.20


Multi-Family Residential (Four-plex and up)
 
1.30


Business
 
2.10


Industrial
 
2.40


School/Church
 
1.00



 



   (B)   Calculation of fees.  The service charge to be billed each
billing unit shall be a fair and equitable share of the total costs of the
system.  Further, service charges shall be apportioned to similar land uses
of property similarly.  From time to time the City Council shall adopt a
resolution establishing a class charge rate calculation table for all billing
units.  These quarterly charges shall be listed in the City Code Appendix
fee resolution table.



   (C)   Other land uses.  Other land uses not listed in the City Code
Appendix class charge rate calculation table are to be classified by the City
Manager or authorized designee, by assigning them to the classes most nearly
like the listed uses, from the standpoint of probable hydrologic response. 
Appeals from the City Manager or authorized designee's determination of the
proper classifications may be made to the City Council in the same manner as
other appeals from administrative determinations.



   (D)   Adjustment of charges.  The City Council may by resolution,
from time to time, adopt policies providing for the adjustment of charges for
parcels or grounds of parcels, based upon data supplied by affected property
owners, demonstrating an actual runoff volume substantially different from
the calculation being used for the class of parcel or parcels.  The
adjustment may be made only after receiving the recommendation of the City
Manager or authorized designee and may not be made effective retroactively. 
If the adjustment would have the effect of changing the calculation for all
or substantially all of the land uses in a particular classification,
however, such adjustment must be accomplished by amending the class charge
rate calculation table found within the City Code Appendix.



   (E)   Excluded lands.  A charge for system availability of service
will not be made against land which is either (i) public streets
right-of-way, or railroad road right-of-way or (ii) vacant and unimproved, or
fallow, with substantially all of its surface having vegetation as ground
cover, and (iii) city owned land.



   (G)   Supplying information.  The owner, occupant or person in
charge of any premises must supply the city with such information as the city
may reasonably request related to the use, development and area of the
premises.  Willful failure to provide such information or to falsify it is a
violation of this subsection.



   (H)   Estimated charges.  If the owner, occupant or person in
charge of any premises fails or refuses to provide the information requested,
as provided above, the charge for such premises must be estimated and billed
in accordance with such estimate, based upon information then available to
the city.



   (I)   Billings and collections.  Storm sewer service charges shall
be placed on the utility accounts of property for the use and availability of
the system and are payable quarterly in accordance with usual and customary
practices in rendering of water and sanitary sewer bills. 



   (J)   Penalties and remedies for delinquency or default in paying
billings.  Penalties and remedies for late payments or non-payment of
billings are the same as those applicable to billings rendered for water and
sanitary sewer service.  In the event a bill becomes delinquent, the City
Council may cause the delinquent charges to become a lien against the
property served by certifying to the Hennepin County Taxpayers Services
Division the amount of such delinquent bill in accordance with the Act.



(Ord. 2002-981, passed 11-25-02)



§ 108.05  USE OF REVENUES



   Revenues received from charges are to be placed in a separate storm
sewer utility enterprise fund and used to pay the normal, reasonable and
current costs of operating, maintaining, and improving water quality within
the system.  Revenues from time to time received in excess of such costs may
be used to finance improvements to and betterments of the storm sewer utility
and other utility enterprise funds.



(Ord. 2002-981, passed 11-25-02)



CHAPTER 109: STREET/SIGNAL LIGHTING SYSTEM



Section



   109.01   Statutory authority



   109.02   System established



   109.03   Rates and charges



109.01   STATUTORY AUTHORITY.



   M.S. Chapter 429 ("the Act"), authorizes cities to impose charges for
the operation of a street/signal lighting system.  By this chapter, the city
elects to exercise such authority.



(Ord. 2002-983, passed 11-25-02)



109.02   SYSTEM ESTABLISHED.



   A city street/signal lighting system is established.  The system
consists of all street lighting facilities, whether owned by the city or
other, for which the city purchases and supplies electrical energy.  A
street/signal lighting service district is hereby established.  The district
includes all property within the city.



(Ord. 2002-983, passed 11-25-02)



109.03  RATES AND CHARGES:



   (A)   Billing unit.  Service charges for parcels of land shall be
based on land use.  The billing unit for residential parcels zoned or used
as residential shall be a dwelling unit; single-family residential unit or
townhouse/two family residential unit or multi-family residential unit.  The
billing unit for parcels zoned or used as other zoning classifications shall
be street front lineal foot.



   (B)   Calculation of fees.  The service charge to be billed each
billing unit shall be a fair and equitable share of the total costs of the
system.  Further, service charges shall be apportioned to similar classes of
property similarly.  From time to time the City Council shall adopt a
resolution establishing a class charge rate calculation table for all billing
units.  These quarterly charges shall be listed in the City Code Appendix
fee resolution table.



   (C)   Billings and collections.  Street/signal lighting service
charges shall be placed on the utility accounts of all property and are
payable quarterly in accordance with usual and customary practices in
rendering of water and sanitary sewer bills.



   (D)   Adjustment of charges.  If an owner or person responsible for
paying the street/signal lighting service charge questions the correctness of
such a charge, such person may have the determination of the charge reviewed
by written request to the City Manager.  Such request shall be made within
30 days of the mailing of the bill in question.  The City Manager shall have
the authority to recompute the charge.



   (E)   Penalties and remedies for delinquency or default in paying
billings.  Any street/signal lighting service charges in excess of 90 days
past due on October 1 of any year may be certified to the Hennepin County
Taxpayer Services Manager for collection with real estate taxes as a special
assessment.  An administrative charge of $25 shall be added to each
street/signal lighting service charge so certified.  In addition, the city
may bring a civil action or to take other legal remedies to collect unpaid
charges.



(Ord. 2002-983, passed 11-25-02)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      Chapter



         110.   GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS



         111.   ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESSES



         112.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND ESTABLISHMENTS



         113.   AMUSEMENTS AND THEATRICAL ENTERTAINMENT



         114.   FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS



         115.   [RESERVED]



         116.   [RESERVED]



         117.   LODGING AND HOUSING ESTABLISHMENTS



         118.   EXCAVATIONS AND EARTH MOVING



         119.   PAWNBROKERS AND PEDDLERS



         120.   SAUNAS



         121.   TAXICABS



         122.   TOBACCO REGULATIONS



         123.   BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS



         124.   MASSAGE THERAPY



CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   110.01   Application of regulations



   110.02   Application for licenses



   110.03   Fees; bonds and insurance



   110.04   License bonds



   110.05   Procedure for issuance of licenses



   110.06   Certified copies



   110.07   Unlawful licenses



   110.08   Contents of license



   110.09   License period



   110.10   Renewal license procedure



   110.11   Duplicate and replacement license procedure



   110.12   Rebate of fee



   110.13   Duties of licensee



   110.14   Change of location of licensed premises



   110.15   Transfer of license



   110.16   Enforcement



   110.17   Termination of license



   110.18   Hearing



   110.19   [Reserved]



   110.20   Revocation of licenses




Fees, Charges and Rates




   110.35   Fees, charges and rates authorized and defined



   110.36   Priority of application



   110.37   Business license and permit fee schedule



   110.38   Late payment



   110.39   Pro rate fees; refunds



Cross-reference:



   Mechanical and plumbing contractors, see §§ 103.75 et seq.



   Public and private swimming pools, see Ch. 105



   Sewer installers, see §§ 99.60 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 110.01  APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Compliance required.  It is unlawful for a person either
directly or indirectly to engage in any business or to use in connection
therewith any vehicle, premises, machine or device, in whole or in part, for
which a license or permit is required by any provision of this title or any
other law or ordinance of this municipality, without a license or permit
therefor being first procured and kept in effect at all times as required by
any such provision of this title or any other law or ordinance of this
municipality.



   (B)   One act constitutes doing business.  For the purpose of this
title a person is deemed to be engaged in any business for which a license or
permit is required, and thus subject to the requirements of this title when
that person does within this municipality one act of:



      (1)   Selling any goods or service for which a license is
required;



      (2)   Soliciting such business or offering such goods or
services for sale or hire;



      (3)   Acquiring or using any vehicle or any premises in this
municipality for such business purposes.



   (C)   Agents responsible for obtaining license.  The agents or
other representatives of non-residents of this municipality who are doing
business in this municipality shall be personally responsible for the
compliance with the provisions of this title by their principals and of the
businesses they represent.



   (D)   Separate license for branch establishments.  A license must
be obtained in the manner prescribed herein for each branch establishment or
location of the business engaged in, as if each such branch establishment or
location were a separate business; provided that warehouses and distributing
plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under
any provision of this title are not be deemed to be a separate place of
business or branch establishment.



   (E)   No license required for mere delivery.  No license is
required of any person for any mere delivery of any property purchased or
acquired in good faith from the person at that person’s regular place of
business outside the corporate limits of this municipality where no intent by
such person is shown to exist to evade the provisions of this title.



('72 Code, § 400:00)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.02  APPLICATION FOR LICENSES.



   A person required to procure any permit, license, or transfer under the
provisions of this title or any other law or ordinance of this municipality
must submit an application for the license to the City Manager or Manager’s
designee in writing.  The application must conform to the following
provisions:



   (A)   Be a written statement upon forms provided by the City Manager
or Manager’s designee such form to include an affidavit to be sworn to by
the applicant before a person authorized to administer an oath.



   (B)   Contain all information necessary to comply with this title
under which the license is required and any other information required by the
City Manager or Manager’s designee.



   (C)   Contain, in addition to all other matters required by
ordinance or by law to be shown, the following facts:



      (1)   Name and address of applicant.



      (2)   Purpose for which license or permit is asked.



      (3)   As to license any occupation or permit the doing of any
act, the place where such occupation or act is to be carried on or done.



      (4)   The length of time the licenses or permits are to cover.



   (D)   All questions on the application blank must be answered and
all information required must be furnished.  Any application for a license
made by an individual owner must be signed and sworn to by such owner; if
made by a partnership, it shall be signed and sworn to by one of the
partners; and if by a corporations by one of the duly elected officials of
the corporation.



('72 Code, § 400:03)



§ 110.03  FEES; BONDS AND INSURANCE.



   (A)   Generally.  An applicant for any permit, license or transfer
of a license to be issued or granted by this municipality must pay the full
amount of the permit fee, license fee, or transfer fee required by this code
and other ordinance of this municipality, and must file with the Clerk the
bond, insurance policy, or certificate therefor, and certified copy of a
state license, if required for license.



('72 Code, § 400:06)



   (B)   Fees.  Except as otherwise specifically stated in the
regulations for specific licenses or permits, the fees for the various
licenses, permits and transfers are as fixed or estimated in this title or as
otherwise provided in this code.



('72 Code, § 400:09)



   (C)   No split fee.  The fee for each license issued is the full
amount provided in this code or other applicable ordinance and no reduction
in the amount of the fee is to be made because part of the license year has
elapsed prior to the date the license is issued, unless specifically stated.



('72 Code, § 400:12)



   (D)   Permit fee doubled.  Should any person, firm or corporation
begin any construction, installation, alteration or repair for which a permit
from this municipality is required, without having secured the necessary
permit therefor, either previous to or during the day of the commencement of
any such work, or on the next succeeding day when such work is commenced an a
Saturday afternoon or on a Sunday or a holiday, that person, firm or
corporation will, when subsequently securing such permit be required to pay
double the fee provided for such permit, and shall be subject to all the
penal provisions of this code or other applicable ordinances.



('72 Code, § 400:15)



§ 110.04  LICENSE BONDS.



   If the provisions under which any license is to be issued require the
licensee to furnish a bond, the bond must be duly executed by the licensee
and a corporate surety, and must be furnished to the City Clerk at the time
the application is filed or as soon thereafter as the Clerk requests.  The
bond must be in such amount and with such penalty provisions as required by
the provision and must be approved as to form and execution by the Attorney
and as to surety and amount by the City Clerk.  Such bonds may be in form as
to terminate with the annual license period or may be in form so as to
provide for automatic renewal in the event the license is renewed.



('72 Code, § 400:18)



§ 110.05  PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSES.



   (A)   On receipt of an application for a license the City Manager or
Manager's designee must transmit the same together with license bond and copy
of receipt for license fee to the Chief of Police or other department
responsible therefor, who must cause investigation to be made of the
qualifications of the applicant and the City Manager or Manager's designee
must determine: (1) whether the premises where the licensed activity is
located is in compliance with all laws, ordinances and regulations applicable
to the property; and (2) whether the applicant has complied with all
requirements of the ordinance under which the license is to be issued and
which requirements are prerequisites to the issuance of the license.  For
purposes of this section, the term PREMISES means the address of the location
where the licensed activity takes place. Unless the subdivision of the
ordinance pursuant to which the license is to be issued requires issuance of
the license by the Council, the City Manager or Manager's designee shall
issue the license upon determination that the prerequisites have been
complied with, but if the City Manager or Manager's designee shall have
determined that the prerequisites have not been complied with the City
Manager or Manager's designee shall deny the application for issuance of the
license.  If any ordinance requires issuance of a license by the Council,
the application must be referred, together with a report of the investigation
and determination with respect to the applicant and the applicant's
compliance with the requirements of the ordinance, to the Council.  The
Council must thereupon consider the report and findings and may grant or deny
the license.  The applicant for any license which has been denied by the
City Manager or Manager's designee may appeal the decision of the City
Manager or Manager's designee to the Council by filing, with the City Manager
or Manager's designee, within ten days after receipt of notice of the denial,
a request for review by the Council of such determination by the City Manager
or Manager's designee.  The City Manager or Manager's designee shall
thereupon refer the request to the Council at its next regular meeting, at
which time the Council shall hear the applicant and review the determination
of the City Manager or Manager's designee and may grant or deny the license.



   (B)   Upon determination of the Council that a license is to be
issued the determination must be transmitted to the City Manager or Manager's
designee who shall issue the license certificate in duplicate under the
municipal corporate seal and deliver one copy to the applicant and retain the
other in the license book as a part of the official records.



('72 Code, § 400:21) (Am. Ord. 2004-1014, passed 5-10-04)



§ 110.06  CERTIFIED COPIES.



   A record or a certified copy thereof is prima facie evidence to the
person therein named and all others, as to the information therein contained.



('72 Code, § 400:24)



§ 110.07  UNLAWFUL LICENSES.



   A license or permit issued in any other manner than that herein
prescribed is of no effect.



('72 Code, § 400:27)



§ 110.08  CONTENTS OF LICENSE.



   Each license issued under this title must state upon its face the
following:



   (A)   Name of the licensee and any other name under which the
business is to be conducted.



   (B)   The name and address of each business so licensed as well as
mailing address if different from business address.



   (C)   The amount of license fee.



   (D)   The date of issuance and expiration thereof.



   (E)   Other information as the City Manager or Manager’s designee
determines.



('72 Code, § 400:30)



§ 110.09  LICENSE PERIOD.



   All permits, licenses, or transfers issued under any provision of this
title shall terminate on December 31 of the calendar year in which issued
unless a different termination date with respect to specific licenses is
specifically provided with respect to the permit, license or transfer.



('72 Code, § 400:33)



§ 110.10  RENEWAL LICENSE PROCEDURE.



   Applications for renewal of any license must be made to the City
Manager or Manager’s designee on forms provided by the City Manager or
Manager’s designee, and must contain any information required for renewal
of the license by this title under which the license is to be issued, and
additional information as the City Manager or Manager’s designee requires.



('72 Code, § 400:36)



§ 110.11  DUPLICATE AND REPLACEMENT LICENSE PROCEDURE.



   A duplicate license certificate or tag must be issued by the City
Manager or Manager’s designee to replace any license certificate or tag
previously issued which has been lost, stolen, defaced or destroyed, without
any wilful conduct on the part of the licensee, upon the filing by the
licensee of an affidavit attesting to that fact and paying to the City
Manager or Manager’s designee the required fee.



('72 Code, § 400:39)



§ 110.12  REBATE OF FEE.



   No rebate or refund of any license fee or part thereof shall be made by
reason of non-use of the license, or by reason of a change in location or
business rendering the use of the license ineffective, provided that the City
Manager or Manager’s designee has authority to refund a license fee
collected through an error, or in cases where the application is denied by
the City Manager or Manager’s designee or the Council.



('72 Code, § 400:42)



§ 110.13  DUTIES OF LICENSEE.



   Every licensee and permittee under any provision of this title or other
applicable ordinances has the duties set forth in the divisions which follow:



   (A)   Permit inspection.  Permit all reasonable inspections of the
licensee’s or permittee’s business and examinations of the licensee’s
or permittee’s books and records by such authorities so authorized by law.



   (B)   Comply with governing law.  Ascertain and at all times comply
with all laws, ordinances, and regulations applicable to such business.



   (C)   Cease business.  Refrain from operating the licensed business
after expiration of licensee’s license and during the period the license is
revoked or suspended.



   (D)   License displayed.  All licenses, tags, plates, or other
method of identification authorized by this title or other applicable
ordinances must be kept on display at a conspicuous place on the licensed
premises, vehicles, or device, or where neither premises, vehicle or device
are licensed, on  the person of the licensee, or in the case of licenses for
billboards or signboards, at the place of business of the licensee.



   (E)   Unlawful possession.  Must not loan, sell, give, or assign,
to any other person, nor allow any other person to use or display or to have
in the person’s possession any license or insignia which has been issued to
the licensee.



   (F)   Inspections.  All persons licensed hereunder are subject to
proper periodic inspections; so far as to give the police officers and other
duly authorized inspectors of this municipality the right and power at all
times to enter upon their premises for the purpose of ascertaining the manner
in which the business is being conducted.



('72 Code, § 400:45)  (Am. Ord. 1992-696, passed 5-11-92; Am. Ord.
2004-1013, passed 5-10-04)



§ 110.14  CHANGE OF LOCATION OF LICENSED PREMISES.



   A licensee or permittee does not have the right to change the location
of the licensed premises except upon the approval of the City Manager or
Manager’s designee  if the license is issued by the Manager or Manager’s
designee, or upon the approval of the Council if the license is issued by the
Council.  Application for renewal must be made in writing in such form as is
prescribed by the City Manager or Manager’s designee and must be
accompanied by the required removal fee.



('72 Code, § 400:48)



§ 110.15  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   A licensee does not  have the right to transfer the licensee’s 
license to any other person unless specifically authorized by this title or
pursuant to which the license was issued.



('72 Code, § 400:51)



§ 110.16  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Inspections.  It is the duty of the municipal Health Office
or the Environmental Health Specialist to inspect all premises licensed
hereunder for the purpose of determining any violation of law relating to
health.  It is the duty of the municipal police officers to inspect and
examine all premises, businesses and enterprises subject to license, or which
have been licensed hereunder, and the City Manager has the right to direct
the Health Officer, any police officer, or any other appropriate officer to
make such inspections at all reasonable times.



   (B)   Sealing of unlicensed, defective, or unsafe machines or
devices and affixing license insignia.  A food vending machine, cigarette
vending machine, pinball machine, childrens' amusement device, mechanical
amusement device, or other amusement device which is defective or unsafe, or
which is licensed and has no license tag or other license insignia affixed as
required by law, or is required to be licensed hereunder and such machine or
device is not currently licensed, may be sealed by a tape or wire to prevent
its continued use.  The tape or tag attached to the seal must state that the
machine or device is not to be used.



   (C)   Removing seal, using machine prohibited.  It is unlawful to 
remove or deface a seal affixed under these provisions except under the
direction of an authorized agent of this municipality.  It is unlawful to
use any machine or device on which a seal has been affixed under the
provisions hereof.



('72 Code, § 400:54)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.17  TERMINATION OF LICENSE.



   At any time that the City Manager determines that a person licensed
under this title or other ordinance of the municipality has failed to comply
with any requirement of law or with any provision of this title, the City
Manager must request the City Clerk to notify the licensee in writing of the
violation. The notice is to be delivered by the U.S. Mail or personally as
the City Manager may determine and deposit of the notice in the U.S. Mail,
addressed to the address stated on the license application, constitutes
service of the notice.  If the person cannot be otherwise found the notice
may be posted on the premises licensed.  The notice must require compliance
with the provision of law, code, or ordinance specified within a reasonable
time to be specified by the City Manager.  Upon expiration of the time,
unless the licensee has requested a hearing in writing, the City Manager, in
the event that the license involved has been issued by the City Manager or
Manager’s designee, may terminate the license, or in the event that the
license has been issued by the Council, the City Manager must report the
matter to the Council and the Council may thereafter terminate the license,
subject to compliance with any procedure prescribed by the provisions of the
ordinance pursuant to which the license or permit was issued.



('72 Code, § 400:57)



§ 110.18  HEARING.



   In the event that a hearing is requested by the licensee the City
Manager must set a time for the hearing not less than ten days and not more
than 20 days after request, at which time the City Manager is to hear all
testimony offered by the licensee, and must inform the licensee of all
information upon which alleged violation of law by the licensee has been
determined.  If the license has been issued by the Council the hearing must
be conducted by the Council.  On completion of the hearing the City Manager
or Council, as the case may be, may make a final order suspending or
terminating the license in question.  Upon the entry of any such order by
the City Manager, the licensee may appeal the determination of the City
Manager to the Council by filing request for such appeal with the City Clerk
within ten days after receipt of notification of the order of the City
Manager, and the Council must thereupon promptly hear the licensee and review
the determination of the City Manager and make its final order sustaining or
modifying the determination of the City Manager.



('72 Code, § 400:60)



§ 110.19  [RESERVED].



§ 110.20  REVOCATION OF LICENSES.



   Violation by a licensee of any provision of this code or state law,
regulating, prescribing conditions, or establishing requirements relative to
licenses held by such a licensee is grounds for revocation of the license.



('72 Code, § 1110:00)



FEES, CHARGES AND RATES



§ 110.35  FEES, CHARGES AND RATES AUTHORIZED AND DEFINED.



   The fees, charges and rates for the purposes set forth in this title of
this code for licenses, permits and municipal services shall be in the
amounts established in the fee resolution set forth in the Appendix to this
code. Reference to the amounts set forth therein in other portions of this
code or in other ordinances of the city may be made in such terms as
“required fee,” “established fee,” “required license fee,”
“license fee,” and “license fee in the required amount,” without
specific reference to this chapter, in which event the amounts set forth in
the fee resolution are applicable.



('72 Code, § 500:00)



§ 110.36  PRIORITY OF APPLICATION.



   If fees, charges and rates are set forth specifically in parts of this
code other than this title or in other ordinances of the city which are now
in effect, but have not been set forth in this title, in that event, the
fees, charges and rates thereby specifically set forth shall be effective for
all purposes.  In the event that such amounts shall appear in other places
in this code or in other ordinances of the city, but shall appear in this
title, the amounts appearing in this title shall supersede the others.



('72 Code, § 500:05)



§ 110.37  BUSINESS LICENSE AND PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE.



   The fees, charges and rates for business licenses and permits, the
duration or term thereof, and the conditions applied thereto, shall be as
established by the fee resolution set forth in the Appendix to this code.



('72 Code, § 500:10)  (Am. Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97; Am. Ord.
1997-845, passed 4-28-97; Am. Ord. 1998-873, passed 4-13-98)



§ 110.38  LATE PAYMENT.



   (A)   No penalty.  No penalty for the late payment of any license
shall be incurred by any licensee provided the owner or the owner's agent
makes application for the renewal of the existing license to the City Clerk
or Clerk’s designee and includes therein the payment of the required fee
therefor prior to the expiration date of the license.



   (B)   Penalty for late payment.  Every person whose licensed trade,
business, profession, activity or privilege is licensed by the city, other
than one who has been closed down and who has not operated such activity in
the city after expiration of the licensing year, shall pay to the City Clerk
the regular license fee and in addition thereto the following penalty for
late application for a license.



      (1)   One to 15 days late a 50% penalty;



      (2)   Sixteen to 30 days late a 100% penalty;



      (3)   After expiration of 30 days from the due date, the
activity for which a license is required shall cease and the City Manager may
recommend that no new license or permit for such activity shall be considered
until the owner of the business personally appears before the City Council. 
If a new license or permit is approved, the fee will consist of the amount
set forth for new licenses and permits, plus the late penalty fee.



   (C)   Late payment of the license fee with penalty is no bar to
prosecution for operating without a license.  The late payment of the
license fee along with the penalty set forth therein is no bar to any
prosecution by the city for operating any licensed trade, business,
profession, activity or privilege within the city without a license therefor.



('72 Code, § 500:15)  (Ord. 1975-181(A), passed 1-27-75; Am. Ord.
1986-540(A), passed  8-18-86)



§ 110.39  PRO RATE FEES; REFUNDS.



   Licenses issued for a stated period of one year or for some other
stated period of time shall be pro rated over the period of the license. 
The pro ration of the fee shall be on a quarterly basis and any unexpired
fraction of a quarter will be counted as a complete quarter.  In no event
shall there be any proration if the prorated fee charged would be less than
$25.



('72 Code, § 500:20)  (Ord. 1989-623(A), passed 3-6-89)



CHAPTER 111:  ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Section



   111.01   Licenses required



   111.02   Issuance of license



   111.03   Investigation fee



   111.04   License fees



   111.05   Inspection



   111.06   Expiration of license



   111.07   Suspension



   111.08   Revocation



   111.09   Transfer of license



§ 111.01  LICENSES REQUIRED.



   An establishment, including a business operating at the time this
chapter becomes effective, operating or intending to operate an adult only
entertainment business, must apply for and obtain a license from the city:



   (A)   A person is in violation of the city code if they operate an
adult only entertainment business or other sections of the city code without
a valid license, issued by the city.



   (B)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided
by the city.  The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram
showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total
floor space occupied by the business.  The sketch or diagram need not be
professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with
marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six inches.



   (C)   The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of
this chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance
with the law by the Environmental Health Division, Fire Department, and
Building Official.



   (D)   (1)   Application for license shall be made only on the
forms provided by the city.  Four complete copies of the application shall
be furnished to the office of the City Clerk containing the address and legal
description of the property to be used; the names, addresses and phone
numbers of the owner and lessee, if any, and the operator or manager; the
name, address, and phone number of two persons who are residents of the State
of Minnesota, and who may be called upon to attest to the applicant's and
manager's-operator's character; whether the applicant, manager, or operator
has ever been convicted of a crime or offense other than a traffic offense
and, if so, complete and accurate information as to the time, place, and
nature of such crime or offense including the disposition thereof; the names
and addresses of all creditors of the applicant, owner, lessee, or manager
insofar as and regarding credit which has been extended for the purposes of
construction, equipping, maintaining, operating, or furnishing or acquiring
the premises, personal effects, equipment, or anything incident to the
establishment, maintenance, and operation of the business.



      (2)   If the application is made on behalf of a corporation,
joint business venture, partnership, or any legally constituted business
association, it must submit along with its application, accurate and complete
business records showing the names and addresses of all individuals having an
interest in the business, including partners, officers, owners, and creditors
furnishing credit for the establishment, acquisition, maintenance, and
furnishings of said business and, in the case of a corporation, the names and
addresses of all officers, general managers, and members of the board of
directors as well as any creditors who have extended credit for the
acquisition, maintenance, operation, or furnishing of the establishment
including the purchase or acquisition of any items of personal property for
use in said operation.



      (3)   All applicants must furnish to the city, along with
their applications, complete and accurate documentation establishing the
interest of the applicant and any other person having an interest in the
premises upon which the building is proposed to be located or the furnishings
thereof, personal property thereof, or the operation or maintenance
thereof.  Documentation shall be in the form of a lease, deed, contract for
deed, mortgage deed, mortgage credit arrangement, loan agreements, security
agreements, and any other documents establishing the interest of the
applicant or any other person in the operation, acquisition, or maintenance
of the enterprise.



('72 Code, § 422:00)  (Ord. 1992-689, passed 3-23-92)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 111.02  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The Chief of Police and City Clerk may recommend approval of
the issuance of a license by the city to an applicant within 90 days after
receipt of an application unless they find one or more of the following to be
true:



      (1)   Applicant(s) or manager is under 18 years of age.



      (2)   Applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or
request for information on the application form.



      (3)   Applicant(s) or an applicant's spouse has been convicted
of a violation of a provision of this chapter, other than the offense of
operating an adult only entertainment business without a license, within two
years immediately preceding the application.  The fact that a conviction is
being appealed shall have no effect.



      (4)   Applicant(s) is residing with a person who has been
denied a license by the city or any other Minnesota municipal corporation to
operate an adult only entertainment business within the preceding 12 months,
or residing with a person whose license to operate an adult only
entertainment business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months.



      (5)   The premises to be used for the adult only entertainment
business has not been approved by the Environmental Health Division, Fire
Department, Zoning/Planning Department and the Building Official as being in
compliance with applicable laws and ordinances; such inspections must be
completed within 30 days from the date the application was submitted,
provided that the application contains all of the information required by
this chapter.  If the application is deficient, the inspections shall be
completed within 30 days from the date the deficiency has been corrected.



      (6)   The license fee required by § 110.37 has not been paid.



      (7)   Applicant(s) has been employed in an adult only
entertainment business in a managerial capacity within the preceding 12
months and has demonstrated that they are unable to operate or manage an
adult only entertainment business premises in a peaceful and law-abiding
manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers.



      (8)   Applicant(s) or applicant's spouse has been convicted of
a crime involving any of the following offenses:



         (a)   Any sex crimes as defined by M.S. §§ 609.29
through 609.352 inclusive or as defined by any ordinance or statute in
conformity therewith.



         (b)   Any obscenity crime as defined by M.S. §§ 617.23
through 617.229 inclusive, or as defined by any ordinance or statute in
conformity therewith for which:



            1.   Less than two years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor offense;



            2.   Less than five years have elapsed since the
date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony
offense; or



            3.   Less than five years have elapsed since the
date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the
last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two
or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring
within any 24 month period.



   (B)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect on
the disqualification of the applicant or applicant's spouse.



   (C)   An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been
convicted of an offense listed in division (A) of this section may qualify
for an adult only entertainment business license only when the time period
required by division (A) of this section has elapsed.



   (D)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of
the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the
address of the adult only entertainment business.  The license must be
posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult only
entertainment business so that it may be easily read at any time.



   (E)   The City Council must act to approve or disapprove the license
application within a reasonable time after receipt of all information
relating to zoning and after completion of all code requirements, provided
that the application contains all of the information required by this
chapter.  If the application is deficient, the Council must act on the
application within 120 days from the date that the deficiency has been
corrected.



('72 Code, § 422:05)  (Ord. 1992-689, passed 3-23-92; Am. Ord. 2004-1013,
passed 5-10-04)



§ 111.03  INVESTIGATION FEE.



   (A)   At the time of each original application for a license, the
applicant must pay a minimum investigating fee.  This minimum fee shall be
$500 per person on the application, and additional direct costs associated
with the investigation will be billed to the applicant(s). The minimum
investigating fee shall not be subject to refund.  If the expenses of the
investigation relating to any application exceed the minimum investigating
fee, the city shall notify the applicant(s) of this fact and shall require
the applicant(s) to pay an additional investigating fee which the City
Manager deems necessary to complete its investigation of the applicant(s). 
The applicant(s) must pay such an additional investigating fee within five
days of being so notified.  If the additional investigating fee is not paid
within the five-day period, the city shall discontinue consideration of the
application.



   (B)   Each application must contain a provision on the application
in bold print indicating that any withholding of information or the providing
of false or misleading information will be grounds for denial or revocation
of a license.  Any changes in the information provided on the application or
provided during the investigation must be brought to the attention of the
City Council by the applicant or licensee.  If the changes take place during
the investigation, the data must be provided to the Chief of Police or the
City Clerk in writing and they must report the changes to the City Council. 
Failure to report the changes by the applicant(s) or the licensee may result
in a denial or revocation of a license.



('72 Code, § 422:10)  (Ord. 1992-689, passed 3-23-92)



§ 111.04  LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   All license fees as established by the Council from time to
time in the Appendix to this code, must be paid at the time of filing the
application.



   (B)   In the case of licenses granted for premises wherein
construction is not yet completed, the Council may grant the license but the
Clerk must not issue the license until the construction is completed in
accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the Council.  The
fee for the license shall be one-half of the license fee from the date of
approval until business operations actually commence on the licensed
premises.  When business operations commence, the full fee shall become
effective pro rated on a quarterly basis.  In no event shall a reduced fee
apply for a licensed establishment under construction for a period of longer
than 12 months from the date of Council approval, but the full fee must be
paid for the balance of the construction period.



('72 Code, § 422:15)  (Ord. 1992-689, passed 3-23-92)



§ 111.05  INSPECTION.



   (A)   Applicant(s) or licensee(s) must permit representatives of the
Police Department, Environmental Health Division, Fire Department, and
Housing and Building Inspection Department to inspect the premises of an
adult only entertainment business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with
the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business.



   (B)   A person who operates an adult only entertainment business or
their agent or employee commits an offense if they refuse to permit a lawful
inspection of the premises by a representative of the Police, Environmental
Health Division, Building or Fire Department at any time it is occupied or
open for business.



('72 Code, § 422:20)  (Ord. 1992-689, passed 3-23-92)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 111.06  EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Each license expires one year from the date of issuance and
may be renewed only by making application as provided in § 111.01. 
Application for renewal should be made at least 60 days before the expiration
date, and when made less than 60 days before the expiration date, the
expiration of the license will not be affected.



   (B)   If the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant must
not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial.  If,
subsequent to denial, the city finds that the basis for denial of the renewal
license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license
if a least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final.



('72 Code, § 422:25)  (Ord. 1992-689, passed 3-23-92)



§ 111.07  SUSPENSION.



   (A)   The city may suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30
days if it determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has:



      (1)   Violated or is not in compliance with any provisions of
this chapter.



      (2)   Engaged in use of alcoholic beverages while on the adult
only entertainment business premises.



      (3)   Refused to allow an inspection of the adult only
entertainment business premises as authorized by this code.



      (4)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the adult
only entertainment business premises.



      (5)   Demonstrated inability to operate or manage an adult
only entertainment business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus
necessitating action by law enforcement officers.



   (B)   A suspension by the city must be preceded by written notice to
the licensee and a public hearing.  The notice must give at least ten days
notice of the time and place of the hearing and must state the nature of the
charges against the licensee.  The notice may be served upon the licensee
personally, or by leaving the same at the licensed business premises with the
person in charge thereof.



('72 Code, § 422:30)  (Ord. 1992-689, passed 3-23-92)



§ 111.08  REVOCATION.



   (A)   The city may revoke a license if a cause of suspension in §
111.07 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12
months.



   (B)   The city may revoke a license if it determines that:



      (1)   The licensee gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted to the city during the application process.



      (2)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed
possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises.



      (3)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premises.



      (4)   A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the adult
only entertainment business during a period of time when the licensee's
license was suspended.



      (5)   A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in §
111.02 for which the time period required has not elapsed.



      (6)   On two or more occasions within a 12 month period, a
person or persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed
premises of a crime listed in § 111.02 for which a conviction has been
obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the adult only
entertainment business at the time the offenses were committed.



      (7)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act
of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation to occur in or
on the licensed premises.



   (C)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect on
the revocation of the license.



   (D)   Subdivision (B)(7) does not apply to adult motels as a ground
for revoking the license unless the licensee or employee knowingly allowed
the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or
sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view.



   (E)   If the city revokes a license, the revocation must continue
for two years and the licensee must not be issued an adult only entertainment
business license for two years from the date revocation became effective. 
If, subsequent to revocation, the city finds that the basis for the
revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a
license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became
effective.



   (F)   A revocation by the city must be preceded by written notice to
the licensee and a public hearing.  The notice must give at least ten days
notice of the time and place of the hearing and shall state the nature of the
charges against the licensee.  The notice may be served upon the licensee
personally, or by leaving the same at the licensed premises with the person
in charge thereof.



('72 Code, § 422:35)  (Ord. 1992-689, passed 3-23-92; Am. Ord. 2004-1013,
passed 5-10-04)



§ 111.09  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   A licensee must not transfer the license to another, nor must a
licensee operate an adult only entertainment business under the authority of
a license at any place other than the address designated in the application.



('72 Code, § 422:40)  (Ord. 1992-689, passed 3-23-92)  Penalty, see §
10.99



CHAPTER 112:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND ESTABLISHMENTS



Section




General Provisions




   112.001   Liability insurance for sellers of intoxicating liquor,
3.2 percent malt liquor and wine



   112.002   Inspection of premises



   112.003   Maintenance of order and conduct on licensed premises




Intoxicating Liquors




   112.030   Definitions



   112.031   License required



   112.032   Application for licenses



   112.033   Regulation



   112.034   Bond required



   112.035   Bond conditions



   112.036   License fees



   112.037   Granting of license



   112.038   New license hearing



   112.039   Application referred to Police Chief



   112.040   Notice; granting



   112.041   Conditions of license



   112.042   Hours of operation



   112.043   Restrictions on consumption



   112.044   Revocation



   112.045   Serving set-ups in unlicensed places



   112.046   Prohibited sales



   112.047   Drinking prohibited



   112.048   Sale of intoxicating liquor - restaurants



   112.049   Licenses available




3.2 Percent Malt Liquor




   112.055   Definitions



   112.056   License required



   112.057   Sales by manufacturer



   112.058   Off-sale licenses



   112.059   Limited licenses for bona fide clubs



   112.060   Municipal operations exempt



   112.061   Application



   112.062   Fees



   112.063   Granting of license



   112.064   Conditions of licenses



   112.065   Hours of sale



   112.066   Term of license



   112.067   Non-transferable



   112.068   Food license



   112.069   Mixing drinks




On-Sale Wine License




   112.095   Definitions



   112.096   Application



   112.097   Fees



   112.098   Hours



   112.099   Bond



   112.100   Zoning location



   112.101   Sale of intoxicating malt liquor



Brewer Taproom Licenses



   112.200   Definition



   112.201   Issuance of license



   112.202   Conditions of license



Brewpub Licenses



   112.210   Off-sale permitted



   112.211   Packaging requirements



Temporary Licenses



   112.300   Temporary on-sale permitted



Microdistilleries



   112.400   Definitions



   112.401   Issuance of license



   112.402   Fees



   112.403   Conditions on licenses



Enforcement



   112.998   Compliance checks and inspections



   112.999   Violations and penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 112.001  LIABILITY INSURANCE FOR SELLERS OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR, 3.2
PERCENT MALT LIQUOR AND WINE.



   (A)   Every person licensed to sell at retail intoxicating liquor,
3.2 percent malt liquor or wine at on-sale in the city must, after March 1,
1983, demonstrate proof of financial responsibility with regard to liability
imposed by M.S. § 340A.409, to the City Clerk or the City Clerk’s designee
and to the Commissioner of Public Safety as a condition of the issuance or
renewal of the person's license.



   (B)   Proof of financial responsibility may be given by filing:



      (1)   (a)   A certificate that there is in effect an
insurance policy or pool providing the following minimum coverages:



            1.   $50,000 because of bodily injury to any one
person in any one occurrence, and, subject to the limit for one person, in
the amount of $100,000 because of bodily injury to two or more persons in any
one occurrence and in the amount of $10,000 because of injury to or
destruction of property of others in any one occurrence.  Hotels and motels
having 200 rooms or more are required to have minimum coverage of $500,000
because of bodily injury for one or more persons.



            2.   $50,000 for loss of means of support of any
one person, any one occurrence, and, subject to the limit for one person,
$100,000 for loss of means of support of two or more persons in any one
occurrence. Hotels and motels having 200 or more are required to have minimum
coverage of $500,000 because of bodily injury for one or more persons.



            3.   The certificate must provide that no payment
of any claim by the insurance company shall in any manner decrease the
coverage provided for in respect to any other claim or claims brought against
the insured or company thereafter.



         (b)   A bond of a surety company with minimum coverages
as provided in subsection (a); or



         (c)   A certificate of the State Treasurer that the
licensee has deposited with the State Treasurer $100,000 in cash or
securities which may be purchased by savings banks  or for trust funds
having a market value of $100,000.



      (2)   The licensee must provide the certificate and proof to
the City Clerk or designee at the time of application for a new license or
renewal of the existing license.  The certificate of insurance must show
that all coverages meet or exceed the requirements of M.S. § 340A.409 and
that the insurance company cannot cancel the insurance until at least ten
days written notice of the cancellation has been served upon the city.  If a
new certificate of insurance is not filed with the City Clerk during the ten
day period after notice of cancellation, the license to sell at retail
intoxicating, 3.2 percent malt liquor or wine is to be suspended until a new
certificate of insurance is filed with the City Clerk and the Minnesota
Commissioner of Public Safety.



      (3)   The City Clerk is authorized to waive the foregoing
insurance requirements for 3.2 percent malt liquor and wine licenses if the
licensee files an affidavit from a certified public accountant to show that
sales are less than the amounts set forth in M.S. § 340A.409, Subd. 4.  The
licensee must also file a written commitment with the City Clerk or designee
that if sales exceed such amounts, the licensee will not continue to sell 3.2
percent malt liquor or wine until the licensee has filed a certificate of
insurance meeting the requirements set forth in this section.



('72 Code, §825:00)  (Ord. 1983-420(A), passed 5-9-83; Am. Ord.
1986-535(A), passed  7-28-86; Am. Ord. 1997-841, passed 3-24-97; Am. Ord.
2005-1052, passed 11-28-05)



§ 112.002  INSPECTION OF PREMISES.



   The applicant must at all times permit the health officers and
representatives of the Police and Fire Departments to inspect and examine the
place of business described in the application, together with all appliances,
instruments or equipment used or to be used in the conduct of the business
for which the license is sought, and any refusal on the part of the applicant
to permit such inspection or any false statement in the application is
sufficient ground for the refusal to issue such license or to revoke the same
after issuance thereof.



('72 Code, § 810:50)



§ 112.003  MAINTENANCE OF ORDER AND CONDUCT ON LICENSED PREMISES.



   (A)   The City Council finds that the serving and consumption of
alcoholic beverages in any establishment holding an on-sale intoxicating
liquor license, an on-sale wine license, or an on-sale 3.2 percent malt
liquor license can contribute to increased acts of disorderly conduct. These
acts of disorderly conduct result in a greater demand on city services,
negatively impact the livability of the city, and have an adverse impact on
the health, safety and welfare of city residents. The City Council further
finds that the holders of on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses and on-sale
3.2 percent malt liquor licenses need to be responsible for managing their
establishments in a manner that does not contribute to acts of disorderly
conduct by their customers, employees, or agents. For the purposes of this
chapter, the term ESTABLISHMENT means the licensed premises and all portions
of the property where the licensed premises is located, and the term LICENSEE
means the holder of an on-sale intoxicating liquor license or the holder of
an on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor license.



   (B)   Maintenance of order. Each licensee must comply with the
following provisions.



      (1)   A licensee is responsible for the conduct at its
establishment and the conditions of sobriety and order of all persons at the
establishment. The act of any employee or agent of the licensee is deemed to
be the act of the licensee, and the licensee is liable for all penalties set
forth in this chapter or state law equally with the employee. The licensee is
deemed to have knowledge of any acts of disorderly conduct identified in this
section occurring at the establishment.



      (2)   No licensee or any other person shall sell, give,
barter, furnish or dispose of in any manner, directly or indirectly, any
alcoholic beverage or 3.2 percent malt liquor, in any quantity, for any
purpose whatsoever, to any obviously intoxicated person. An obviously
intoxicated person shall not be allowed to enter a licensed premise. For
purposes of this section, OBVIOUSLY INTOXICATED PERSON means a person who is
presently impaired, mentally, physically, or emotionally, as a result of the
presence of alcohol in the person's body and such impairment is obvious to a
reasonable person. Evidence of an obviously intoxicated person includes, but
is not limited to, the odor of intoxicants on the person's breath, bloodshot
eyes, dilated pupils, stumbling, staggering, slurred speech, or other symptom
commonly associated with intoxication.



      (3)   A licensee must require that all of its employees or
agents who serve alcoholic beverages or who provide security at the
establishment successfully complete an annual program of server and security
training. Such program of server and security training must be approved by
the Brooklyn Park Police Department. A licensee must annually submit proof to
the Brooklyn Park Police Department that an approved program was successfully
completed by each employee or agent who serves alcoholic beverages or who
provides security at the establishment.



      (4)   Employees or agents of licensees must not consume
alcoholic beverages while working, or work while obviously intoxicated.



      (5)   A licensee or any of its employees or agents shall not
sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person more than two alcoholic
beverages for a single price or increase the volume of intoxicating liquor or
3.2 percent malt liquor in an alcoholic beverage without proportionately
increasing the price charged for the alcoholic beverage. Special pricing on
drinks, commonly referred to as "happy hour," may only be offered between the
hours of 12:00 noon and 11:00 p.m. Temporary promotional pricing; i.e.,
pricing associated with a specific event, is allowed after 11:00 p.m. as long
as the temporary promotional pricing is also offered during other hours of
operation on the same day. Beer, wine, or liquor samplings are allowed as
permitted by state law.



      (6)   A licensee or any of its employees or agents must engage
in responsible serving practices. Sales of pitchers of alcoholic beverages
are allowed, provided there are at least two persons intending to consume the
pitcher of alcoholic beverages. The sale of a single serving of an alcoholic
beverage which, when consumed, would, by itself, result in an alcohol
concentration of .08 or more is not allowed.



      (7)   (a)   A licensee or any of its employees or agents
must not:



            1.   Encourage or permit customers to conduct
games or contests that involve drinking;



            2.   Award prizes to customers based on alcohol
consumption; or



            3.   Award prizes of alcohol to customers.



         (b)   Alcoholic beverages must not be included as part
of a charge for admission to the licensed premises.



      (8)   A licensee or any of its employees or agents must
require patrons and occupants of the establishment to conduct themselves in
such a manner as to not cause any portion of the establishment to be
disorderly, as defined in division (C) of this section or defined elsewhere
in the city code or in state law.



      (9)   Employees or agents of a licensee or any person
providing entertainment or working for or on behalf of a licensee, whether
compensated or not, must act in accordance with federal, state and local
laws, statutes, ordinances, regulations and rules, including any conditions
associated with the liquor license. Conduct by any of those persons at the
establishment will be considered to be, and treated as, the act or conduct of
the licensee for the purpose of imposing penalties or other sanctions against
a licensee.



   (C)   A licensee is responsible for acts of disorderly conduct by
persons occupying its establishment when a licensee knows or has reason to
know of acts of disorderly conduct by persons occupying its establishment or
when a licensee manages its establishment in a manner that contributes to
acts of disorderly conduct by persons occupying its establishment. For
purposes of this section, the following types of conduct at an establishment
are disorderly:



      (1)   Unlawful possession, delivery, or purchase of a
controlled substance, as set forth in M.S. §§ 152.01 et seq. and Chapter
135 of this code;



      (2)   Disorderly conduct, as set forth in M.S. § 609.72 and
§ 134.15 et seq. of this code;



      (3)   Unlawful sale of intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt
liquor as set forth in M.S. Chapter 340A and §§ 112.030 through 112.069 of
this code;



      (4)   Homicide and suicide, as set forth in M.S. §§ 609.18
through 609.215;



      (5)   Criminal sexual conduct, as set forth in M.S. §§
609.342 through 609.3451;



      (6)   Prostitution or acts relating to prostitution including
housing individuals engaged in prostitution as set forth in M.S. §§
609.321, Subdivision 9, and 609.324;



      (7)   Unlawful use or possession of a firearm at an
establishment as set forth in M.S. §§ 609.66 et seq. and Chapter 136 of
this code;



      (8)   Assault as set forth in § 134.01 of this code;



      (9)   Contributing to the delinquency of a minor as defined in
M.S. Chapter 260B;



      (10)   Sexual and labor trafficking crimes as set forth in
M.S. §§ 609.281 through 609.284;



      (11)   Interference with a police officer as set forth in M.S.
§ 609.50;



      (12)   Terroristic threats as set forth in M.S. § 609.713;



      (13)   Unlawful assembly as set forth in M.S. § 609.715;



      (14)   Riots as set forth in M.S. § 609.71;



      (15)   Interfering with phone calls for emergency assistance
as set forth in M.S. § 609.78;



      (16)   Gambling as set forth in M.S. §§ 609.75 through
609.76;



      (17)   Crime committed for the benefit of a gang as set forth
in M.S. § 609.229;



      (18)   Racketeering as set forth in M.S. § 609.903; or



      (19)   Any other conduct deemed disorderly by the city or
other law enforcement agency.



   (D)   Upon a determination by the City Manager that any act or
conduct described in divisions (B) or (C) of this section, or any other act
of disorderly conduct as provided for elsewhere in the city code or in state
law, has occurred at an establishment, the City Manager will provide notice
of the conduct to the owner of the establishment and to the licensee
directing them to take action to prevent future incidents.



   (E)   If another act or conduct described in divisions (B) or (C) of
this section, or any other act or conduct prohibited elsewhere in the city
code or in state law, occurs within 12 months after an incident for which
notice was provided under division (D) of this section, the owner and
licensee will be notified and will be required to participate in a Problem
Solving Conference (PSC). The PSC will be scheduled and conducted by the City
Manager. The purpose of the PSC is to develop a plan of action to ensure that
a future incident does not occur at the establishment. The PSC must be
approved by the City Manager. A licensee must participate in the PSC within
five business days of the notice.



   (F)   If a third act or conduct described in divisions (B) or (C) of
this section, or any other act or conduct prohibited elsewhere in the city
code or in state law, occurs within 12 months after either of the two
previous incidents, the City Manager will notify the owner and licensee of
the third incident and will require the owner and licensee to submit a
written report of the actions taken, and proposed to be taken, to prevent
further incidents. The written report must be submitted to the City Manager
no later than ten business days after notice of the third incident is mailed
or delivered to the licensee. The written report must also detail all actions
taken by the licensee in response to all previous incidents for which notices
were sent to the licensee.



   (G)   After the third act or conduct described in divisions (B) or
(C) of this section, or any other act or conduct prohibited elsewhere in the
city code or in state law, the City Council may deny, revoke, suspend, or not
renew the license, or may apply any other sanction provided by law. The owner
and licensee shall be provided with written notice of a hearing before the
City Council to consider such denial, revocation, suspension, non-renewal, or
sanction. Such written notice must specify all incidents of disorderly
conduct and violations under this section, and must state the date, time,
place and purpose of the hearing. The hearing must be held no less than ten
business days and no more than 30 days after giving such notice.



   (H)   Upon a decision to revoke, deny or not renew a license, the
owner or licensee will not be eligible to apply for any new license for a
period of one year. Any person who has had two or more licenses revoked,
suspended, denied or not renewed will not be eligible to apply for any new
licenses for a period of two years.



   (I)   A determination that an act or conduct described in divisions
(B) or (C) of this section, or any other act or conduct prohibited elsewhere
in the city code or in state law, has occurred at an establishment must be
made based upon a fair preponderance of the evidence. It is not necessary
that criminal charges be brought in order to support a determination by the
City Council that any such act or conduct has occurred at the establishment.
The fact of dismissal or acquittal of any such criminal charge does not
operate as a bar to an adverse license action under this section.



   (J)   Enforcement actions provided in this section are not
exclusive, and the City Council may take any action with respect to a
licensee as is authorized by the city code or state or federal law. This may
include a PSC as well as an immediate license suspension where there has been
a determination by the City Council that continued operation poses a risk to
public safety. If the City Council finds that a licensee failed to
participate in a PSC, then this failure is grounds for a license suspension.



   (K)   The City Council may postpone or discontinue any enforcement
action, including an action to deny, revoke, suspend, or not renew a license,
if the owner and licensee have taken appropriate measures to prevent further
violations or instances of disorderly conduct.



   (L)   All notices given by the city under this section must be
personally served on the owner and licensee or sent by first class mail to
the owner and licensee's last known addresses.



   (M)   Any person whose license is denied, revoked, suspended, or not
renewed under this section shall have the right to appeal that decision by
petitioning the Minnesota Court of Appeals for a writ of certiorari pursuant
to M.S. Chapter 606.



(Ord. 2009-1097, passed 4-6-09)



INTOXICATING LIQUORS



§ 112.030  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CLUB.



      (1)   An incorporated organization organized under the laws of
the state for civic, fraternal, social, or business purposes, for
intellectual improvement, or for the promotion of sports, or a
congressionally chartered veterans' organization, which:



         (a)   Has more than 30 members;



         (b)   Has owned or rented a building or space in a
building for more than one year that is suitable and adequate for the
accommodation of its members;



         (c)   Is directed by a board of directors, executive
committee, or other similar body chosen by the members at a meeting held for
that purpose.



      (2)   No member, officer, agent, or employee shall receive any
profit from the distribution or sale of beverages to the members of the club,
or their guests, beyond a reasonable salary or wages fixed and voted each
year by the governing body.



   HOTEL.  An establishment where food and lodging are regularly
furnished to transients and which has a dining room serving the general
public at tables and having facilities for seating at least 30 guests at one
time; and at least 25 guest rooms.



   INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR.  Ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented,
spirituous, vinous and malt liquors containing in excess of 3.2 percent of
alcohol by weight.



   MINOR.  Any person who has not attained the age of 21.



   OFF-SALE.  The sale of liquor in original package in retail stores for
consumption off or away from the premises where sold.



   ON-SALE.  The sale of liquor by the glass for consumption on the
premises only.



   PACKAGE or ORIGINAL PACKAGE.  Any container or receptacle holding
liquor, which container or receptacle is corked or sealed.



   RESTAURANT.  Any establishment, other than a hotel, under the control
of a proprietor or manager, having appropriate facilities for the serving of
meals to not less than 30 guests at one time and where meals are regularly
furnished at tables to the general public and which employs an adequate staff
to provide the usual and suitable service to its guests, and the principal
part of the business of which is the serving of foods.



   SALE, SELL and SOLD.  All barters, and all manners or means, of
furnishing intoxicating liquor and including such furnishing in violation or
evasion of law.



   SUNDAY SALE.  The sale of liquor by the glass for consumption on the
premises, in conjunction with the serving of food by the licensee, pursuant
to a special license therefore issued by the city as authorized by state law.



   THEATER. A building containing an auditorium in which live dramatic,
musical, dance, or literary performances are regularly presented to holders
of tickets for those performances.



('72 Code, § 805:00)  (Ord. 1976-225(A), passed 8-9-76; Am. Ord.
1986-544(A), passed  9-22-86; Am. Ord. 1987-563(A), passed 6-8-87; Am. Ord.
1992-697, passed 5-26-92; Am. Ord. 2012-1140, passed 4-16-12)



§ 112.031  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It is unlawful to, directly or indirectly, upon any premises
or by any device, manufacture, import, sell, exchange, barter, dispose of or
keep for sale any intoxicating liquor without first having obtained a license
therefor as hereinafter provided.  Licenses are of three kinds: 
“on-sale,” “off-sale” and “Sunday sale,” which are granted only
for the purposes permitted by the statutes of the state and limited by this
chapter.



   (B)   “On-sale” licenses permit the sale and consumption of
liquor on the licensed premises only.



   (C)   (1)   “Off-sale” licenses are granted to permit the
sale of liquor at retail in the original package for consumption off the
licensed premises only.



      (2)   Off-sale licensed stores may provide samples of malt
liquor, wine liqueurs, and cordials which the licensee currently has in stock
and is offering for sale to the general public without obtaining an
additional license, provided the malt liquor, wine, liqueur, and cordial
samples are dispensed at no charge and consumed on the licensed premises
during the permitted hours of off-sale in a quantity less than 100
milliliters of malt liquor per variety per customer, 50 milliliters of wine
per variety per customer and 25 milliliters of liqueur or cordial per variety
per customer.



   (D)   “Sunday sale” licenses permit the sale and consumption of
liquor on the licensed premises only.



('72 Code, § 805:05)  (Am. Ord. 1989-628(A), passed 6-26-89)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 112.032  APPLICATION FOR LICENSES.



   (A)   Every person desiring a license for either “on” or
“off” or for “Sunday” sales must file an application in the form to
be prescribed by the State Department of Public Safety and with such
additional information as the Council may require.  The application for a
“Sunday sale” license may be included with an application for an
“on-sale” license.



   (B)   At the time of each original application for a license, the
applicant must also pay a minimum investigating fee of $500 per person on the
application and additional direct costs associated with the investigation
will be billed to the applicant(s). The minimum investigating fee is not
subject to refund.  If the expenses of the investigation relating to any
application exceed the minimum investigating fee, the city must notify the
applicant of this fact and require the applicant to pay an additional
investigating fee which the City Manager deems necessary to complete its
investigation of the applicant.  The applicant must pay such an additional
investigating fee within five days of being so notified.  If such additional
investigating fee is not paid within such five-day period, the city shall
discontinue consideration of the application.



   (C)   Each application must contain a provision on the application
in bold print indicating that any withholding of information or the providing
of false or misleading information will be grounds for denial or revocation
of a liquor license.  Any changes in the information provided on the
application or provided during the investigation must be brought to the
attention of the City Council by the applicant or licensee.  If the changes
take place during the investigation, the data must be provided to the Chief
of Police or the City Manager in writing and they must report the changes to
the City Council.  Failure to report the changes by the applicant or the
licensee may result in a denial or a revocation of a license.



   (D)   The Council, in its sole discretion and for any reasonable
cause, may refuse to grant any license.  Licenses will not be issued to a
person who has any of the following:



      (1)   Is not a United States citizen;



      (2)   Has a felony conviction;



      (3)   Who has previous convictions in the past five years of
illegal sales of alcohol or alcoholic beverages, including but not limited to
sales to minors;



      (4)   Has not properly filed personal and/or business tax
returns;



      (5)   Has had a liquor license from any city, county, or state
revoked within five years of the pending license application.



('72 Code, § 805:10)  (Am. Ord. 1972-122(A), passed 8-28-72; Am. Ord.
1981-371(A), passed 12-14-81; Am. Ord. 1990-664(A), passed 11-26-90; Am. Ord.
2012-1140, passed 4-16-12; Am. Ord. 2017-1223, passed 10-23-17)



§ 112.033  REGULATION.



   (A)   No off-sale liquor license may be issued except in a
commercial or business use district.



   (B)   All licensees must prove to the Council that they are
financially responsible and of good moral character.  Financial data
submitted as a part of the application must provide complete information to
satisfy the City Council that the applicants have financial capital to
commence business and to operate the business.  The City Council is
concerned that lack of capital could lead to sales practices which are
contrary to the general welfare of the community.



   (C)   The number of “off-sale” licenses is limited to allow no
more than one such license for every 4,000 residents.  This provision does
not apply to combination on and off-sale licenses.  No more than 12
"off-sale" liquor licenses may be issued for property located south of 93rd
Avenue.



   (D)   In a new area being opened to commercial development or if a
new structure is being built in an existing commercial or business use
district, or if an existing structure is being remodeled to house a new
on-sale and/or off-sale license, the applicant/licensee must agree as a
condition of acquiring the license that all construction must be completed
within a specified time but in no event shall said time exceed a reasonable
period as determined by the Council at the time of Council approval.  A date
for completion of construction shall be included at the time of issuance of a
license. Failure to have completed construction and to have obtained a
certificate of occupancy and to be in operation within the specified time
results in automatic revocation of the license.  The applicant/licensee must
then be required to file an application for a new license, provide all data
required for any new licensee and complete the entire licensing process. 
Upon the issuance of a license and the opening date established, the business
must remain open and operational.  If the business closes for more than 30
consecutive days the license shall be revoked unless it is closed by a
circumstance out of the control of the business owner (fire, tornado, etc.).



('72 Code, § 805:20)  (Am. Ord. 1981-371(A), passed 12-14-81; Am. Ord.
1986-517(A), passed 2-10-86; Am. Ord. 1989-639(A), passed 11-20-89; Am. Ord.
2004-1013, passed 5-10-04; Am. Ord. 2013-1160, passed 8-19-13)



§ 112.034  BOND REQUIRED.



   A bond with a corporate surety must accompany each application for a
license.  If the application is for a “Sunday sale” special license,
such bond requirement may be met by a separate bond or by the inclusion
thereof in an existing “on-sale” bond when accompanied by a proper
endorsement or certificate showing inclusion of “Sunday sales.”  In the
case of an application for license for “on-sale” or “Sunday sale” or
both, the application must be accompanied by a corporate surety bond in the
sum of $4,000; or in lieu of such bond, cash or bonds of the United States of
a market value of $4,000 may be deposited with the Treasurer on the same
conditions as provided in the penalty clause of the required surety bond. 
In the case of an application for an “off-sale” license, a similar surety
bond or cash or United States bond equivalent is required, but the amount of
such bond is $2,000 and must be approved by the State Department of Public
Safety.



('72 Code, § 805:25)



§ 112.035  BOND CONDITIONS.



   All such bonds must be conditioned as follows:



   (A)   That the licensee will obey the law relating to such licensed
premises.



   (B)   That the licensee will pay to the City of Brooklyn Park when
due all license fees, penalties, and other charges provided by law.



   (C)   That in the event of any violation of the provisions of any
law relating to the retail “off-sale” and retail “on-sale” and retail
“Sunday sale” of intoxicating liquor, such bond must be forfeited to the
city.



   (D)   That the licensee will pay to the extent of the principal
amount of the bond any damages for death or injury caused by or resulting
from the violation of any provision of law relating thereto, and in such
cases recovery under this division may be had from the surety of this bond. 
The amount specified in the bond is declared to be a penalty, the amount
recoverable to be measured by the actual damages; provided, however, that in
no case is the surety to be liable for any amount in excess of the penal
amount of the bond.



   (E)   All such bonds are for the benefit of the City of Brooklyn
Park and all persons suffering damages by reason of the breach of the
conditions of this subchapter or state statutes.



   (F)   If the applicant files cash or United States government bonds,
as permitted in this section, the Finance Director must execute a receipt
therefor and a copy of the receipt must be filed with the Clerk or
designee.  If government bonds are filed, the licensee is permitted to clip
and take all interest bearing coupons thereto attached as they become due.



('72 Code, § 805:30) (Am. Ord. 2004-1013, passed 5-10-04)



§ 112.036  LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   All license fees as established by the Council from time to
time must be paid at the time of filing the application.



   (B)   In the case of licenses granted for premises where
construction is not yet completed, the Council may grant the license but the
Clerk or designee must not issue the license until the construction is
completed in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the
Council.  The fee for the license is one-half of the license fee from the
date of approval until liquor sales actually commence on the licensed
premises.  When sales commence, the full fee is to become effective prorated
on a quarterly basis.  In no event may a reduced fee apply for a licensed
establishment under construction for a period of longer than 12 months from
the date of Council approval, the full fee is to be paid for the balance of
the construction period.



   (C)   The City Council may, in its discretion, prorate any or all
license fees as it considers appropriate under the circumstances including,
but not limited to, when a license is issued for an unexpired portion of a
license year.



('72 Code, § 805:40)  (Am. Ord. 1972-122(A), passed 8-28-72; Am. Ord.
2002-971, passed 5-13-02)



Cross-reference:



   License fees, see Appendix



§ 112.037  GRANTING OF LICENSE.



   The Council must cause an investigation to be made of all the
representations set forth in the application.  An opportunity must be given
at a regular or special meeting of the Council to any person to be heard for
or against the granting of any license.  After the investigation and
approval of the required bond, the Council must grant or refuse such license
at its discretion; provided that no “off-sale” license becomes effective
until it, together with the bond, has the approval of the State Department of
Public Safety.  All licensed premises must have the license posted in a
conspicuous place therein at all times.  No license may be transferable
either as to licensee or premises without the approval of the Council and
also the State Department of Public Safety in the case of “off-sale”
licenses.



('72 Code, § 805:45)



§ 112.038  NEW LICENSE HEARING.



   No license for the sale of intoxicating liquor “on-sale,”
“off-sale” or “Sunday sale” may be hereafter granted by the Council
unless the license is a renewal of a license previously granted at the same
location to the same licensee, until a public hearing is conducted by the
Council after published notice in the official newspaper at least ten days in
advance of the hearing.



('72 Code, § 805:50)



§ 112.039  APPLICATION REFERRED TO POLICE CHIEF.



   (A)   All applications for a license must be referred to the Chief
of Police and to such other departments as the Council deems necessary for
verification and investigation of the facts set forth in the application. 
The Chief of Police must cause to be made such investigation of the
information required in this subchapter as is necessary and must make a
written recommendation and report to the Council and the report must include
a list of all violations of federal or state law or municipal ordinance. 
The Chief of Police is directed to trace the assets of the applicant
individual, partnership or major stockholders of a corporation.  This
requirement is waived for corporations traded on the New York, American Stock
Exchange, National Association of Securities Dealers National Market System
or is a publicly held or traded corporation where no one individual has more
than 25% of the stock ownership.  In this investigation the Chief or the
Chief’s designated agent must require the applicant to provide
substantiating documentation regarding the funds available for operation of
the on-sale or off-sale licensee's liquor operation.  The Council may order
and conduct such additional investigation as it deems necessary.



   (B)   The requirement that the Chief of Police trace the applicant's
assets has been waived for certain corporations as set forth above.  In lieu
of an investigation of the principals in the business, these publicly held
corporations must designate with their application a manager or operator who
shall be legally responsible for compliance with all federal, state, and
local laws relating to the sale of intoxicating or 3.2 percent malt
liquors.  The named manager or operator who shall be responsible must agree
in writing to accept service of any legal process relating to the operation
of the licensed premises.  The person responsible must have on file with the
city at all times their current address where service of process will be
accepted.  At the time of the original application or at any time thereafter
when the responsible manager or operator is changed, the Chief of Police must
conduct a criminal investigation (not a financial investigation) to determine
that the responsible manager or operator meets the city's standards
applicable to obtaining a license and subject to all the fees and
requirements set forth in §§ 112.032 and 112.035 of this code.  The City
Council must at its sole discretion approve or decline to approve the manager
or operator to operate a public corporation's premises licensed to sell
intoxicating malt liquor.



('72 Code, § 805:55)  (Am. Ord. 1981-371(A), passed 12-14-81; Am. Ord.
1993-728, passed 7-12-93; Am. Ord. 1997-841, passed 3-24-97; Am. Ord.
2001-960, passed 11-26-01)



§ 112.040  NOTICE; GRANTING.



   Upon receipt of the written report and recommendation by the Chief of
Police, the information and data must be reviewed by the City Manager to
determine that it is complete.  The City Council must then be provided in
writing a complete report regarding the application and the investigation. 
The City Council may request that the applicant(s) appear at a City Council
Meeting to discuss informally the applications and all relevant data. 
Within 20 days thereafter, the Council must instruct the Clerk to cause to be
published in the official newspaper ten days in advance a notice of a hearing
to be held, setting forth the day, time and place when the hearing will be
held, the name of the applicant, the premises where the business is to be
conducted, the nature of the business, and such other information as the
Council may direct.  At the hearing, opportunities must be given to any
person to be heard for or against the granting of the license.  After it has
conducted the public hearing, the Council must grant or refuse the
application at its discretion.



('72 Code, § 805:60)  (Am. Ord. 1981-371(A), passed 12-14-81)



§ 112.041  CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.



   All licenses granted hereunder are granted subject to the following
conditions, all other conditions of this chapter, and subject to all other
ordinances of the city applicable thereto and to all regulations promulgated
by the State Department of Public Safety and all statutes of the State of
Minnesota applicable thereto:



   (A)   Every licensee must be responsible for the conduct of the
licensee’s place of business and the conditions of sobriety and order
therein.  No “on-sale” dealer nor “Sunday sale” dealer shall sell
liquor by the bottle or container for removal from the premises.  No dealer
license for “off-sale” shall permit the consumption of any liquor on such
licensed premises except that off sale licensed stores may provide samples of
malt liquor, wine, liqueurs, and cordials which the licensee currently has in
stock and is offering for sale to the general public without obtaining an
additional license, provided the malt liquor, wine, liqueur, and cordial
samples are dispensed at no charge and consumed on the licensed premises
during the permitted hours of off-sale in a quantity less than 100
milliliters of malt liquor per variety per customer, 50 milliliters of wine
per variety per customer and 25 milliliters of liqueur or cordial per variety
per customer.



   (B)   It is unlawful to sell intoxicating liquor to any minor. A
license must not be granted to a minor and a person under 18 years of age
must not be employed in any room constituting the place in which intoxicating
liquors are sold at retail “on-sale” or “Sunday sale,” except that
persons under 18 years of age may be employed as musicians or to perform the
duties of busboy or dishwashing services in places defined as a restaurant,
hotel or motel.  Persons under 18 years of age may be employed as waiters or
waitresses at a restaurant, hotel or motel where only wine is sold, provided
that the person under the age of 18 may not serve or sell any wine.  The
licensee must not permit any person under 18 years of age to loiter or remain
in the room where intoxicating liquor is being sold or served unless
accompanied by the minor’s parent or legal guardian.  A person 18, 19 or
20 years old may enter an establishment licensed under this chapter to:



      (1)   Perform work for the establishment, including the
serving of alcoholic beverages, unless otherwise prohibited by M.S. §
340A.412, Subdivision 10;



      (2)   Consume meals; and



      (3)   Attend social functions that are held in a portion of
the establishment where liquor is not sold.



   (C)   An “on-sale” or “Sunday sale” licensee must not keep,
possess or operate, or permit the keeping, possession or operation of, on the
premises or in any room adjoining the licensed premises controlled by the
licensee, any slot machine, dice, or other gambling device or apparatus, nor
permit any gambling therein, except as authorized by the city pursuant to
M.S. Chapter 349, or as amended, nor permit the licensed premises or any room
in the same or in any adjoining building directly or indirectly under the
licensee's control, to be used as a resort for prostitutes or other
disorderly persons.



   (D)   A license must not be issued to any person not a citizen of
the United States, nor to any person not of good moral character and repute,
nor to any person who has been convicted of any willful violation of any law
of the United States or the State of Minnesota within the past five years, or
of any of the local ordinances with regard to the manufacture, sale,
distribution or possession for sale or distribution of intoxicating liquor
within the past five years, nor to any person whose license under this
chapter is revoked for any willful violation of such laws or ordinances.



   (E)   Except as otherwise permitted in state law, a license must not
be granted to any manufacturer or distiller of intoxicating liquor, nor to
anyone interested in the ownership or operation of any such place, nor to a
person operating a licensed place owned by a manufacturer, distiller, or
exclusive wholesale distributing agent unless such interest was acquired at
least six months prior to January 1, 1934; and equipment or fixtures in any
licensed place must not be owned in whole or in part by any manufacturer or
distiller.



   (F)   (1)   No more than one off-sale license may be directly or
indirectly issued or granted to one person or to one management within the
city.  It is unlawful for a person, partnership or corporation to knowingly
have or possess a direct or indirect interest in more than one “off-sale”
license in the city.  “On-sale” licenses may be issued for the sale of
intoxicating liquor in hotels, clubs, restaurants and establishments for
“on-sale” of liquor exclusively.  “Sunday sale” licenses may be
issued to hotels or restaurants as defined in M.S. § 340A.101 and which have
facilities for serving not less than 30 guests at one time and to which
“on-sale” licenses have been issued or may be issued hereafter for the
sale of intoxicating liquor.  “Off-sale” licenses are issued only to
proprietors or exclusive liquor stores.  No “off-sale” licenses may be
issued to any applicant unless the applicant shows that the proposed location
of the exclusive liquor store has a minimum of 1,000 square feet of floor
space in a building which meets all building codes and building ordinances. 
Off-sale liquor stores in operation as of the date of this chapter change may
continue to operate in their existing facilities as a non-conforming use
until such time as they are transferred to a different location and subject
to the same standards as set forth in this code.  The existing facilities
which do not meet the standards of this chapter must be treated as a
non-conforming use and are subject to the provisions of this code.



      (2)   The term INTEREST includes any pecuniary interest in the
ownership, operation, management, or profits of a retail liquor
establishment, but does not include:  bona fide loans; bona fide rental
agreements; bona fide open accounts or other obligations held with or without
security arising out of the ordinary and regular course of business of
selling or leasing merchandise, fixtures or supplies to such establishment,
an interest in a corporation owning or operating a hotel but having at least
150 or more rental units holding a liquor license in conjunction therewith;
or ten percent or less interest in any other corporation holding a license. 
A person who receives monies from time to time directly or indirectly from a
licensee, in the absence of a bona fide consideration therefor and excluding
bona fide gifts or donations, is deemed to have a pecuniary interest in such
retail license.  In determining “bona fides” the reasonable value of the
goods or things received as consideration for any payment by the licensee and
all other facts reasonably tending to prove or disprove the existence of any
purposeful scheme or arrangement to evade the prohibitions of this chapter
must be considered.



   (G)   All premises where any license hereunder is granted must be
open to inspection by any police or health officer or other properly
designated officer or employee of the city at any time during which the place
so licensed is open to the public for business.



   (H)   A license must not be granted within 300 feet of any school,
early childhood development center, licensed nursery or daycare facility, or
religious institution. A license may be granted within 300 feet of any of the
above listed uses if the licensed premises and the listed uses are located
within the same zoning district. The measurement must be made from building
to building and not from the property lines.



   (I)   (1)   Every room, place or premises wherein such liquor is
permitted to be or is sold, including any café, restaurant, or dining room
operated in connection therewith, or as part thereof, pursuant to an
“on-sale” license, must be closed and kept closed to the public on every
day between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.  During those hours, it is
unlawful for a person or persons to be or remain upon or within, such room,
place on premises for any purpose whatsoever, except that the owner or
licensee, or the owner or licensee’s agents or servants or employees may be
and remain therein and thereon for the purpose only of cleaning, preparation
of meals, necessary repairs, or other work in connection therewith, or as
watchperson.  An exception to the foregoing statement applies to hotels,
restaurants, and clubs where portable bars are temporarily set up in dining
rooms, club rooms, or other areas which are open to the public and which are
used only on a temporary basis.  Portable or temporary bars located on the
licensed premises must have all liquor removed and/or places under lock and
key within the above designated hours or all intoxicating liquor must be
returned to a central location where the liquor is stored and which is closed
to the public during the hours stated above.



      (2)   Nothing herein prohibits a hotel dining room, a
restaurant, a bowling center, or a club from serving or selling food during
hours that the sale of liquor is prohibited if the liquor is removed from
display and placed in a locked enclosure or room that is inaccessible to the
public during the hours stated above.



   (J)   (1)   It is unlawful for intoxicating liquor to be drunk or
consumed from the licensed premises during the times when the sale of
intoxicating liquors is prohibited by state law or as such state law is
modified by ordinance.  During those hours and at those times no
intoxicating liquor in any quantity whatsoever shall be served, kept,
displayed or permitted to be on or in any table, booth, bar or other place in
such licensed premises, except the stock of liquors stored therein during
such times on the premises in such portions thereof as are accessible only to
the licensee and his or her employees.  Temporary or portable bars located
as outlined in division (J) of this section hereof must have all liquor
removed from sight and placed under lock and key or returned to a central
storage area during the hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited.



      (2)   Nothing herein prohibits a hotel dining room, a
restaurant, or a club from serving or selling food during hours that the sale
of liquor is prohibited if the liquor is removed from display, covered or
stored and is not visible to the public.



   (K)   As a condition to the granting of an “on-sale” or
“Sunday sale” license where sale of food and such other articles is
permitted by the Council, the Council may by resolution restrict, the sale
and consumption of liquor at any place so licensed to tables where food is
served to patrons purchasing and consuming said liquor, and may prohibit or
limit the sale or consumption of liquor at a bar, and may prohibit the
maintenance of a bar on the premises where liquor is displayed or dispensed.



   (L)    An “on-sale,” “Sunday sale,” or “off-sale”
license is not effective beyond the compact and contiguous space named in the
license granted, except that the Council may permit sales of liquor with
meals in additional dining rooms open to the public and specified in the
license where meals are regularly served to guests therein.



   (M)   It must be a condition of every license heretofore or
hereafter issued hereunder to a corporation that the Clerk or designee be
furnished by the licensee with a correct list of all stockholders of the
corporation to whom the license is issued and the number of shares held by
each, either individually or beneficially for others; and it is the
continuing duty of each corporate licensee to promptly notify the Clerk or
designee of any change in ownership or beneficial interest of such shares. 
Any change of ownership or beneficial interest of shares of stock entitled to
be voted at any meeting of the stockholders of such corporation which results
in change in voting control of the corporation by the persons owning shares
of stock therein is deemed equivalent to a transfer of the license issued to
such corporation, and any such licenses must be revoked and terminated 30
days after any such change in ownership or beneficial interest of shares,
unless the Council is notified of such change in writing and has approved
thereof.  The Council or any officer of the city designated by it may at any
reasonable time examine the stock transfer records and minute books of any
corporate licensee in order to verify the names of stockholders and persons
voting at meetings of such corporation, and the Council may cancel and
terminate any license issued hereunder to a corporation upon determination by
the Council that any change of ownership of stock in such corporate licensee
has actually resulted in change of control of such corporation so as to
materially affect the integrity and character of its management and its
operation of an “on sale,” “Sunday sale,” or “off-sale” liquor
business, provided that no such action must be taken until after a hearing by
the Council on ten days notice to the licensee.



   (N)   The City Council finds that the sale and/or presence of
alcoholic beverages by the drink and adult entertainment occurring on the
same premises can increase disorderly conduct and can result in incidents of
prostitution, public masturbation, indecent exposure, and/or sexual
assault.  In order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of city
residents, and pursuant to the City Council's authority to regulate alcoholic
beverages under M.S. Chapter 340A and the Twenty-First Amendment to the
United States Constitution, it is unlawful for an on-sale licensee under this
code to permit the following kinds of conduct on the licensed premises or in
areas adjoining the licensed premises where the following kinds of conduct
can be seen by patrons of the licensed premises:



      (1)   The performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual
intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation or
flagellation; or



      (2)   The actual or simulated touching, caressing, or fondling
on the breast, buttocks, anus, or genitals; or



      (3)   The actual or simulated displaying of the pubic hair,
anus, vulva, or genitals; or



      (4)   The displaying of films, videos, still pictures,
electronic reproduction, or any other visual reproduction of image depicting
the acts described in (1) through (3) above; or



      (5)   The presentation of any female in such manner or attire
as to expose to view any portion of the breast below the top of the areola,
or any simulation thereof.



      (6)   It is unlawful for the licensee or their agent to allow
or permit to remain in or about the licensed premises any person who performs
acts as set forth in (1) through (5) above.



      (7)   The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
by the licensee or their employees agents constitutes grounds for the
suspension or revocation of any and all intoxicating liquor, 3.2 percent malt
liquor, or wine licenses issued to the premises or to the licensee.



('72 Code, § 805:65)  (Am. Ord. 1992-700, passed 8-24-92; Am. Ord.
1993-715, passed 2-22-93; Am. Ord. 1997-841, passed 3-24-97; Am. Ord.
2004-1013, passed 5-10-04; Am. Ord. 2005-1045, passed 7-18-05; Am. Ord.
2015-1196, passed 9-14-15; Am. Ord. 2017-1223, passed 10-23-17)



§ 112.042  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   A room, place or premise where intoxicating liquor is permitted to be
sold under an “on-sale,” “off-sale,” “Sunday sale” or “club
license” and including a café, restaurant or dining room operated in
connection therewith, must be closed to the public during the times when the
sale of liquor is prohibited by state law.  During those hours, it is
unlawful for a person or persons to be allowed to be or remain within such
room, place or premise, for any purpose whatsoever, except that the owner or
licensee, the owner or licensee’s agents, servants, or employees, may be
and remain therefor the purpose only of cleaning, preparation of meals,
necessary repairs, or other work in connection therewith.



('72 Code, § 805:70)  (Am. Ord. 1989-628(A), passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord.
1989-641(A), passed 12-18-89; Am. Ord. 1990-655(A), passed 7-9-90)  Penalty,
see § 10.99



§ 112.043  RESTRICTIONS ON CONSUMPTION.



   In any place licensed for “on-sale,” the liquor sold must be served
and consumed at tables, counters or bars equipped with chairs at which
customers must sit to be served.  It is unlawful for liquor to be sold or
consumed on a public highway or in an automobile.



('72 Code, § 805:75)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.044  REVOCATION.



   Any violation of any provision or condition of this chapter or the
state licensing law or any falsification of any statement in the application
is grounds for an adverse action by the City Council, including, but not
limited to, suspension, revocation, denial, or non-renewal of the license. 
No portion of the license fee paid shall be returned upon suspension,
revocation, denial or non-renewal.



('72 Code, § 805:80)  (Am. Ord. 2009-1097, passed 4-6-09)



§ 112.045  SERVING SET-UPS IN UNLICENSED PLACES.



   It is unlawful for any proprietor of any public place of business,
other than a holder of an intoxicating liquor license to permit the
consumption or displaying of intoxicating liquor upon such premises, or in
any manner to serve or permit the serving of liquids for the purpose of
mixing with intoxicating liquor, and the serving of any such liquids for the
purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquor is prima facie evidence that
intoxicating liquor is being permitted to be consumed or displayed contrary
to the provisions of this subchapter.



('72 Code, § 805:85)  (Am. Ord. 2012-1140, passed 4-16-12)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 112.046  PROHIBITED SALES.



   It is unlawful to sell, furnish or deliver intoxicating liquor for any
purpose to any minor or to any person obviously intoxicated or to any other
person to whom sale is prohibited by state statute.



('72 Code, § 805:90)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.047  DRINKING PROHIBITED.



   The drinking of intoxicating liquor and/or 3.2 percent malt liquor on
the public streets, public parking lots, public property, or in other public
areas within the city is prohibited except in designated picnic areas
approved by the City Council.  The drinking of intoxicating liquor and/or
3.2 percent malt liquor in automobiles, on the public streets, public parking
lots, or other public property within the city is prohibited.



('72 Code, § 805:95)  (Ord. 1979-295(A), passed 7-9-79; Am. Ord. 1997-841,
passed 3-24-97)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.048  SALE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR - RESTAURANTS.



   At the time of the initial license application and each license renewal
application for a restaurant, the applicant must provide written
documentation demonstrating that at least 25% of the restaurant's gross
receipts are attributable to the sale of food.  This section does not apply
to any restaurant for which an on-sale intoxicating liquor license was
initially issued before July 1, 2012.



(Ord. 2012-1140, passed 4-16-12)



§ 112.049  LICENSES AVAILABLE.



   The city may only issue an on-sale intoxicating liquor license to the
following establishments:



   (A)   Hotels;



   (B)   Restaurants;



   (C)   Bowling centers;



   (D)   Clubs or congressionally chartered veterans organizations with
the approval of the Commissioner, provided that the organization has been in
existence for at least three years and liquor sales will only be to members
and bona fide guests, except that a club may permit the general public to
participate in a wine tasting conducted at the club under M.S. § 340A.419;



   (E)   Sports facilities located on land owned by the Metropolitan
Sports Commission;



   (F)   Theaters; and



   (G)   Other locations authorized by special legislation of the state
legislature.



(Ord. 2012-1140, passed 4-16-12)



3.2 PERCENT MALT LIQUOR



§ 112.055  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   3.2 PERCENT MALT LIQUOR.  Any malt liquor containing not less than
one-half of one percent alcohol by volume nor more than 3.2 percent alcohol
by weight and is a fermented malt beverage.



   MINOR.  Any person who has not attained the age of 21.



   PERSON.  Every person, persons, firm, association or corporation.



('72 Code, § 810:00)  (Ord. 1976-225(A), passed 8-9-76; Am. Ord.
1986-544(A), passed 9-22-86; Am. Ord. 1989-628(A), passed 6-26- 89; Am. Ord.
1997-841, passed 3-24-97)



§ 112.056  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It is unlawful to sell 3.2 percent malt liquors at wholesale
or retail except when licensed as hereinafter provided.  There are two types
of licenses issued for the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquors, as hereinafter
set out.



   (B)   “On-sale” licenses permit the licensee to sell 3.2 percent
malt liquors for consumption on the premises.  “On-sale” licenses may be
granted only to restaurants, hotels, drug stores and bona fide clubs.



   (C)   “Off-sale” licenses permit the licensee to sell 3.2
percent malt liquors in the original package for consumption off the premises
only, except that off-sale licensed stores may provide samples of malt liquor
which the licensee has in stock and is offering for sale to the general
public without obtaining an additional license, provided the malt liquor is
dispensed at no charge and consumed on the licensed premises during the
permitted hours of off-sale in a quantity less than 100 milliliters of malt
liquor per variety per customer.



('72 Code, § 810:05)  (Am. Ord. 1989-628(A), passed 6-26-89; Am. Ord.
1997-841, passed 3-24-97)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.057  SALES BY MANUFACTURER.



   A manufacturer of 3.2 percent malt liquors may without license sell the
same to licensed retail dealers and may sell and deliver the same in
quantities of not less than two gallons to consumers at their homes.



('72 Code, § 810:10)  (Am. Ord. 1997-841, passed 3-24-97)



§ 112.058  OFF-SALE LICENSES.



   Every distributor of 3.2 percent malt liquors selling the same within
the city limits is required to take out an “off-sale” license unless the
distributor is also a manufacturer thereof.



('72 Code, § 810:15)  (Am. Ord. 1997-841, passed 3-24-97)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 112.059  LIMITED LICENSES FOR BONA FIDE CLUBS.



   Notwithstanding other licensing requirements for 3.2 percent malt
liquor, the Council upon proper application may in their discretion grant
limited licenses to sell 3.2 percent malt liquor “on-sale” to bona fide
clubs which meet the definitions contained in M.S. § 340A.101.  Such
limited licenses must not exceed a two week period and require a payment in
an amount as established by the fee resolution, set forth in the Appendix to
this code, to the general fund of the city.  The premises from which the 3.2
percent malt liquor is dispensed must be accurately described in the
application.  Only four such limited licenses may be granted to any bona
fide club within any one calendar year except that a license for the entire
year may be issued to such club under the provisions of § 112.062 of this
subchapter.



('72 Code, § 810:20)  (Am. Ord. 1974-169(A), passed 6-24-74; Am. Ord.
1997-841, passed 3-24-97)



§ 112.060  MUNICIPAL OPERATIONS EXEMPT.



   The Council may at their discretion waive the license fee as it applies
to any “on-sale” license issued to any city owned and operated facility.



('72 Code, § 810:25)



§ 112.061  APPLICATION.



   Any person desiring either of the licenses herein described must first
make application therefor to the Council by filing with the Council a formal
application in writing, which application must set forth the applicant's
name, residence and the location at which the applicant proposes selling such
3.2 percent malt liquors, together with such other information as the Council
may require.



('72 Code, § 810:30)  (Am. Ord. 1997-841, passed 3-24-97)



§ 112.062  FEES.



   At the time of filing such application the licensee must deposit the
required license fee in the amount set by the Council from time to time.  No
license will be issued until the fee has been paid.  The license fees
required to be paid are in addition to all other license fees required under
any and all other ordinances.  The City Council may, in its discretion,
prorate any or all license fees as it considers appropriate under the
circumstances including, but not limited to, when a license is issued for an
unexpired portion of a license year.



('72 Code, § 810:35)(Am. Ord. 2002-971, passed 5-13-02)



Cross-reference:



   License fees, see Appendix



§ 112.063  GRANTING OF LICENSE.



   The City Council must cause an investigation to be made of all facts
set forth in the application.  Opportunity must be given to any person to be
heard for or against the granting of any license.  After the investigation,
the City Council must grant or refuse any such application at its discretion.



('72 Code, § 810:40)



§ 112.064  CONDITIONS OF LICENSES.



   All licenses granted hereunder are granted subject to the following
conditions, and all other conditions of this chapter, and subject to all
other ordinances of the city applicable thereto:



   (A)   A license must not be granted to a minor.



   (B)   A license must not be granted to an applicant who already owns
a license of the kind applied for.



   (C)   A license must not be issued to an applicant unless the
applicant is the actual owner or proprietor of the business at the location
where the applicant intends to sell such malt liquor.



   (D)   A person must not have in the person’s possession for sale
any 3.2 percent malt liquor without first having obtained one or both of the
licenses herein provided for.



   (E)   A room, place or premises wherein such 3.2 percent malt liquor
is permitted to be or is sold, including any café, restaurant, or dining
room operated in connection therewith, or as part thereof, pursuant to an
“on-sale” license, must be closed and kept closed to the public during
the times when a sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor is prohibited by state
law.  During those hours, it is unlawful for a person or persons to be or
remain upon, or within, such room, place or premises for any purpose
whatsoever, except that the owner or licensee, the owner or licensee’s
agents or servants or employees may be and remain therein and thereon for the
purpose only of cleaning, preparation of meals, necessary repairs, or other
work in connection therewith, or as watchperson.



   (F)   It is unlawful for 3.2 percent malt liquor to be drunk or
consumed from the licensed premises during the closing hours set forth in
division (E) above, and at those times it is unlawful for 3.2 percent malt
liquor in any quantity whatsoever to be served, kept, displayed or permitted
to be on or in any table, booth, bar or other place in such licensed
premises, except the stock of liquors stored therein during such times on the
premises in such portions thereof as are accessible only to the licensee and
the licensee’s employees.



   (G)   The written license must at all times be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises named herein.



   (H)   All licenses granted under this ordinance must be issued to
the applicant only, and must be issued for the premises described in the
application.



   (I)   It is unlawful for a manufacturer of 3.2 percent malt liquors
to have any ownership, in whole or in part, in the business of any licensee
holding an “on-sale” license.



   (J)   Licenses hereunder may be issued only to persons who are
citizens of the United States and who are of good moral character and repute.



   (K)   It is unlawful to sell 3.2 percent malt liquor to any minor. 
No license may be granted to a minor and no person under 18 years of age may
be employed in any room constituting the place in which 3.2 percent liquors
are sold at retail “on-sale” or “Sunday sale,” except that persons
under 18 years of age may be employed as musicians or to perform the duties
of busboy or dishwashing services in places defined as a restaurant, hotel or
motel.  Persons under 18 years of age may be employed as waiters or
waitresses at a restaurant, hotel or motel where only wine is sold, provided
that the person under the age of 18 may not serve or sell any wine.  The
licensee must not permit any person under 18 years of age to loiter or remain
in the room where 3.2 percent malt liquor is being sold or served unless
accompanied by the minor’s parent or legal guardian.  A person 18, 19, or
20 years old may enter an establishment licensed under this chapter to:



      (1)   Perform work for the establishment, including the
serving of 3.2 percent malt liquor, unless otherwise prohibited by M.S. §
340A.412. Subdivision 10;



      (2)   Consume meals; and



      (3)   Attend social functions that are held in a portion of
the establishment where 3.2 percent malt liquor is not sold.



('72 Code, § 810:45)  (Am. Ord. 1986-544(A), passed 9-22-86; Am. Ord.
1989-641(A), passed 12-18-89; Am. Ord. 1997-841, passed 3- 24-97)



§ 112.065  HOURS OF SALE.



   It is unlawful to sell 3.2 percent malt liquor to the public during the
times when a sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor is prohibited by state law.



('72 Code, § 810:55)  (Am. Ord. 1984-466(A), passed 9-24-84; Am. Ord.
1989-641(A), passed 12-18-89; Am. Ord. 1997-841, passed 3- 24-97)  Penalty,
see § 10.99



§ 112.066  TERM OF LICENSE.



   Licenses herein provided for expire December 31 of each year, but if
issued after the first of the year the license fee therefor may, at the
option of the Council, be prorated on a quarterly basis.



('72 Code, § 810:60)



§ 112.067  NON-TRANSFERABLE.



   A license issued hereunder is not transferable.



('72 Code, § 810:65)



§ 112.068  FOOD LICENSE.



   A license holder under this subchapter, except a bona fide club, must
also hold a hotel or restaurant license or must be engaged primarily in the
business of selling food and must hold a food stuff license.



('72 Code, § 810:70)  (Am. Ord. 1982-384(A), passed 3-22-82)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 112.069  MIXING DRINKS.



   It is unlawful for a licensee hereunder to permit the practice of
adding any alcohol, whiskey, moonshine or other intoxicating liquor to said
3.2 percent malt liquors sold or consumed in the licensee’s place of
business, and if such intoxicating liquor is added to such 3.2 percent malt
liquor in the premises, it is deemed to have been done with the knowledge,
acquiescence and consent of the licensee.



('72 Code, § 810:75)  (Am. Ord. 1997-841, passed 3-24-97)  Penalty, see §
10.99



ON-SALE WINE LICENSE



§ 112.095  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ON-SALE WINE LICENSE.  A license authorizing the sale of wine not
exceeding 14% alcohol by volume, for consumption on the licensed premises
only, in conjunction with the sale of food.



   RESTAURANT.  An establishment, under the control of a single
proprietor or manager, having appropriate facilities for serving meals and
seating not fewer than 25 guests, and where, in consideration of payment
therefore, meals are regularly served at tables to the general public, and
which employs an adequate staff to provide the usual and suitable service to
its guests.



('72 Code, § 820:00)



§ 112.096  APPLICATION.



   Application for an on-sale wine license must be made in the manner
specified and subject to the conditions set forth in §§ 112.030 et seq.
where applicable.  On-sale wine licenses may be granted only to restaurants
as defined herein.



('72 Code, § 820:05)



§ 112.097  FEES.



   At the time of filing such application the licensee must deposit the
required license fee in the amount set by the Council from time to time.  A
license must not be issued until the fee has been paid.  The license fees
required to be paid are in addition to all other license fees required under
any and all other ordinances.  The City Council may, in its discretion,
prorate any or all license fees as it considers appropriate under the
circumstances including, but not limited to, when a license is issued for un
unexpired portion of a license year.



('72 Code, § 820:10)  (Am. Ord. 2002-971, passed 5-13-02)



Cross-reference:



   License fees, see Appendix



§ 112.098  HOURS.



   Sales under an on-sale wine license are subject to the restrictions
specified in § 112.041.



('72 Code, § 820:15)  (Am. Ord. 1989-641(A), passed  - - )  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 112.099  BOND.



   A bond as required by §§ 112.034 and 112.035 must be filed with the
City Clerk or the City Clerk’s designee.  An on-sale wine license is not
effective until the license and bond are approved by the State Department of
Public Safety.



('72 Code, § 820:20)



§ 112.100  ZONING LOCATION.



   Notwithstanding the prohibition against serving intoxicating liquor,
on-sale wine licenses are considered as restaurants (Class I) as defined in
the zoning code.  All other restrictions in said section apply to
restaurants holding on-sale wine licenses.



('72 Code, § 820:25)



§ 112.101  SALE OF INTOXICATING MALT LIQUOR.



   A holder of an on-sale wine license pursuant to this chapter who is
also licensed to sell 3.2 percent malt liquors on-sale pursuant to §
112.056, and whose gross receipts are at least 60% attributable to the sale
of food, may sell intoxicating malt liquors on-sale.



(Ord. 2004-1023, passed 12-6-04)



BREWER TAPROOM LICENSES



§ 112.200  DEFINITION.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, BREWER TAPROOM LICENSE shall mean
a license authorizing the on-sale of malt liquor produced by a brewer for
consumption on the premises of or adjacent to one brewer location owned by
the brewer. 



(Ord. 2012-1140, passed 4-16-12)



§ 112.201  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   A brewer taproom license may be issued to the holder of a brewer's
license under M. S. § 340A.301, Subd. 6(c), (i) or (j). 



(Ord. 2012-1140, passed 4-16-12)



§ 112.202  CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The only alcoholic beverages sold or consumed on the premises
of the taproom will be malt liquor produced by the brewer upon the brewery
premises.



   (B)   No taproom shall be located across a public right-of-way such
as a street or alley from the brewery location.



   (C)   All other provisions of this chapter, except §§ 112.034 and
112.035, shall be applicable to such licenses and licensees unless
inconsistent with the provisions of this section.



   (D)   Nothing in this section shall preclude the holder of a brewer
taproom license from also holding a license to operate a restaurant at the
taproom location.



(Ord. 2012-1140, passed 4-16-12; Am. Ord. 2016-1203, passed 3-14-16)



BREWPUB LICENSES



§ 112.210  OFF-SALE PERMITTED.



   Brewpub off-sale malt liquor license as provided in M.S. § 340A.301,
Subd. 7, which may be issued to a brewer who holds a brewer license issued by
the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety for the operation of a brewpub
and shall be operated in and as a part of a restaurant establishment for
which an on-sale intoxicating liquor license has been issued by the city. 



   (A)   An off-sale license may be issued solely for the malt liquor
produced and packaged on the licensed premises and only upon approval of the
license by the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety.



   (B)   Off-sale malt liquor shall be limited to the legal hours for
off-sale pursuant to M.S. § 340A.504, Subd. 4 and must be removed from the
premises before the applicable off-sale closing time requirements.



   (C)   Only malt liquor may be brewed or manufactured at the licensed
premises and not more than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a calendar year
may be brewed or manufactured at the licensed premises.



(Ord. 2012-1140, passed 4-16-12)



§ 112.211  PACKAGING REQUIREMENTS.



   The malt liquor sold off-sale shall be packaged in 64-ounce containers,
commonly known as "growlers" and shall have the following requirements for
packaging:



   (A)   The containers shall bear a twist type closure, cork, stopper,
or plug.



   (B)   At the time of sale, a paper or plastic adhesive band, strip,
or sleeve shall be applied to the container and extend over the top of the
twist type closure, cork, stopper, or plug forming a seal that must be broken
upon opening of the container.



   (C)   The adhesive band, strip, or sleeve shall bear the name and
address of the brewer/licensee selling the malt liquor.



   (D)   The containers shall be identified as malt liquor, contain the
name of the malt liquor, bear the name and address of the brewer/licensee
selling the malt liquor, and the contents in the container packaged as
required herein shall be considered intoxicating liquor unless the alcoholic
content is labeled as otherwise in accordance with the provisions of Minn.
Rules 7515.1100.



(Ord. 2012-1140, passed 4-16-12)



TEMPORARY LICENSES



§ 112.300  TEMPORARY ON-SALE PERMITTED.



   (A)   (1)   The City Council may authorize a temporary 3.2
percent malt liquor license or intoxicating liquor license to:



         (a)   A club or charitable, religious, or other
nonprofit organization in existence for at least three years,



         (b)   A political committee registered under M.S.
§10A.14, or



         (c)   A state university, a temporary license for the
on-sale of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the
municipality sponsored by the licensee.



      (2)   The license may authorize the on-sale of intoxicating
liquor for not more than four consecutive days, and may authorize on-sales on
premises other than premises the licensee owns or permanently occupies. The
license may provide that the licensee may contract for intoxicating liquor
catering services with the holder of a full-year on-sale intoxicating liquor
license issued by the city. The licenses are subject to the terms, including
a license fee, imposed by the city. Licenses issued under this subdivision
are subject to all laws and ordinances governing the sale of intoxicating
liquor except M.S. §§ 340A.409 and 340A.504, Subd. 3, paragraph (d), and
those laws and ordinances which by their nature are not applicable. Licenses
under this subdivision are not valid unless first approved by the
Commissioner of Public Safety.



   (B)   The City Council may issue to a brewer who manufactures fewer
than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year a temporary license for the
on-sale of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the
municipality sponsored by the brewer. The terms and conditions specified for
temporary licenses under division (A) shall apply to a license issued under
this division, except that the requirements of M.S. § 340A.409, Subd. 1 to
3a, shall apply to the license.



   (C)   The City Council may issue to a microdistillery a temporary
license for the on-sale of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social
event within the municipality sponsored by the microdistillery. The terms and
conditions specified for temporary licenses under division (A) shall apply to
a license issued under this division, except that the requirements of M.S. §
340A.409, Subd. 1 to 3a, shall apply to the license.



(Ord. 2012-1140, passed 4-16-12; Am. Ord. 2015-1196, passed 9-14-15)



MICRODISTILLERIES



§ 112.400  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, COCKTAIL ROOM LICENSE shall mean a
license authorizing a self-contained room for the on-sale of distilled liquor
produced by the distiller for consumption on the premises of or adjacent to
one distillery location owned by the distiller pursuant to M.S. § 340A.22.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, OFF-SALE MICRODISTILLERY LICENSE
shall mean a license authorizing the off-sale of distilled spirits
manufactured on-site pursuant to M.S. § 340A.22.



(Ord. 2014-1183, passed 10-6-14; Am. Ord. 2015-1196, passed 9-14-15)



§ 112.401  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   A cocktail room license may be issued to the holder of a
microdistillery license under M.S. § 340A.22.



   (B)   An off-sale microdistillery license may be issued to the
holder of a microdistillery license under M.S. § 340A.22.



(Ord. 2014-1183, passed 10-6-14; Am. Ord. 2015-1196, passed 9-14-15)



§ 112.402  FEES.



   At the time of filing such application the licensee must deposit the
required license fee in the amount set by the Council from time to time. A
license must not be issued until the fee has been paid. The license fees
required to be paid are in addition to all other fees required under any and
all other ordinances. The City Council may, in its discretion, prorate any or
all license fees as it considers appropriate under the circumstances
including, but not limited to, when a license is issued for an unexpired
portion of a license year.



(Ord. 2014-1183, passed 10-6-14; Am. Ord. 2015-1196, passed 9-14-15)



§ 112.403  CONDITIONS ON LICENSE.



   (A)   A cocktail room license is issued pursuant to the provisions
of M.S. § 340A.22. All other provisions of  §§ 112.001 to 112.049, except
§§ 112.034 and 112.035, shall be applicable to a cocktail room license and
a cocktail room licensee unless inconsistent with the provisions of this
subchapter or with the provisions of state law.



   (B)   An off-sale microdistillery license is issued pursuant to the
provisions of M.S. § 340A.22.  All other provisions of §§ 112.001 to
112.049, except §§ 112.034 and 112.035, shall be applicable to an off-sale
microdistillery license and an off-sale microdistillery licensee unless
inconsistent with the provisions of this subchapter or with the provisions of
state law.



(Ord. 2014-1183, passed 10-6-14; Am. Ord. 2015-1196, passed 9-14-15; Am. Ord.
2016-1203, passed 3-14-16)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 112.998  COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.



   All licensed premises must be open to inspection by the Police
Department or other authorized city official during regular business hours. 
From time to time, but at least as often as required by state law, the city
will conduct compliance checks, following the procedures and requirements
outlined in Minnesota State Statutes. Nothing in this section prohibits other
compliance checks authorized by state or federal law for educational,
research, or training purposes, or as required for the enforcement of any
local ordinance, or state or federal law.



(Ord. 2012-1140, passed 4-16-12)



§ 112.999  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY.



   (A)   Violations.



      (1)   Notice. Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the
alleged violator must be issued, either personally or by mail, a citation
that sets forth the alleged violation and which must inform the alleged
violator of their right to be heard on the accusation.



      (2)   Hearings.  If a person accused of violating this
chapter so requests, a hearing will be scheduled, the time and place of which
must be published and provided to the accused violator.



      (3)   Hearing officer. The City Council will periodically
approve a list of persons, from which the City Manager or designated agent
will randomly select a hearing officer to hear and determine a matter for
which a hearing is requested.



      (4)   Decision.  If the hearing officer determines that a
violation of this chapter did occur, that decision, along with the hearing
officers reasons for finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed under
division (B) of this section, must be recorded in writing, a copy of which
must be provided to the accused violator.  Likewise, if the hearing officer
finds that no violation occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any
penalty, the findings must be recorded and a copy provided to the acquitted
accused violator.



      (5)   Appeals.  Appeals of any decision made by the hearing
officer must be filed in the district court for the city in which the alleged
violation occurred.



      (6)   Prosecution.  Nothing in this section prohibits the
city or any other legitimate jurisdiction from seeking criminal prosecution
for violations of this chapter or any other state or federal law regulating
alcoholic beverages.



      (7)   Continued violation.  Each violation, and every day in
which a violation occurs or continues, constitutes a separate offense.



   (B)   Administrative penalties.



      (1)   Licensees.  Any licensee found to have violated this
chapter, or whose employee have violated this chapter, will be charged as
follows:



         (a)   First violation of this chapter, an administrative
fine of $500.



         (b)   Second offense at the same licensed premises
within a 24-month period, an administrative fine of $750.



         (c)   Third offense at the same licensed location within
a 24-month period, an administrative fine of $1,000 and the license will be
suspended for seven days.



         (d)   Fourth offense at the same licensed location
within a 24-month period, an administrative fine of $1,250 and the license
will be suspended for 30 days.



         (e)   Fifth offense at the same licensed location within
a 24-month period, an administrative fine of $1,500 and the license will be
revoked.



         (f)   It is an affirmative defense to the charge of
selling alcoholic beverages to a person under the age of 21 years in
violation of this chapter that the licensee or individual making the sale
relied in good faith upon proof of age as follows:



            1.   A valid driver's license or identification
card issued by the State of Minnesota, another state, or a province of
Canada, and including the photograph and date of birth of the licensed
person; or



            2.   A valid military identification card issued
by the United States Department of Defense; or



            3.   In the case of a foreign national, from a
nation other than Canada, by a valid passport.



      (2)   Other individuals.  Other individuals, other than
minors regulated by division (B)(3) of this section, found to be in violation
of this chapter will be charged an administrative fee of $50.



      (3)   Minors. Charges for minors found in unlawful possession
of, or who unlawfully purchase or attempt to purchase, alcohol or alcoholic
beverages will be routed through the Hennepin County Juvenile diversion
program.



      (4)   Criminal prosecution.  Nothing in this section
prohibits the city from seeking criminal prosecution for violations of this
chapter or any other state or federal law regulating alcoholic beverages.



(Ord. 2012-1140, passed 4-16-12)



CHAPTER 113:  AMUSEMENTS AND THEATRICAL ENTERTAINMENT



Section




Motion Picture Establishments




   113.40   Definitions



   113.41   License required



   113.42   Application



   113.43   Fees



   113.44   Standards of issuance



   113.45   Duties of licensee



   113.46   Films



   113.47   Standards for maintenance of premises



   113.48   Revocation or suspension



   113.49   Summary action



   113.50   Applicable laws




Lawful Gambling




   113.60   Purpose



   113.61   Definitions



   113.62   Lawful gambling



   113.63   Additional regulations



   113.64   Adoption by reference



MOTION PICTURE ESTABLISHMENTS



§ 113.40  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   LICENSEE.  A person having a city license in full force and effect
issued hereunder for a motion picture establishment.



   MOTION PICTURE ESTABLISHMENT.  Any premises in which motion pictures
are projected upon the screen for viewing by patrons and for which an
admission charge is made.



   PERSON.  Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.



('72 Code, § 426:00)  (Ord. 1979-296(A), passed 7-23-79)



§ 113.41  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for a person to engage in the business of operating a
motion picture establishment or to exhibit any motion pictures for which
admission is charged either directly or indirectly without a license;
provided that no license is necessary for any motion picture exhibition which
is given for the benefit of any school, church or benevolent institution or
for any charitable purpose or is exhibited in any home.



('72 Code, § 426:05)  (Ord. 1979-296(A), passed 7-23-79)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 113.42  APPLICATION.



   Application for a license issued hereunder must be made upon forms
prepared and made available by the Licensing Division and must state:



   (A)   The name and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual.  The name and address of all partners in the case of a
partnership.  The name and address of all officers in the case of a
corporation.



   (B)   Three references as to financial responsibility and three
references as to good character of the applicant or applicants.



   (C)   The hours of operation of the motion picture establishment.



   (D)   The application required hereunder must be accompanied by a
plat or drawing of the motion picture establishment showing its location,
size and capacity, location and size of entrances and exits, kind of ground
surface, location, size and construction of all structures and location, size
and construction of any walls, fences or barriers surrounding the premises.



   (E)   In cases where the applicant lives outside of Hennepin County,
the application must be signed by a resident, subject to service of process,
who must be locally responsible for compliance with this and other ordinances
of the city and the licensee must always have a person authorized to accept
service of process for the licensee and the person must live in Hennepin
County.



('72 Code, § 426:10)  (Ord. 1979-296(A), passed 7-23-79)



§ 113.43  FEES.



   An application for a license hereunder must be accompanied by the
annual license fee.  The fee is as established in the Appendix to this code.



('72 Code, § 426:15)  (Ord. 1979-296(A), passed 7-23-79)



§ 113.44  STANDARDS OF ISSUANCE.



   The City Council must approve the issuance of a license hereunder when
they find:



   (A)   That the applicant is capable of operating the proposed
business in a manner consistent with the public health, safety and general
welfare; and



   (B)   That the requirements of this subchapter and of all other
governing laws and ordinances have been met.



('72 Code, § 426:20) (Ord. 1979-296(A), passed 7-23-79; Am. Ord. 2004-1013,
passed 5-10-04)



§ 113.45  DUTIES OF LICENSEE.



   A licensee hereunder must comply with the following requirements and
standards of operation:



   (A)   Quiet and good order.  The licensee must maintain quiet and
good order upon the premises where any motion picture establishment is
operated and loitering must not be permitted in or about the entrances or
exits from such theater.  All indoor motion picture establishments must have
at least four exits to the ground for use in case of fire which must be
accessible at all times and if above ground must have one fireproof stairway
leading thereto.  The doors of all indoor motion picture theaters must be so
hung and arranged as to open and swing outward during any exhibition of a
motion picture and must be kept unlocked and unfastened during the exhibition
and in such condition that immediate egress from such building must not be
hindered, prevented or delayed.



   (B)   All aisles in indoor motion picture theaters having seats on
each side must not be less than three feet in width and increased in width
two inches for every ten feet of the seats farthest from the exit.



   (C)   Every projection machine in a motion picture establishment
must be housed in a fireproof booth constructed to conform with the laws of
the State of Minnesota and the ordinances of the City of Brooklyn Park.



   (D)   In addition to the other inspections required by law the Fire
Chief must inspect all motion picture establishments and if the Chief deems
the same not to afford proper protection to the public in cases of fire or
accident the Chief must cause the building to be closed to the public until
it shall be so arranged as to afford proper protection in such cases.



   (E)   The licensee must not permit indecent, obscene immoral or
suggestive advertising on the premises of any motion picture establishment
and no picture or other form of advertising is permitted which is not true to
the theatrical performance or a moving picture entertainment as advertised or
which misleads or misinforms the public as to the nature of the picture or
entertainment to be exhibited.



   (F)   The licensee must not admit children under the age of 16 to
any outdoor motion picture establishment unless accompanied by and in direct
personal charge of the child's parent or other responsible person.



   (G)   (1)   Non-intoxicating or intoxicating liquor must not be
drunk, consumed, served, kept or displayed on any premises licensed under
this ordinance.



      (2)   A person must not have in the person's possession or on
the person's person while in a private motor vehicle upon the premises of a
theater licensed under this subchapter, any bottle or receptacle containing
intoxicating or 3.2 percent malt liquor which has been opened, or the seal
broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed.



      (3)   It is unlawful for the owner of any private motor
vehicle or the driver, if the owner is not then present in the motor vehicle,
to keep or allow to be kept in a motor vehicle when the vehicle is upon the
premises of a licensed theater, any bottle or receptacle containing
intoxicating liquors or 3.2 percent malt liquors which has been opened, or
the seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed except
when such bottle or receptacle is kept in the trunk of the motor vehicle when
the vehicle is equipped with a trunk, or kept in some other area of the
vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or passengers, if the motor
vehicle is not equipped with a trunk.  A utility compartment or glove
compartment is deemed to be within the area occupied by the driver and
passengers.



('72 Code, § 426:25)  (Ord. 1979-296(A), passed 7-23-79)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 113.46  FILMS.



   It is unlawful for a licensee to knowingly allow or permit the showing
of any motion picture containing the following when there are present within
the licensee’s establishment children under the age of 18 years or when the
motion picture is visible from any public thoroughfare or private property
other than the property on which the picture is being shown:



   (A)    NUDITY means the showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic areas, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering or
the showing of an uncovered, or less than opaquely covered, female breast
below a point immediately above the top of the nipple (or the breast with the
nipple and immediately adjacent area only covered).



   (B)    SEXUAL CONDUCT means any of the following depicted sexual
conduct:



      (1)   Sadomasochistic abuse, meaning flagellation or torture
by or upon a person who is nude, or clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre
costume, or the condition of being bound, fettered, or otherwise physically
restrained on the part of one who is so clothed as an act of sexual
stimulation or gratification;



      (2)   Human defecation or urination;



      (3)   The condition of human male or female genitals, or the
breasts of the female when in a state of sexual stimulation, or the sensual
experience of humans in engaging in or witnessing sexual conduct or nudity; or



      (4)   Human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy, actual
or simulated, or any touching of the genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of a
human being, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or
between humans or animals in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or
gratification.



   (C)   An obscene motion picture as defined in M.S. § 617.298, Subd.
2.



   (D)   Any other conduct which is so obscene as to be unfit to be
seen by children under the age of 18 years old when viewed in light of
contemporary community standards, and is utterly without redeeming social
importance for minors.



('72 Code, § 426:30)  (Ord. 1979-296(A), passed 7-23-79)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 113.47  STANDARDS FOR MAINTENANCE OF PREMISES.



   (A)   Access.  The licensee must provide access available to public
streets or other public ways from at least two points at all times.  Such
means of access must be kept clear by the licensee at all times to facilitate
the departure of persons and vehicles and to permit entrance of fire
apparatus or ambulances in case of emergency.  Drives must be channelized by
the licensee and limited to not more than three lanes to control traffic.



   (B)   Drives.  All drives and areas used by vehicles within 50 feet
of the public right of way must be satisfactorily paved by the licensee or
treated to avoid creating dust.



   (C)   Lighting.  Exits and passageways leading to them must be kept
adequately lighted by the licensee at all times when opened to the public. 
The licensee must provide artificial light whenever natural light is
inadequate.



   (D)   State and city fire laws.  All rules, regulations and
conditions adopted, issued and prescribed by the State Fire Marshal under any
and all laws of this state are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated
in and made a part of this chapter as completely as if set out here in
full.  The licensee is subject to any and all rules, regulations and city
code requirements adopted by this Council or issued and prescribed by the
City Fire Chief.  Three copies of the laws and of the rules, regulations and
conditions are hereby filed with the City Clerk and made a part of this
record and the City Clerk is hereby instructed to keep said copies available
for inspection at all times to any interested party.  Any violation of any
provision of the laws or of the rules, regulations and conditions is a
violation of this subchapter.



   (E)   Sanitary facilities.  Adequate and proper sanitary facilities
approved by the Health Department must be provided by the licensee.



   (F)   Attendants.  At all times when a motion picture establishment
is open to the public the licensee must provide an adequate number of
qualified attendants on duty at all times who must see that order is
maintained, that disorderly or immoral conduct is prevented, that the
entrances and exits are kept free from congestion and that this subchapter
and all other governing ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to
motion picture establishments are observed.



   (G)   Fence or wall.  The licensees of any outdoor motion picture
establishment must provide a wall or fence of adequate height to screen the
patrons and cars in attendance at the theater from the view of the
surrounding property.  Such fence must be of design and structure approved
by the City Building Official.  The perimeter of the fence must be
landscaped with suitable plants and shrubbery to preserve as far as possible
harmony with the appearance of the surrounding property.



   (H)   Noise.  The licensee of any outdoor motion picture theater
must provide individual loudspeakers for each car and a central loudspeaker
system must not be permitted by the licensee.



   (I)   Commercial activities.  Any sale of soft drinks, confections
or other articles of merchandise is governed by the laws and ordinances
governing such business and requires the same license as if such sale were
conducted elsewhere.



('72 Code, § 426:35)  (Ord. 1979-296(A), passed 7-23-79)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 113.48  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.



   (A)   Every license or permit issued under this subchapter is
subject to the right, which is hereby expressly reserved, to suspend or
revoke the same should the license holder or their agents, employees,
representatives or lessees directly or indirectly operate or maintain motion
picture establishments contrary to the provisions of this subchapter or any
other ordinance of the city or any special permit issued by the city or the
laws of the State of Minnesota.



   (B)   The license may be suspended or revoked by the Council after a
written notice is sent to the license holder specifying the ordinance or law
violations with which they are charged.  This notice must also specify the
date for hearing before the Council, which must not be less than ten days
from the date of the notice.



   (C)   At such hearing before the Council, the license holder or
their attorneys may submit and present witnesses in their defense.



   (D)   After a hearing the Council may suspend or revoke the license
if they deem it necessary to protect the public health, safety or general
welfare.



('72 Code, § 426:40)  (Ord. 1979-296(A), passed 7-23-79)



§ 113.49  SUMMARY ACTION.



   (A)   When the conduct of any license holder or their agent,
representative, employee or lessee or the condition of their motion picture
establishment is detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare
as to constitute a nuisance, fire hazard or other unsafe or dangerous
condition and thus give rise to an emergency, the Building Official has the
authority to summarily condemn or close off such area of the motion picture
establishment.



   (B)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Building Official to
cease business or revoke or suspend the license or permit is entitled to
appeal to the Council, immediately by filing a notice of appeal with the
Manager.  The Manager must schedule a date for hearing before the Council
and notify the aggrieved person of the date.



   (C)   The hearing must be conducted in the same manner as if the
aggrieved person had not received summary action.



   (D)   The decision of the Building Official is not voided by the
filing of such appeal.  Only after the Council has held its hearing will the
decision of the Building Official be affected.



('72 Code, § 426:45)  (Ord. 1979-296(A), passed 7-23-79)



§ 113.50  APPLICABLE LAWS.



   Licensees are subject to all of the ordinances of the city and the
State of Minnesota relating to motion picture establishments; and this
subchapter must not be construed or interpreted to supersede or limit any
other such applicable ordinance or law.



('72 Code, § 426:50)  (Ord. 1979-296(A), passed 7-23-79)



LAWFUL GAMBLING



§ 113.60  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to incorporate M.S. §§ 349.11
through 349.23, inclusive into the city code, to regulate legal forms of
gambling, to prevent the commercialization of gambling, to insure integrity
of operations, and providing for the use of net profits only for lawful
purposes.  It also provides for local regulation and approval as authorized
by M.S. § 349.213.



('72 Code, § 491:00)  (Ord. 1988-597(A), passed  - -  )



§ 113.61  DEFINITIONS.



   The terms used in this subchapter and defined in M.S. §§ 349.11
through 349.22, inclusive, and defined in the rules adopted pursuant to the
authority contained in the said statutes have the meanings set forth in those
statutes and rules.



('72 Code, § 491:05)  (Ord. 1988-597(A), passed  - - )



§ 113.62  LAWFUL GAMBLING.



   Gambling is unlawful in the City of Brooklyn Park except bingo, raffle
games, paddlewheels, tipboards and pull-tabs duly licensed or otherwise
allowed pursuant to the provisions of this section; M.S. §§ 349.11 through
349.22, inclusive, and rules adopted pursuant to the authority contained in
said statutes.



   (A)   No Brooklyn Park permit is required for the conduct of
gambling exempt from licensing under state law.



   (B)   Nothing in this section is deemed to be an automatic approval
of a license applied for with the Charitable Gambling Control Board.  The
city reserves the right to disapprove licenses for individual bingo
occasions, raffle games, paddlwheels, tipboards and pull-tab distributions.



('72 Code, § 491:10)  (Ord. 1988-597(A), passed  - -; Am. Ord. 2002-963,
passed 2-11-02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.63  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.



   In addition to the requirements of M.S. §§ 349.11 through 349.22,
inclusive, and rules adopted pursuant to the authority contained in those
statutes, lawful gambling is subject to the regulations set forth in the
following divisions:



   (A)   Except as provided in this division, it is unlawful to
disseminate in the city, in any manner, information concerning any present or
future lawful gambling event of opportunity.



      (1)   An organization conducting lawful gambling, duly
licensed or otherwise allowed pursuant to the statutes and rules referred to
in this section, may disseminate information to its own membership about such
games.



      (2)   Signs advertising bingo, a raffle or a pull-tab
distribution are regulated pursuant to the provisions of the applicable
sections of this code.



      (3)   Advertising and news reporting contained in newspaper,
radio and television media available to the general public of more than one
municipality and addressed to the general public, and not addressed to the
residents of Brooklyn Park, is exempt from the provisions of this section.



   (B)   Pull-tab operations.



      (1)   Pull-tab operations may not be conducted on any premises
other than a church, a licensed bingo hall, the premises of a fraternal,
veterans or other non-profit organization, or the premises of an on-sale
liquor licensee of the City of Brooklyn Park.



      (2)   To be licensed to conduct pull-tab operations, any
organization or local subdivision thereof, must meet all the following
requirements:



         (a)   The organization or the local subdivision has been
in continuous existence holding meetings and conforming with the requirements
of this subdivision for more than one year prior to the approval of the
license; and



         (b)   Pursuant to M.S. § 349.213, 75% of the net
profits of any Brooklyn Park pull-tab distribution will be spent in the City
of Brooklyn Park or on items or activities that will directly benefit
citizens of Brooklyn Park.  For purposes of this division, the term NET
PROFITS means all monies received from pull-tab purchasers minus amounts
spent for necessary and statutorily allowed expenses related to the pull-tab
distribution.



         (c)   The term TRADE AREA means all that area described
below:  City of Brooklyn Park, and all contiguous cities and the City of
Minneapolis.



      (3)   A pull-tab operation at a licensed bingo hall may only
be conducted by the same organization that is simultaneously conducting the
bingo event.



      (4)   Any one organization may hold three licenses within the
city.



('72 Code, § 491:15)  (Ord. 1988-597(A), passed - -; Am. Ord. 1990-644(A),
passed 2-26-90; Am. Ord. 1994-699, passed - -; Am. Ord. 1994-765, passed
7-25-94; Am. Ord. 1999-895, passed 3-22-99; Am. Ord. 2000-927, passed
6-26-00)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.64  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   M.S. §§ 349.11 through 349.22, inclusive, and rules adopted pursuant
to the authority contained in said statutes are hereby adopted by reference
and are incorporated in this subchapter as completely as if set out in full.



('72 Code, § 491:20)  (Ord. 1988-597(A), passed  - - )



CHAPTER 114:  FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS



Section



   114.01   Findings and purpose



   114.02   Adoption of state and county regulations



   114.03   Definitions



   114.04   License administration



   114.05   License fees; exemptions; reinspection fees



   114.06   Inspections



   114.07   Emergency closure



   114.08   Procedures for emergency closure



   114.09   Standards for health, safety and nuisance prevention



   114.10   Industry self-survey and training responsibility



§ 114.01  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   Purpose. This chapter is enacted to establish standards for
the regulation of food establishments to protect the health, safety and
general welfare of the people of the city pursuant to powers granted under
M.S. Chapters 28A and 145A, and subsequent recodifications and/or amendments
as may be adopted from time to time.



   (B)   Objectives. The general objectives of this chapter are as
follows:



      (1)   To prevent foodborne illness.



      (2)   To correct and prevent conditions that may adversely
affect persons utilizing food establishments.



      (3)   To provide standards for the design, construction,
operation, and maintenance of food establishments.



      (4)   To meet consumer expectations of the safety of food
establishments.



   (C)   Scope.  This chapter is applicable to all food establishments
where food, meals, snacks, beverages, or ingredients thereof are stored,
prepared, or sold for consumption on or off the premises.  Food
establishments include, but are not limited to restaurants, boarding houses,
drive-ins, bars, taverns, brew pubs, cafeterias, delicatessens, snack bars,
grocery stores, retail bakeries, micro markets, convenience stores, meat
markets, caterers, cafes, clubs, lodges, commissaries, lodging facilities,
resorts, public and private schools, public buildings, group day care
facilities, concession stands, satellite or catered feeding locations,
catering food vehicles, food delivery services, mobile food units, itinerant
and other temporary food events, vending machines, food or beverage carts,
and similar business and establishments.



(Ord. 2001-958, passed 10-22-01; Am. Ord. 2019-1237, passed 2-25-19)



§ 114.02  ADOPTION OF STATE AND COUNTY REGULATIONS.



   For the purpose of prescribing regulations governing food
establishments, the following rules and statutes and subsequent
recodifications and/or amendments and other applicable legislation, as may be
adopted form time to time.



   (A)   M.S. Chapters 157, 17.04, 29.21, 29.23, 29.235, 29.236,
29.237, 29.24, 29.25, 29.26, 29.27 and 30.49, applicable sections of M.S.
Chapters 28A, 31 and 34A.



   (B)   Minn. Rules Chapter 4626, except 4626.033 subparts G through
O, 4626.1720B and 4626.1760.



   (C)   Hennepin County Food Protection Ordinance 3 is adopted by
reference and incorporated into the city code in full, except as otherwise
modified in this chapter.



   (D)   Applicable sections of Minn. Rules parts 1520, 1545, 1550 and
1556.



(Ord. 2001-958, passed 10-22-01; Am. Ord. 2012-1135, passed 3-26-12; Am. Ord.
2019-1237, passed 2-25-19)



§ 114.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY.   The City of Brooklyn Park and its designated employees or
person-in-charges.



   HEALTH AUTHORITY.   As used in this chapter or the Hennepin County
Ordinance  No. 3, the city's Code Enforcement and Public Health Division,
its designated employees, or other designated agents.



   ITINERANT FOOD ESTABLISHMENT.   A food establishment operating as a
seasonal permanent food stand, seasonal temporary food stand, or special
event food stand as defined in M.S. § 157.15, Subd. 12.a, 13, and 14.



   MOBILE FOOD UNIT.   A self-contained food service operation, located
in a readily movable motorized wheeled or towed vehicle, used to store,
prepare, display or serve food intended for individual portion service that
is readily movable without disassembling, or as defined in M.S. § 157.15,
Subd. 9.



   REGULATORY AUTHORITY.   As used in Minn. Rules Chapter 4626, the
city’s Code Enforcement and Public Health Division, its designated
employees, or other designated agents.



(Ord. 2001-958, passed 10-22-01; Am. Ord. 2014-1177, passed 7-7-14)



§ 114.04  LICENSE ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   License required.  It is unlawful to operate a food
establishment within the city or engage in any enterprises described herein,
unless a license has been obtained.  Each license must be obtained in
accordance with the requirements of the city code.



   (B)   General licensing.  The application for such licenses must be
made on forms furnished by the city and must describe the general nature of
the business, the location, and any other information deemed necessary by the
city.



   (C)   License expiration.  Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter
commence and expire on the dates indicated on the license certificate.  With
the exception of the itinerant food establishment licenses, all food
establishment licenses will be issued for the applicable license year. 
Itinerant food establishment licenses will be issued for the specific days
that the itinerant food establishment is in operation.



   (D)   Transfer and display of license.  Only a person who complies
with the requirements of this chapter is entitled to receive a license.  A
license is not transferable as to person or place.  A valid license must be
located onsite and posted so that it  is clearly visible to the public.



(Ord. 2001-958, passed 10-22-01; Am. Ord. 2019-1237, passed 2-25-19) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.05  LICENSE FEES; EXEMPTIONS; REINSPECTION FEES.



   (A)   Fees. Fees for licenses issued hereunder must be in the amount
set forth by the Council.  An additional fee will be charged for each
additional service or operation that is separate, distinct or unique from the
central or main food establishment, as determined by the Health Authority.



   (B)   Late fees. If work has commenced prior to approval of
construction or remodeling, or license fees are submitted after the annual
license date, additional fees will be assessed according to the fees set
forth by the Council.



   (C)   Fee exemptions. Food establishments operated by governmental
subdivisions, charitable institutions, places of worship, or non-profit
agencies are required to obtain a license and comply with the provisions of
this chapter, but are not required to pay a fee.



   (D)   Reinspection fees.  A reinspection fee will not be charged
for the first reinspection conducted to determine correction of a code
violation.  A reinspection fee, as set forth by the Council, may be charged
for each subsequent reinspection. 



(Ord. 2001-958, passed 10-22-01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.06  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Inspection required.  The Health Authority will inspect each
food establishment prior to issuing a license for a new establishment, as
part of a construction or remodeling plan review, as part of a complaint
investigation, or for routine inspection.  A license will not be issued
until the food establishment meets the standards of this chapter as
demonstrated by a satisfactory inspection.



   (B)   Construction inspection.  The food establishment must be
constructed in conformance with the approved plans.  A building permit will
not be issued for a food establishment for remodeling or alteration for such
establishment until such plans have the approval of the Health Authority. 
The Health Authority will inspect the food establishment as frequently as
necessary during construction to ensure that construction occurs in
conformance with this chapter.  The food establishment owner, operator, or
person-in-charge must contact the Health Authority and obtain a final
inspection prior to the start of operations and issuance of a license or to
resume operations after remodeling.



   (C)   Access to premises and records.  The person operating the
food establishment must, upon request of the Health Authority and after
proper identification, permit access to all parts of the establishment at any
reasonable time for the purpose of inspection and must exhibit and allow
copying of any records necessary to ascertain sources of food.



   (D)   Interference with Health Authority.  It is unlawful to
interfere with or hinder the Health Authority in the performance of its
duties, or refuse to permit the Health Authority to make such inspections.



   (E)   Removal and correction of violations.  The owner, or
operator, or person-in-charge of a food establishment, upon receipt of a
report giving notification of one or more violations of this chapter, must
correct or remove each violation in a reasonable length of time as determined
by the Health Authority.  The length of time for the correction or removal
of each such violation will be noted on the inspection report.  Failure to
remove or correct each violation within the time period noted on the
inspection report constitutes a separate violation of this chapter.  The
Health Authority may issue orders to halt construction or remodeling, or to
take corrective measures to ensure compliance with this chapter.



(Ord. 2001-958, passed 10-22-01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.07  EMERGENCY CLOSURE.



   If any of the following conditions exist, the operator may be ordered
to discontinue all operations of the food establishment:



   (A)   Failure to possess a license required by this chapter;



   (B)   Evidence of a sewage backup in a food preparation, food
storage, or utensil washing area;



   (C)   Lack of potable, plumbed, hot or cold water to the extent that
hand washing , utensil washing, food preparation, or toilet facilities are
not operational;



   (D)   Lack of electricity or gas service to the extent that hand
washing, utensil washing, food preparation, lighting, or toilet facilities
are not operational;



   (E)   Evidence of an ongoing foodborne illness associated with the
operation of the establishment;



   (F)   Significant damage to the food establishment due to tornado,
fire, flood, or other disaster;



   (G)   Evidence of infestation of rodents or other vermin;



   (H)   Evidence of cross contamination, filthy conditions, untrained
staff or poor personal hygiene;



   (I)   Lack of an effective means of sanitizing dishes or utensils; or



   (J)   Any time an immediate health or safety hazard or public health
nuisance exists.



(Ord. 2001-958, passed 10-22-01)



§ 114.08  PROCEDURES FOR EMERGENCY CLOSURE.



   (A)   Notification. The Health Authority, with the approval of the
City Manager, may immediately close a food establishment if a violation is
found that constitutes an imminent health or safety hazard.  After written
notice is provided, the food establishment operator must immediately cease
operation. The notice must identify the food establishment, describe the
specific grounds for closure of the establishment, direct the immediate
closure of the establishment and vacating of the premises by consumers, list
the corrective actions necessary to re-open the establishment, and state that
a hearing on the emergency closure may be requested by the licensee.  The
notice must be served upon the owner, food establishment operator, or
person-in-charge.



   (B)   Reopening process. The person-in-charge or person receiving
the order must close the establishment and ensure the premises is vacated in
accordance with the notice.  The establishment must remain closed until the
Health Authority rescinds the order for emergency closure.  When the food
establishment operator notifies the health authority that the violations have
been corrected, the Health Authority must re-inspect the food establishment
within a reasonable length of time.  If all violations constituting the
ground for emergency closure have been corrected, the Health Authority must
reopen the establishment.



   (C)   Appeal process. The licensee may appeal the temporary
suspension and request a hearing in writing as to the conditions, if any, to
be imposed for reopening the food establishment.  The hearing must be held
within two business days.  A written decision must be made within two
business days after the conclusion of the hearing.



(Ord. 2001-958, passed 10-22-01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.09  STANDARDS FOR HEALTH, SAFETY AND NUISANCE PREVENTION.



   (A)   The food establishment licensee must receive approval from the
Health Authority prior to implementing the provisions in Minn. Rules 4626.
The city specifically adopts the following additional standards for health
and safety to Minn. Rules Chapter 4626 for food service establishments
excluding retail food establishments delegated by the State Department of
Agriculture.



   (B)   A hand washing lavatory must be equipped to provide water to
the user at a temperature of at least 43° C. (110° F.), but not more than
54° C. (130° F.) in a food establishment and not more than 48° C. (120°
F.) in a sink that is used by children, such as a school, day care or
preschool, through a mixing valve or combination faucet.



   (C)   Materials for indoor floor, wall, and ceiling surfaces under
conditions of normal use must be non-absorbent and resistant to the wear and
abuse to which they are subjected.  Materials such as, but not limited to,
quarry tile, ceramic tile, or terrazzo are approved for floor surfaces in
food preparation areas, walk-in refrigerators, walk-in freezers, warewashing
areas, toilet rooms, mobile food establishment servicing areas, handwash
areas, janitorial areas, laundry areas, interior garbage and refuse storage
rooms, wait stations, kitchens, bars, areas subject to flushing or spray
cleaning methods, and other areas subject to moisture.



   (D)   A supply of toilet tissue in a mounted dispenser must be
available at each toilet.



   (E)   The plans and specifications for a food establishment must
include the proposed layout to scale, mechanical schematics, construction
materials, and finish schedules.



(Ord. 2001-958, passed 10-22-01; Am. Ord. 2019-1237, passed 2-25-19) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.10  INDUSTRY SELF-SURVEY AND TRAINING RESPONSIBILITY.



   Every licensee or person-in-charge of a food establishment must arrange
for and maintain a program of sanitation self-inspection conducted by the
owner, person-in-charge, or designated agent as approved by the Health
Authority.  The self-inspection program must include written policies,
employee training procedures, appropriate forms for logging self-inspections,
and evidence that routine self-inspection of all aspects of the food
establishment takes place.  A description of the food establishment
operation, including the menu, must be available for review.



(Ord. 2001-958, passed 10-22-01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 115:  [RESERVED]



CHAPTER 116:  [RESERVED]



CHAPTER 117:  LODGING AND HOUSING ESTABLISHMENTS



Section



Lodging Establishments



   117.25   Additional provisions



   117.26   License required



   117.27   Application for license



   117.28   Inspection



   117.29   License expiration and renewal



   117.30   Licensing regulations and fees



Rental Establishments



   117.40   Purpose



   117.41   Intent



   117.42   Definitions



   117.43   License required



   117.44   License period



   117.45   Fees



   117.46   Application



   117.47   License transfer



   117.48   Display of license



   117.481-   Report changes in ownership



   117.482-   Tenant register



   117.483-   Responsibility for acts of manager



   117.484-   No retaliation



   117.485   Point of conversion inspection



   117.49   Conduct on rental property



   117.491   Minnesota Crime Free Multi-housing Program



   117.50   Landscape condition



   117.51   Safety from fire



   117.52   Enforcement



   117.521   Assessment of unpaid administrative penalties



   117.53   Removal of snow and ice



LODGING ESTABLISHMENTS



§ 117.25  ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.



   Except as otherwise modified in this chapter, the following provisions,
including all future revisions to them, in Minnesota Statutes and Minnesota
Rules, are adopted and incorporated by reference into this chapter:



   (A)   M.S. Chapter 157, except § 157.16;



   (B)   M.S. §§ 327.10 through 327.131 and §§ 327.70 through
327.76; and



   (C)   Minn. Rules Chapter 4625.



(Ord. 2012-1135, passed 3-26-12)



§ 117.26  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any person to operate a lodging establishment unless
the City of Brooklyn Park has issued a valid license, including plan review
approval. The license must be on display in the immediate vicinity of the
customer registration area and conveniently accessible upon demand.



('72 Code, § 456:05)  (Ord. 1976-230(A), passed  - -; Am. Ord. 2012-1135,
passed 3-26-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 117.27  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   Application for license hereunder must be submitted to the Licensing
Division in such form and manner as the City Clerk may prescribe.



('72 Code, § 456:10)  (Ord. 1976-230(A), passed  - - )



§ 117.28  INSPECTION.



   The Code Enforcement & Public Health Division or designated agent must
inspect every lodging establishment as frequently as deemed necessary to
insure compliance with this subchapter.



('72 Code, § 456:15)  (Ord. 1976-230(A), passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 2012-1135,
passed 3-26-12)



§ 117.29  LICENSE EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL.



   Licenses issued under this subchapter expire on the last day of
December each year.  License renewal applications must be filed with the
Licensing Division prior to the expiration date each year.



('72 Code, § 456:20)  (Ord. 1976-230(A), passed  - - )



§ 117.30  LICENSING REGULATIONS AND FEES.



   License application and possession is subject to § 110.37 of this
code.  The annual license fee for a lodging establishment is set by the
Appendix to this code.



('72 Code, § 456:25)  (Ord. 1976-230(A), passed  - - )



RENTAL ESTABLISHMENTS



§ 117.40  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this subchapter to protect the public health,
safety and welfare of the residents of rental dwellings in the City of
Brooklyn Park and to ensure that rental housing in the city is safe, sanitary
and operated and maintained not to become a nuisance to the neighborhood and
community.  The operation of rental residential properties is a business
enterprise that entails certain responsibilities.



('72 Code, § 455:00)  (Am. Ord. 1990-667(A), passed 12-17-90; Am. Ord.
2002-975, passed 6-10-02; Am. Ord. 2008-1090, passed 7-7-08)



§ 117.41  INTENT.



   It is the intent of this subchapter that a permanent mode of protecting
and regulating the living conditions of citizens of the city be established;
and that uniform standards be established and applicable for all rental
dwellings in the city.  This subchapter is not construed or interpreted to
supersede or limit any other such applicable ordinance or law.  This
subchapter applies to all rental dwellings whether or not a valid license is
in effect.  City staff will review this subchapter on an annual basis.



('72 Code, § 455:05)  (Am. Ord. 1983-421(A), passed 5-9-83; Am. Ord.
1996-795, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 2008-1090, passed 7-7-08)



§ 117.42  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APARTMENT.  A community, complex, or building having a common owner
and containing 16 or more living units.



   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.   Document issued by the city, stating that
the building has been inspected and is in compliance with applicable property
maintenance codes and ordinances.



   CITY MANAGER .  The City Manager or the City Manager's designated agent



   DWELLING.  A building or one or more portions thereof occupied or
intended to be occupied for residence purposes; but not including rooms in
motels, hotels, nursing homes, boarding houses, trailers, tents, cabins or
trailer coaches.



   GENERAL HOUSING UNIT.  A dwelling other than an apartment, including
but not limited to a townhouse, condominium, double bungalow, residential
zero lot line (split double), single family or tri-plex.



   LET FOR OCCUPANCY or TO LET.  To permit possession or occupancy of a
dwelling or living unit by a person who is not the legal owner of record
thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, or pursuant to a recorded
or unrecorded agreement whether or not a fee is required by the agreement.



   LIVING UNIT.  A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.



   OCCUPANT.  Any person living or sleeping in a dwelling; or having
possession of a space within a dwelling.



   OPERATE.  To let for occupancy or to let.



   OPERATOR/MANAGER.  Any person who has charge, care or control of a
structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.



   OWNER/LICENSEE.  Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation
having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the
official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the
property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian
of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the
estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a
court, or any person representing the actual owner.



   PERSON.  An individual, corporation, firm, association, company,
partnership, organization or any other group acting as a unit.



   RENT.  To let for occupancy or to let.



   RENTAL DWELLING.  Any apartment or general housing unit let for
occupancy.



   SMALL APARTMENT .  A community, complex, or building containing four
or more or fewer than 16 living units.



   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected on, or connected to the
ground.



('72 Code, § 455:10)  (Am. Ord. 1983-421(A), passed 5-9-83; Am. Ord.
1996-795, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 2001-956, passed 8-13-01; Am. Ord.
2002-975, passed 6-10-02; Am. Ord. 2002-987, passed 12-16-02; Am. Ord.
2004-1021, passed 11-15-04; Am. Ord. 2005-1036, passed 5-23-05; Am. Ord.
2007-1068, passed 2-20-07)



§ 117.43  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful to operate a rental dwelling in the city without first
having obtained a license from the City Manager.  Each general housing unit
and each apartment complex must register annually with the City Manager.  No
license is required under this subchapter when an owner occupies a living
unit as a permanent residence.  Failure to obtain a rental license may
result in the issuance of administrative citations and fines and any other
civil or criminal penalties available to the city.



('72 Code, § 455:15)  (Am. Ord. 1996-795, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord.
2001-956, passed 8-13-01; Am. Ord. 2002-975, passed 6-10-02; Am. Ord.
2004-1021, passed 11-15-04; Am. Ord. 2007-1068, passed 2-20-07; Am. Ord.
2008-1090, passed 7-7-08)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 117.44  LICENSE PERIOD.



   Apartment licenses are valid from July 1 through June 30 of the
following year. General housing unit licenses and licenses for small
apartments are valid from October 1 through September 30.



('72 Code, § 455:16)  (Ord. 1996-795, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 2001-956,
passed 8-13-01; Am. Ord. 2002-975, passed 6-10-02; Am. Ord. 2002-987, passed
12-16-02; Am. Ord. 2004-1021, passed 11-15-04; Am. Ord. 2005-1036, passed
5-23-05; Am. Ord. 2007-1068, passed 2-20-07)



§ 117.45  FEES.



   License fees are in the amount set by the Council.



('72 Code, § 455:17)  (Ord. 1996-795, passed 1-22-96; Am. Res. 2001-188,
passed 8-13-01)



Cross-reference:



   License fees, see Appendix



§ 117.46  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Applications for licenses must be made in writing to the City
Manager by the owner or operator.  Failure to complete a license application
may result in delay or suspension of the application process and civil and
criminal penalties.  In cases where the owner of a rental dwelling lives
outside a 50-mile radius of the rental dwelling, the owner must name an
operator living within the 50-mile radius of the rental dwelling.



   (B)   All applications must specify the following:



      (1)   Owner's name, address and telephone number.  In cases
where the owner is an individual, one of the following is required: 
driver's license number, state identification number, or date of birth.



      (2)   Operator's name, address, phone number and driver's
license number or state identification number or date of birth.



      (3)   Signature of owner or operator.



      (4)   Name, address and phone number of management company,
manager or managing officer.



      (5)   Legal address of the rental dwelling.



      (6)   Number and type of living units within the rental
dwelling.



      (7)   Date of the most recent certificate of compliance.



      (8)   E-mail address, when available.



('72 Code, § 455:26)  (Ord. 1996-795, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 2001-956,
passed 8-13-01; Am. Ord. 2002-975, passed 6-10-02; Am. Ord. 2004-1021, passed
11-15-04; Am. Ord. 2008-1090, passed 7-7-08)



§ 117.47  LICENSE TRANSFER.



   No licensee has the right to transfer a license to any other person or
property.



('72 Code, § 455:36)  (Ord. 1996-795, passed 1-22-96)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 117.48  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



   Rental licenses must be posted in every rental dwelling. The license
for each apartment building must be conspicuously posted at or near the front
entrance, a public corridor, hallway or lobby of the apartment building for
which it is issued.  The annual license for general housing units must be
posted within the dwelling.



('72 Code, § 455:40)  (Am. Ord. 1983-421(A), passed 5-9-83; Am. Ord.
1990-667(A), passed 12-17-90; Am. Ord. 1996-795, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord.
2002-975, passed 6-10-02; Am. Ord. 2008-1090, passed 7-7-08)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 117.481  REPORT CHANGES IN OWNERSHIP.



   Licensees must report to the City Manager any changes in the identity
of the owner of a rental dwelling, including a change in the majority
shareholder or shareholders and officers in the case of corporations. 
Licensees must report a change in ownership at least 30 days before closing.



(Ord. 2002-975, passed 6-10-02; Am. Ord. 2003-1007, passed 10-27-03; Am. Ord.
2004-1021, passed 11-15-04)



§ 117.482  TENANT REGISTER.



   Licensees must, as a continuing obligation of a license, maintain a
current register of tenants and other persons who have a lawful right to
occupancy of rental dwellings within an apartment. In its application, the
licensee must designate the person or persons who will have possession of the
register and must promptly notify the City Manager of any change of the
identity, address or telephone numbers of such persons. The register must be
available for inspection by the City Manager at all times.



(Ord. 2002-975, passed 6-10-02)



§ 117.483  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ACTS OF MANAGER.



   Licensees are responsible for the acts or omissions of their managers
and operators.



(Ord. 2002-975, passed 6-10-02; Am. Ord. 2008-1090, passed 7-7-08)



§ 117.484  NO RETALIATION.



   No licensee shall evict, threaten to evict or take any other punitive
action against any tenant by reason of good faith calls made by such tenant
to law enforcement agencies relating to criminal activity, suspected criminal
activity, suspicious occurrences or public safety concerns.  This section
shall not prohibit the eviction of tenants for unlawful conduct of a tenant
or invitee of the tenant or violation of any rules, regulations or lease
terms other than a prohibition against contacting law enforcement agencies.



(Ord. 2002-975, passed 6-10-02)



§ 117.485  POINT OF CONVERSION INSPECTION.



   Whenever a dwelling is converted to a licensed rental dwelling, the
dwelling shall be licensed and inspected for compliance with the minimum
standards set forth in § 117.52 of this code.  The fee for the conversion
required by this section shall be in the amount set by the City Council. 
This fee shall be in addition to the annual rental license fee.  This
provision shall not apply to buildings containing more than two dwelling
units.



(Ord. 2002-975, passed 6-10-02; Am. Ord. 2003-1007, passed 10-27-03; Am. Ord.
2004-1021, passed 11-15-04; Am. Ord. 2008-1087, passed 5-27-08; Am. Ord.
2008-1093, passed 8-25-08)



§ 117.49  CONDUCT ON RENTAL PROPERTY.



   (A)   It is the responsibility of the owner/licensee to see that
persons occupying a rental dwelling conduct themselves in such a manner as
not to cause the premises to be disorderly.  For purposes of this section, a
rental dwelling is disorderly when any of the following types of conduct
occur under any of the following provisions:



      (1)   §§ 92.05 and 92.06 of this code (animal noise and
public nuisances).



      (2)   § 134.03 of this code (noisy parties).



      (3)   Chapter 135 of this code (unlawful possession, delivery
or purchase) or violation of laws relating to the possession of controlled
substances as defined in M.S. §§ 152.01 et seq.



      (4)   §§ 134.15 et seq. of this code (disorderly conduct) or
laws relating to disorderly conduct as defined in M.S. § 609.72.



      (5)   §§ 112.030 through 112.069 of this code (unlawful sale
of intoxicating liquor or 3.2 malt liquor) or laws relating to the sale of
intoxicating liquor as defined in M.S. §§ 340A.701, 340A.702 or 340A.703.



      (6)   Laws relating to prostitution or acts relating to
prostitution as defined in M.S. § 609.321, Subdivision 9 and 609.324,
housing individuals engaged in prostitution.



      (7)   Chapter 136 of this code (weapons) or laws relating to
unlawful use or possession of a firearm as defined in M.S. §§ 609.66 et
seq., on the licensed premises.



      (8)   § 134.01 of this code (assaults) or laws relating to
assault.



      (9)   Laws relating to contributing to the need for protection
or services or delinquency of a minor as defined in M.S. § 260C, et seq.



      (10)   M.S. § 609.33, relating to owning, leasing, operating,
managing, maintaining or conducting a disorderly house or inviting or
attempting to invite others to visit or remain in a disorderly house.



      (11)   M.S. § 609.50 which prohibits interference with a
police officer.



      (12)   M.S. § 609.713 which prohibits terroristic threats.



      (13)   M.S. § 609.715 which prohibits presence of unlawful
assembly.



      (14)   M.S. § 609.71 which prohibits riot.



      (15)   M.S. §§ 609.226 and 347.56, relating to dangerous
dogs.



      (16)   M.S. § 609.78 which prohibits interfering with "911"
phone calls.



      (17)   M.S. §§ 609.75 through 609.76, which prohibits
gambling.



      (18)   M.S. § 243.166 (Predatory Offender Registration).



      (19)   M.S. § 609.229 (Crime committed for benefit of a gang).



      (20)   M.S. § 609.26, subdivision 1(8) (causing or
contributing to a child being a runaway).



      (21)   M.S. § 609.903 (Racketeering).



   (B)   Conduct enforcement. The City Manager is responsible for
enforcement and administration of this section.



     (C)   Upon determination by the City Manager that a rental
dwelling was used in a disorderly manner, as described in paragraph (A) of
this section, the City Manager must give notice to the owner/licensee of the
violation and direct that steps be taken to prevent further violations.



   (D)   If a second instance of disorderly use of a rental dwelling
occurs within the 12-month period following an incident for which a notice in
paragraph (C) of this section was given, the City Manager must notify the
owner/licensee of the violation and must also require the owner/licensee to
submit a written report of the actions taken, and proposed to be taken to
prevent further disorderly use. This written report must be submitted to the
City Manager within ten business days of receipt of the notice of disorderly
use and must detail all actions taken by the owner/licensee in response to
all notices of disorderly use within the preceding 12 months.



   (E)   (1)   If a third instance of disorderly use of a rental
dwelling occurs within the 12-month period following any two previous
instances of disorderly use for which notices were given, the City Manager
must notify the owner/licensee of the violation and must also require the
owner/licensee to submit a written report of the actions taken, and proposed
to be taken, to prevent further disorderly use.  The 12-month period begins
on the date of the police report generated in response to the first instance
of disorderly use. The written report must be submitted to the City Manager
within ten business days of receipt of the notice of disorderly use and must
detail all actions taken in response to all  notices of disorderly use
within the preceding 12 months.



      (2)   After the third instance of disorderly use, the City
Manager may deny, revoke, suspend or not renew the license for the
premises.  Before such an action, the City Manager must give to the
owner/licensee written notice of a hearing before the City Hearing Officer to
consider such denial, revocation, suspension or non-renewal.  Such written
notice must specify all violations of this section, and must state the date,
time, place and purpose of the hearing.  The hearing must be held no less
than ten days and no more than 30 days after giving such notice.



      (3)   Following the hearing, the City Manager may deny,
revoke, suspend or decline to renew the license for all or any part or parts
of the rental dwelling or may grant a license upon such terms and conditions
as it deems necessary to accomplish the purposes of this section.



      (4)   Appeals of any decision made by the City Manager must be
filed in Hennepin County District Court.



      (5)   Upon a decision to revoke, suspend, deny or not renew a
license for violations of this section, the owner/licensee will not be
eligible for any new rental licenses for a period determined by the City
Manager, but not to exceed one year. Any person who has had two or more
licenses revoked, suspended, denied or not renewed for violations of this
section, will not be eligible for any new rental licenses for a period
determined by the City Manager, but not to exceed two years.



   (F)   No adverse license action shall be imposed where the instance
of disorderly use occurred during the pendency of eviction proceedings
(unlawful detainer) or within 30 days of notice given to a tenant to vacate
the premises where the disorderly use was related to conduct by that tenant
or by other occupants or guests of the tenant's unit.  Eviction proceedings
are  not a bar to adverse license action, however, unless they are
diligently pursued by the licensee. 



   (G)   A determination that a rental dwelling has been used in a
disorderly manner as described in paragraph (A) of this section shall be made
upon a fair preponderance of the evidence to support such a determination. 
It is not necessary that criminal charges be brought in order to support a
determination of disorderly use nor does the fact of dismissal or acquittal
of such a criminal charge operate as a bar to adverse license action under
this section.



   (H)   All notices given by the city under this section must be
personally served on the owner/licensee, sent by certified mail to the
owner/licensee's last known address or, if neither method of service effects
notice, by posting on a conspicuous place on the rental dwelling.



   (I)   Enforcement actions provided in this section are not
exclusive, and the City Manager may take any action with respect to a
licensee, a tenant, or a rental dwelling as is authorized by the city code,
state or federal law.  The City Manager may postpone or discontinue any
enforcement action, including an action to deny, revoke, suspend, or not
renew a license, if it appears that the owner/licensee has taken appropriate
measures to prevent further instances of disorderly use.



('72 Code, § 455:50)  (Ord. 1992-710, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. 2002- 975,
passed 6-10-02; Am. Ord. 2008-1090, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 2016-1208, passed
9-26-16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 117.491  MINNESOTA CRIME FREE MULTI-HOUSING PROGRAM.



   (A)   The city has established a rental owner educational program
consistent with the Minnesota Crime Free Multi-housing Program. This
educational program will include, but is not limited to information such as:
applicant screening, rental agreements, identification of illegal activity,
eviction process, the roles of working with the police, crime prevention,
code enforcement and public health, licensing and inspections, and active
property management. The following are requirements of the program:



      (1)   All owners or operators must attend one of these
regularly-scheduled seminars within one year of the issuance of a new rental
license.



      (2)   Owners or operators possessing rental licenses issued
prior to the enactment of this section will be required to attend the Crime
Free Housing Program within one year of the renewal their rental license.



      (3)   The owner or operator of a property notified of a third
instance of disorderly use under § 117.49 will be required to attend the
next available Brooklyn Park Crime Free Housing Program to maintain their
rental license.



      (4)   Program attendees will be required to pay a
participation fee in an amount determined to cover the direct cost of the
program.



   (B)   An owner whose only rental dwelling is a single-family
dwelling homesteaded by a relative is exempted from the program.



   (C)   All tenant leases signed following the enactment of this
section, except for state-licensed residential facilities and subject to all
preemptory state and federal laws, shall contain the following Crime Free
Housing Addendum language:



      (1)   Resident, any members of the resident's household or a
guest or other person affiliated with resident shall not engage in criminal
activity, including drug-related criminal activity, on or near the premises.



      (2)   Resident, any members of the resident 's household or a
guest or other person affiliated with resident shall not engage in any act
intended to facilitate criminal activity, including drug-related criminal
activity, on or near the premises.



      (3)   Resident or members of the household will not permit the
dwelling unit to  be used for, or to facilitate criminal activity, including
drug-related criminal activity, regardless of whether the individual engaging
in such  activity is a member of the household, or a guest.



      (4)   Resident, any member of the resident's household or a
guest, or other person affiliated with the resident shall not engage in the
unlawful manufacturing, selling, using, storing, keeping, or giving of a
controlled substance at any locations, whether on or near the premises or
otherwise.



      (5)   Violation of the above provisions shall be a material
and irreparable violation of the lease and good cause for immediate
termination of tenancy.



      (6)   The term DRUG RELATED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY means the
illegal manufacture sale, distribution, use, or possession with intent to
manufacture, sell, distribute, or use of a controlled substance or any
substance represented to be drugs (as defined in Section 102 of the
Controlled Substance Act [21  U.S.C. 802]).



      (7)   Non-exclusive remedies. The Crime Free Housing Addendum
language is in addition to all other terms of the lease and does not limit or
replace any other provisions.



   (D)   Upon determination by the City Manager that a licensed
premises or unit within a licensed premises was used in violation of the
Crime Free Housing Addendum language, the City Manager shall notify the owner
and property manager of the violation. The owner or property manager shall
notify the tenant or tenants within ten days of the notice of violation of
the Crime Free Housing Addendum language and proceed with the termination of
the tenancy of all tenants occupying the unit. The owner shall not enter into
a new lease with the evicted tenant for a period of one year after the
eviction. If the owner or property manager fails to comply with this section,
the City Manager may initiate an action to deny, revoke, suspend, or not
renew the license following the same process as outlined in § 117.49(E)(2) -
(5).



(Ord. 208-1090, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 2016-1208, passed 9-26-16)



§ 117.50  LANDSCAPE CONDITION.



   Each rental dwelling must be maintained by its owner, occupant, or
operator so that the yards, open spaces and parking facilities are kept in a
safe and attractive condition.  Where a conditional use permit has been
granted, the landscaping shown on the approved landscaping plan is considered
as minimal and must be maintained accordingly.  Any deviation to species or
material shall be equal to or better than originally approved.  In addition,
adequate lighting facilities must be provided and operated between the hours
of sunset and sunrise;  and snow plowing or snow shoveling must be regularly
accomplished to maintain all sidewalk and parking areas in a safe and
passable condition.



('72 Code, § 455:70)  (Am. Ord. 1983-421(A), passed 5-9-83; Am. Ord.
2002-975, passed 6-10-02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 117.51  SAFETY FROM FIRE.



   An owner or operator of a rental dwelling is responsible to comply with
the applicable provisions of the Fire Prevention Code of the city in keeping
open all fire lanes established by the city.



('72 Code, § 455:75)  (Am. Ord. 1983-421(A), passed 5-9-83; Am. Ord.
2002-975, passed 6-10-02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 117.52  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Responsibility.  It is the responsibility of the owner and
operator/manager to be in compliance with this subchapter, other city
ordinances and state laws.



   (B)   Maintenance standards.  Every rental dwelling must maintain
the standards in the city property maintenance code, Chapter 106 of this
code, in addition to any other requirement of the ordinances of the city or
special permits issued by the city, or the laws of the State of Minnesota.



   (C)   Inspections and investigations.



      (1)   The City Manager is authorized to make inspections to
enforce this subchapter.



      (2)   All designated agents authorized to inspect have the
authority to enter, at all reasonable times, any rental dwelling.  Prior to
entering a rental dwelling, the designated agent must first present proper
credentials and request entry.  If any owner, operator, occupant or other
person(s) in charge of a rental dwelling fails or refuses to permit access
and entry to the rental dwelling, or any part thereof, the designated agent
may, upon showing that probable cause exists for the inspection and for the
issuance of an order directing compliance with the inspection requirements of
this section, petition and obtain such order from a court of competent
jurisdiction in order to secure entry.



      (3)   Compliance orders must be written in accordance with §
107.00 of the International Property Maintenance Code.



      (4)   There is no fee charged for an initial inspection to
determine the existence of a housing maintenance code violation, nor any fee
for the first reinspection to determine compliance with an order to correct a
housing maintenance code violation.



         (a)   A fee will be charged for each subsequent
re-inspection occurring after the due date for compliance with an order, as
determined by the City Manager.  The amount of the re-inspection fee will be
set by resolution of the council as listed in the Appendix of this code.



         (b)   The re-inspection fees prescribed above are to be
billed directly to the owner or operator/manager for the property upon
completion of any re-inspection for which a fee is required.  Failure to pay
such fees is grounds for revocation, suspension, or non-issuance of a rental
dwelling license.  This subdivision is not to be considered the exclusive
method of collecting re-inspection fees and does not preclude collection by
other lawful means.



         (c)   Every notice of violation and order to correct
housing code violations must contain a clear and conspicuous explanation of
the policy in this section requiring re-inspection fees for subsequent
re-inspection.



         (d)   The City Manager may waive a re-inspection fee in
case of error, mistake, injustice, or other good cause.



   (D)   Revocation, suspension, denial or non-renewal of license.



      (1)   The City Manager may revoke, suspend, deny or decline to
renew any license issued under this subchapter for part or all of a rental
dwelling upon any of the following grounds:



         (a)   False statements on any application or other
information or report required by this subchapter to be given by the
applicant or licensee;



         (b)   Failure to pay any application, penalty,
reinspection or reinstatement fee required either by this section or City
Council resolution;



         (c)   Failure to correct deficiencies in the time
specified in a compliance order;



         (d)   Failure to allow an authorized inspection of a
rental dwelling;



         (e)   Violation of an owner's duties under M.S. §§ 
299C.66 to 299C.71 ("Kari Koskinen Manager Background Check Act");



         (f)   Failure to comply with the Minnesota Crime Free
Multi-housing Program requirements in § 117.491.



         (g)   Any other violation of this subchapter.



      (2)   Before the City Manager may revoke, suspend, deny or not
renew a license, written notice must be sent to the applicant or
owner/licensee setting forth the alleged grounds for the potential action. 
The notice must also specify a date for a hearing before the Hearing Officer,
which must not be less than ten days from the date of the notice.  At the
hearing, the owner/licensee may present witnesses in their defense.  The
Hearing Officer may give due regard to the frequency and seriousness of
violations, the ease with which such violations could have been cured or
avoided and good faith efforts to comply and shall issue written findings.



      (3)   Upon a decision to revoke, deny or not renew a license,
the owner/licensee will not be eligible for any new rental licenses for a
period determined by the City Manager, but not to exceed one year.



      (4)   A decision to revoke, suspend, deny or not renew a
license or application will specify the part or parts of the rental dwelling
to which it applies.  Until a license is reissued or reinstated, no rental
units becoming vacant in such part or parts of the rental dwelling may be
relet or occupied.  Revocation, suspension or non-renewal of a license will
not excuse the owner/licensee from compliance with all terms of this section
for as long as any units in the rental dwelling are occupied.



      (5)   Failure to comply with all terms of this section during
the term of revocation, suspension or non-renewal is a misdemeanor and
grounds for extension of the term of  revocation, suspension or continuation
of non-renewal of the license.



      (6)   Appeals of any decision made by the City Manager must be
filed in Hennepin County District Court.



   (E)   [Reserved].



   (F)   Summary action.



      (1)   When the conduct of any owner/licensee or their agent,
representative, employee or lessee or the condition of their rental dwelling
is detrimental to the public health, sanitation, safety and general welfare
of the community at large or residents of the rental dwelling as to
constitute a nuisance, fire hazard or other unsafe or dangerous condition and
thus give rise to an emergency, the City Manager has the authority to
summarily condemn or close off individual units or such areas of the rental
dwelling.  Notice of summary condemnation must be posted at the location of
the rental dwelling license and at the units or areas affected and shall
indicate the units or areas affected.  Upon notice of summary condemnation,
the City Manager may deny, revoke, suspend or decline to renew the license
for all or any part or parts of the rental dwelling or may impose terms and
conditions as necessary to remedy the nuisance, fire hazard, or other unsafe
or dangerous condition.



      (2)   Any person aggrieved by a decision or action of the City
Manager under paragraph (F) shall be entitled to appeal by filing a notice of
appeal in the office of the City Manager.  The appeal must be filed within
ten days of the City Manager's decision. The City Manager will schedule a
date for a hearing before the Hearing Officer and notify the aggrieved person
of the date.  At the hearing, the owner/licensee may present witnesses in
their defense.  The Hearing Officer may give due regard to the frequency and
seriousness of violations, the ease with which such violations could have
been cured or avoided and good faith efforts to comply and shall issue
written findings.



      (3)   The decision of the City Manager is not voided by the
filing of such appeal.  Only after the Hearing Officer has held its hearing
will the decision or action of the City Manager be affected.




   (G)   Posting of unlicensed properties.  Any dwelling found in
violation of § 117.43 of this subchapter may be posted with a placard near
or upon the main entrance of the dwelling and must be substantially in the
following form:





NOTICE
Property Address
This property is in violation of Brooklyn Park Ordinance Section 117:43,
License
Required. Failure to obtain a rental license will result in legal action. Any
unauthorized
person removing or defacing this notice will be prosecuted.
Division...Designated Agent...Date




('72 Code, § 455:78)  (Ord. 1996-795, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 2001- 956,
passed 8-13-01; Am. Ord. 2002-975, passed 6-10-02; Am. Ord. 2003-1007, passed
10-27-03; Am. Ord. 2004-1021, passed 11-15-04; Am. Ord. 2005-1036, passed
5-23-05; Am. Ord. 2008-1090, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 2016-1208, passed
9-26-16)



§ 117.521  ASSESSMENT OF UNPAID ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.



   Any unpaid administrative penalty for failure to comply with the rental
licensing provisions in §§ 117.40 through 117.52 of this code may be
assessed against the property in the manner set forth in § 37.08 of this
code.



(Ord. 2009-1103, passed 9-8-09)



§ 117.53  REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE.



   The owner of any rental dwelling is responsible for the removal of snow
and ice from parking lots, driveways, steps and walkways on the premises. 
Individual snowfalls of three inches or more, or successive snowfalls
accumulating to a depth of three inches must be removed from walkways and
steps within 48 hours after the cessation of the snowfall.



(Ord. 2001-956, passed 8-13-01) Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 118:  EXCAVATIONS AND EARTH MOVING



Section



   118.01   Permit required



   118.02   Exceptions



   118.03   Application



   118.04   Filing and fees



   118.05   Requirements



   118.06   Violations and nuisances



   118.07   Land reclamation permit



   118.08   Conditions of permit



   118.09   Prohibited materials



§ 118.01  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to remove, store or
excavate rock, sand, dirt, gravel, clay or other like material in the amount
of more than 200 cubic yards without obtaining an earth moving permit from
the City Engineer.



('72 Code, § 340:00)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.02  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Basements.  No permit is required for the excavation, removal
or storage of rock, sand, dirt, gravel, clay or other like material for the
purpose of the foundation, cellar or basement of some immediately pending
superstructure to be erected, built, or placed thereon contemporaneously
with, or immediately following such excavation, removal or storage, providing
a building permit has been issued.



   (B)   Road construction.  No permit is required for such
excavations, removal or storage of rock, sand, dirt, gravel, clay or other
like material as may be required by the state, county or city authorities in
connection with the construction or maintenance of roads and highways.



('72 Code, § 340:05)



§ 118.03  APPLICATION.



   The application must be made in writing on such form as the city may
from time to time designate, and must include such information as may be
required by the City Engineer and shall contain, among other things:



   (A)   The correct legal description of the premises where the
excavation, removal or storage of rock, sand, dirt, gravel, clay or other
like material shall or does occur.



   (B)   The name and address of the applicant and owner of the land.



   (C)   The purpose of the removal, storage or excavation.



   (D)   The estimated time required to complete the removal, storage
or excavation.



   (E)   The highways, streets or other public ways within the city
upon and along which the material excavated or removed is to be transported.



   (F)   A map or plat of the proposed pit or excavation to be made
showing the confines or limits thereof together with the proposed finished
elevations based on sea level readings.



('72 Code, § 340:10)



§ 118.04  FILING AND FEES.



   Each application must be filed with the City Engineer.  A permit fee
in an amount set by the Council from time to time must accompany each
application.



('72 Code, § 340:15)



Cross-reference:



   License fees, see Appendix



§ 118.05  REQUIREMENTS.



   As a pre-requisite to the granting of a permit, or after a permit has
been granted, the applicant or the owner of the premises must comply with the
requirements of the following:



   (A)   Properly fence any pit or excavation to protect the safety of
the public.



   (B)   Slope the banks, and otherwise guard and keep any pit or
excavation in such condition as not to be dangerous because of sliding or
caving banks.



   (C)   Properly drain, fill or level off any pit or excavation so as
to make the same safe and healthful.



   (D)   Reimburse the city for the cost of periodic inspections by the
City Engineer, or other city employee, for the purpose of seeing that the
terms under which the permit has been issued are being complied with.



   (E)   The permit must include as a condition thereof a plan for a
finished grade which will not adversely affect the surrounding land or the
development of the site on which the excavating is being conducted, and the
permitted route of trucks moving to and from the site.



   (F)   Post a surety bond, in such form and sum as the city may
require, running to the city, conditioned to pay the city the cost and
expense of repairing any highways, streets, or other public ways within the
city made necessary by the special burden resulting from hauling and
transporting thereon by the applicant in the removal of rock, sand, dirt,
gravel, clay or other like material, the amount of such cost to be determined
by the City Engineer; and conditioned further to comply with all the
requirements of this subchapter and the particular permit, and to save the
city free and harmless from any and all suits or claims for damages resulting
from the negligent excavation, removal or storage of rock, sand, dirt,
gravel, clay, or other like material within the city.



   (G)   And such other requirements as the City Engineer or Council
from time to time deems proper and necessary for the protection of the
citizens and the general welfare.



   (H)   Such permit must not be granted for a period of longer than 12
months, but may be renewed by the City Engineer.



('72 Code, § 340:20)



§ 118.06  VIOLATIONS AND NUISANCES.



   A person, firm or corporation that refuses, neglects or fails to comply
with any requirement made of that person, firm or corporation under the
provisions of § 118.05 as promptly as same can be reasonably done, is guilty
of a penal offense and the Council may revoke the permit issued, and in
addition to other penalties prescribed herein, the failure to comply with
such requirement, after notice, and the continuing excavation, removal or
storage of rock, sand, gravel, dirt, clay, or other like material on the
premises is prima facie evidence of a public nuisance and may be abated by
court action.



('72 Code, § 340:25)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Nuisances, see §§ 94.01 et seq.



§ 118.07  LAND RECLAMATION PERMIT.



   Land reclamation under this subchapter is the reclaiming of land by
depositing of material so as to elevate the grade.  Land reclamation is
permitted only after issuance of a special permit in all districts on any lot
or parcel upon which 200 cubic yards or more of fill is to be deposited for
land reclamation.  Fill materials shall be approved by the City Engineer as
suitable to the final use of the property.  Fill materials must conform to
the following minimum requirements:  The material must not include garbage
or toxic materials and must be stable, non-combustible and not support decay.



('72 Code, § 340:30)  (Am. Ord. 1981-372(A), passed 12-14-81)  Penalty,
see § 10.99



§ 118.08  CONDITIONS OF PERMIT.



   The permit must include as a condition thereof a finished grade plan
which will not adversely affect the adjacent land, and as a condition thereof
must regulate the type of fill permitted, plans for rodent control, fire
control and general maintenance of the site and adjacent area and make
provision for control of material dispersed from wind or hauling material to
or from the site.



('72 Code, § 340:35)



§ 118.09  PROHIBITED MATERIALS.



   The dumping of materials for the purposes of land reclamation must not
be a violation of any other ordinance or code provisions of the city,
including but not limited to dumping and sanitary landfill, provided that the
person engaged in such land reclamation must have first secured a special
permit in accordance with the provisions of § 118.07.  Any area of the city
which has been licensed as a public dump by the city shall not be subject to
this section or § 118.07.



('72 Code, § 340:40)  (Am. Ord. 1981-355(A), passed 3-23-81; Am. Ord.
1981-372(A), passed 12-14-81)



Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 119:  PAWNBROKERS AND PEDDLERS



Section




Pawnbrokers




   119.01   Purpose



   119.02   Definitions



   119.03   License required



   119.04   License fees



   119.05   Investigation fees



   119.06   Expiration of license



   119.07   Application required



   119.08   Bond



   119.09   Records required



   119.10   Daily reports to police



   119.11   Receipt required



   119.12   Redemption period



   119.13   Holding period



   119.14   Police order to hold property



   119.15   Inspection of items



   119.16   Labels required



   119.17   Prohibited acts



   119.18   Denial, suspension, or revocation



   119.19   Payments by check



   119.20   Business at only one place



   119.21   Applicable laws




Peddlers and Solicitors




   119.30   Definitions



   119.31   Exceptions to definitions; license exemptions



   119.32   Licensing



   119.33   License ineligibility



   119.34   Suspension and revocation



   119.35   Transferability



   119.36   Prohibited activities



   119.37   Exclusion by placard




Itinerant Produce Merchant




   119.40   Definitions



   119.41   Permit required



   119.42   Time period



   119.43   Location



   119.44   Time of day



   119.45   Itinerant produce merchant limit



   119.46   Application



   119.47   Transfer



   119.48   Nuisance



   119.49   Loud noises and speaking devices



   119.50   Signs



   119.51   Duty of Community Development and Police Departments to
enforce



   119.52   Revocation of permit



PAWNBROKERS



§ 119.01  PURPOSE.



   The City Council finds that pawnbrokers can provide an opportunity for
the commission and concealment of crimes, because such businesses have the
ability to receive and transfer stolen property easily and quickly.  The
City Council also finds that consumer protection regulation is warranted with
transactions involving pawnbrokers.  The purpose of this subchapter is to
prevent pawn businesses from being used as facilities for the commission of
crimes and to assure that such businesses comply with basic consumer
protection standards, thereby protecting the public health, safety, and
general welfare of the residents of the city.  It is also the purpose of
this section to help the Police Department regulate such businesses and to
decrease and stabilize costs associated with the regulation of the pawn
industry and to assist the Police Department in the identification of
criminal activities in the pawn industry through the timely collection and
sharing of pawn transaction information.



('72 Code, § 468:00)  (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)



§ 119.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BILLABLE TRANSACTION.  Every reportable transaction conducted by a
pawnbroker except renewals, redemptions, or extensions of existing pawns on
items previously reported and continuously in the licensee’s possession is
a billable transaction.



   CHATTEL.  A movable article of personal property.



   CHOSE IN ACTION.  A thing in action and a right of bringing an action
or right to recover a debt or money.  Right of proceeding in a court of law
to procure payment of sum of money, or right to recover a personal chattel or
a sum of money by action.



   PAWNBROKER.  Any person, who, either as a principal, agent, or
employee lends money on deposit or pledge of personal property, or other
valuable thing, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property, or other
valuable thing on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated
price, or who lends money secured by chattel mortgage on personal property,
taking possession of the property or any part thereof so mortgaged.



   PAWNSHOP.  The location at which or premises in which a pawnbroker
regularly conducts business.



   PAWN TRANSACTION.  Any loan on the security of pledged goods or any
purchase of pledged goods on the condition that the pledged goods are left
with the pawnbroker and may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a
fixed price within a fixed period of time.



   PLEDGED GOODS.  Tangible personal property other than choses in
action, securities, bank drafts, or printed evidence of indebtedness,
purchased by, deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the
possession of a pawnbroker in connection with a pawn transaction.



   PERSON.  An individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity,
however organized.



   REPORTABLE TRANSACTION.  Every transaction conducted by a pawnbroker
in which merchandise is received through a pawn or in which a pawn is
renewed, extended, or redeemed, is reportable except:



      (1)   The bulk purchase or consignment of new or used
merchandise from a merchant, manufacturer, or wholesaler having an
established permanent place of business, and the retail sale of said
merchandise, provided the pawnbroker maintains a record of that purchase or
consignment that describes each item, and must mark each item in a way that
relates it to that transaction record.



      (2)   Retail and wholesale sales of merchandise originally
received by pawn or purchase, and for which all applicable hold and/or
redemption periods have expired.



   TRUE COPY.  A copy consistent with fact or reality, not false or
erroneous.  Reliable, accurate, real, and genuine.



('72 Code, § 468:05)  (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)



§ 119.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for a person to conduct, operate or engage in the
business of a pawnbroker or otherwise portray the person as a pawnbroker
without having first obtained a valid license authorizing engagement in the
business.  No license may be transferred to a different location or a
different person.  In the case of the death of a licensee, the personal
representative of the licensee may continue operation of the business for not
more than 90 days after the licensee’s death.  Issuance of a license under
this section will not relieve the licensee from obtaining any other licenses
required to conduct business at the same or any other locations.



('72 Code, § 468:10)  (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 119.04  LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   The annual license fees for a license will be as set forth in
the Appendix to this code.  If the application is made during the license
year, a license may be issued for the remainder of the license year for a
monthly pro rata fee.  An unexpired fraction of a month will be counted as a
complete month.



   (B)   The billable transaction license fee will be as set forth in
the Appendix.



   (C)   Billable transaction fees will be billed monthly and are due
and payable within 30 days.  Failure to do so is a violation of this
subchapter.



('72 Code, § 468:15)  (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 119.05  INVESTIGATION FEES.



   An applicant for a new license under this section, or for the renewal
of an existing license that is more than six months past due, will pay an
investigation fee as set forth in  the Appendix to this code at the time an
original application is submitted.  This investigation fee will not be
subject to refund or proration.  If the expenses of the investigation
relating to any application exceed the minimum investigation fee, the city
will notify the applicant(s) of this fact and will require the applicant(s)
to pay an additional investigation fee that the city deems necessary to
complete the city's investigation of the applicant(s).  The applicant(s)
will pay such an additional investigation fee within five days of being so
notified.  If such additional investigation fee is not paid within the five
day period, the city will cease consideration of the application. 
Nonpayment of any additional investigation fees required will be grounds for
denial of the application.



('72 Code, § 468:20)  (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)



§ 119.06  EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.



   The license is issued for a period of one year beginning on January 1
except that if the application is made during the license year a license may
be issued for the remainder of the license year for a monthly pro rata fee. 
An unexpired fraction of a month will be counted as a complete month.  All
licenses will expire on December 31.



('72 Code, § 468:25)  (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)



§ 119.07  APPLICATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Required information.  An application form provided by the
License Division must be completed by every applicant for a new license or
for a renewal of an existing license.  Every new applicant must provide all
the following information:



      (1)   If the applicant is an individual:



         (a)   The full legal name, place of birth, date of
birth, street resident address, home telephone number, and work telephone
number of the applicant.



         (b)   Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United
States or resident alien.



         (c)   Whether the applicant has ever used or has been
known by a name other than the applicant’s name, and if so, the name or
names used and information concerning dates and places used.



         (d)   The name of the business if it is to be conducted
under a designation, name, or style other than the name of the applicant and
a certified copy of the certificate as required by M.S. § 333.01.



         (e)   The street address at which the applicant has
lived during the preceding five years.



         (f)   The type, name, and location of every business or
occupation in which the applicant has been engaged during the preceding five
years and the name(s) and address(es) of the applicant’s employer(s) and
partner(s), if any, for the preceding five years.



         (g)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a
felony, crime, or violation of any ordinance other than a traffic
ordinance.  If so, the applicant must furnish information as to the time,
place, and offense of all such convictions.



         (h)   The physical description of the applicant.



         (i)   The applicant’s current personal financial
statement and true copies of the applicant’s federal and state tax returns
for the two years prior to application.



         (j)   If the applicant does not manage the business, the
full legal name of the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the
business, as well as, the following information:



            1.   Place of birth, date of birth, street
resident address, home telephone number, and work telephone number of the
manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business.



            2.   Whether the manager(s) or other person(s) in
charge of the business is a citizen of the United States or resident alien.



            3.   Whether the manager(s) or other person(s) in
charge of the business has ever used or has been known by a name other than
the name(s) listed as manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the
business.  If so, the name or names used and information concerning dates
and places used.



            4.   The street address at which the manager(s) or
other person(s) in charge of the business has lived during the preceding five
years.



            5.   The type, name, and location of every
business or occupation in which the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge
of the business has been engaged during the preceding five years and the
name(s) and address(es) of their employer(s) and partner(s), if any, for the
preceding five years.



            6.   Whether the manager(s) or other person(s) in
charge of the business has ever been convicted of a felony, crime, or
violation of any ordinance other than a traffic ordinance.  If so, they must
furnish information as to the time, place, and offense of all such
convictions.



            7.   The physical description(s) of the manager(s)
or other person(s) in charge of the business.



      (2)   If the applicant is a partnership:



         (a)   The full legal name(s), address(es), place of
birth(s), home telephone number(s), and work telephone number(s) of all
general or limited partners.



         (b)   Whether all the general or limited partners are
citizens of the United States or resident aliens.



         (c)   Whether the general or limited partners have ever
used or have been known by a name other than the names listed as general or
limited partners, and if so, the name or names used and information
concerning dates and places used.



         (d)   The name(s) of the managing partner(s) and the
interest of each partner in the licensed business.



         (e)   The street address at which the general or limited
partners have lived during the preceding five years.



         (f)   The type, name, and location of every business or
occupation in which the general or limited partners have been engaged during
the preceding five years and the name(s) and address(es) of the general or
limited partner’s employer(s) and partner(s), if any, for the preceding
five years.



         (g)    A true copy of the partnership agreement will be
submitted with the application.  If the partnership is required to file a
certificate as to a trade name pursuant to M.S. § 333.01, a certified copy
of such certificate must be attached to the application.



         (h)    A true copy of the federal and state tax returns
for partnership for the two years prior to application.



         (i)   Whether any general or limited partner has ever
been convicted of a felony, crime, or violation of any ordinance other than a
traffic ordinance.  If so, the partner(s) must furnish information as to the
time, place, and offense of all such convictions.



         (j)   If the partnership does not manage the business,
the full legal name of the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the
business, as well as, the following information:



            1.   Place of birth, date of birth, street
resident address, home telephone number, and work telephone number of the
manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business.



            2.   Whether the manager(s) or other person(s) in
charge of the business is a citizen of the United States or resident alien.



            3.   Whether the manager(s) or other person(s) in
charge of the business has ever used or has been known by a name other than
the name(s) listed as manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the
business.  If so, the name or names used and information concerning dates
and places used.



            4.   The street address at which the manager(s) or
other person(s) in charge of the business has lived during the preceding five
years.



            5.   The type, name, and location of every
business or occupation in which the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge
of the business has been engaged during the preceding five years and the
name(s) and address(es) of their employer(s) and partner(s), if any, for the
preceding five years.



            6.   Whether the manager(s) or other person(s) in
charge of the business has ever been convicted of a felony, crime, or
violation of any ordinance other than a traffic ordinance.  If so, they must
furnish information as to the time, place, and offense of all such
convictions.



            7.   The physical description(s) of the manager(s)
or other person(s) in charge of the business.



      (3)   If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:



         (a)   The name of the corporation or business form, and
if incorporated, the state of incorporation.



         (b)   A true copy of the certificate of incorporation,
articles of incorporation or association agreement, and bylaws will be
attached to the application.  If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a
certificate of authority as required by M.S. § 303.06, must be attached.



         (c)   The full legal name of the manager(s),
proprietor(s), or agent(s), as well as, the following information concerning
each manager, proprietor, or agent:



            1.   Place of birth, date of birth, street
resident address, home telephone number, and work telephone number of the
manager(s), proprietor(s) or agent(s).



            2.   Whether the manager(s), proprietor(s), or
agent(s) is a citizen of the United States or resident alien.



            3.   Whether the manager(s), proprietor(s) or
agent(s) has ever used or has been known by a name other than the name(s)
listed as manager(s), proprietor(s), or agent(s).  If so, the name or names
used and information concerning dates and places used.



            4.   The street address at which the manager(s),
proprietor(s), or agent(s) has lived during the preceding five years.



            5.   The type, name, and location of every
business or occupation in which the manager(s), proprietor(s), or agent(s)
has been engaged during the preceding five years and the name(s) and
address(es) of their employer(s) and partner(s), if any, for the preceding
five years.



            6.   Whether the manager(s), proprietor(s) or
agent(s) has ever been convicted of a felony, crime, or violation of any
ordinance other than a traffic ordinance.  If so, furnish information as to
the time, place, and offense of all such convictions.



            7.   The physical description of the manager(s),
proprietor(s), or agent(s).



            8.   A list of all persons who control or own an
interest in excess of five percent in such organization or business form or
who are officers of the corporation or business form and the following
information for each said persons:



               a.   Place of birth, date of birth, street
resident address, home telephone number, and work telephone number.



               b.   Whether all said persons are a citizens
of the United States or resident aliens.



               c.   Whether all said persons have ever used
or have been known by a name other than the name(s) listed.  If so, the name
or names used and information concerning dates and places used.



               d.   The street address at which all said
persons have lived during the preceding five years.



               e.   The type, name, and location of every
business or occupation in which all said persons have been engaged during the
preceding five years and the name(s) and address(es) of employer(s) and
partner(s), if any, for the preceding five years.



               f.    Whether all said persons have ever
been convicted of a felony, crime, or violation of any ordinance other than a
traffic ordinance.  If so, furnish information as to the time, place, and
offense of all such convictions.



               g.   The physical description of all said
persons.



               h.   This subdivision, however, will not
apply to a corporation whose stock is publicly traded on a stock exchange and
is applying for a license to be owned and operated by it.



      (4)   For all applicants:



         (a)   Whether the applicant holds a current pawnbroker,
precious metal dealer or secondhand goods dealer license from any other
governmental unit.



         (b)   Whether the applicant has previously been denied,
or had revoked or suspended, a pawnbroker, precious metal dealer, or
secondhand dealers license from any other governmental unit.



         (c)   The location of the business premises.



         (d)   If the applicant does not own the business
premises, a true and complete copy of the executed lease.



         (e)   The legal description of the premises to be
licensed.



         (f)   Whenever the application is for premises either
planned or under construction or undergoing substantial alteration, the
application must be accompanied by a set of preliminary plans showing the
design of the proposed premises to be licensed.



         (g)   The approved conditional use permit (CUP).



         (h)   Such other information as the City Council or
issuing authority may require.



   (B)   New manager.  When a licensee places a manager(s),
proprietor(s), or agent(s), or if the named manager(s), proprietor(s), or
agent(s) of a licensed business changes, the licensee must complete and
submit the appropriate information, on forms provided by the City Manager or
designated official, within 14 days and will pay the investigation fee as set
forth in the Appendix to this code.  The application must include:



      (1)   The full legal name, place of birth, date of birth,
street resident address, home telephone number, and work telephone number of
the manager(s), proprietor(s) or agent(s).



      (2)   Whether the manager(s), proprietor(s), or agent(s) is a
citizen of the United States or resident alien.



      (3)   Whether the manager(s), proprietor(s) or agent(s) has
ever used or has been known by a name other than the name(s) listed as
manager(s), proprietor(s), or agent(s).  If so, the name or names used and
information concerning dates and places used.



      (4)   The street address at which the manager(s),
proprietor(s), or agent(s) has lived during the preceding five years.



      (5)   The type, name, and location of every business or
occupation in which the manager(s), proprietor(s), or agent(s) has been
engaged during the preceding five years and the name(s) and address(es) of
their employer(s) and partner(s), if any, for the preceding five years.



      (6)   Whether the manager(s), proprietor(s) or agent(s) has
ever been convicted of a felony, crime, or violation of any ordinance other
than a traffic ordinance.  If so, furnish information as to the time, place,
and offense of all such convictions.



      (7)   The physical description of the manager(s),
proprietor(s), or agent(s).



   (C)   Investigation.  The investigation fee will not be subject to
refund or proration.  If the expenses of the investigation relating to any
application exceed the investigation fee, the city will notify the
applicant(s) of this fact and will require the applicant(s) to pay an
additional investigation fee which the city deems necessary to complete the
city's investigation of the applicant(s).  The applicant(s) will pay such an
additional investigation fee within five days of being so notified.  If such
additional investigation fee is not paid within the five day period, the city
will discontinue consideration of the application.  Nonpayment of any
additional investigation fees required will be grounds for denial of
application.



   (D)   Application execution.  All applications for a license under
this section must be signed and sworn to under oath or affirmation by the
applicant.  If the application is that of a person, it must be signed and
sworn to by such person; if that of a corporation, by an officer thereof; if
that of a partnership, by one of the general partners; and if that of an
unincorporated association, by the manager or managing officer thereof.



   (E)   Investigation.  The city, prior to the granting of an initial
license, must conduct a preliminary background and financial investigation of
the applicant.  The Police Department and Finance Division must investigate
into the truthfulness of the statements set forth in the application and will
verify the findings thereon.  The applicant must furnish to the Police
Department and Finance Division such evidence as the Police Department and
Finance Division may reasonably require in support of the statements set
forth in the application.



   (F)   Public hearing.  A license will not be issued or renewed
without a public hearing.  Any person having an interest in or who will be
affected by the proposed license will be permitted to testify at the
hearing.  The public hearing must be preceded by at least ten days published
notice specifying the location of the proposed licensed business premises.



   (G)   Granting of license.  After review of the license
application, investigation report, and a public hearing, the City Council may
grant or refuse the application for a new or renewed pawnbroker license.  A
license will not be effective unless the application fee and bond have been
filed with the License Division.



   (H)   Persons ineligible for a license.  No licenses under this
ordinance will be issued to an applicant who is a natural person, a
partnership if such applicant has any general partner or managing partner, a
corporation or other organization if such applicant has any manager,
proprietor or agent in charge of the business to be licensed, if the
applicant:



      (1)   Is a minor at the time that the application is filed;



      (2)   Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the
occupation licensed as prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 2, and has not
shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to
perform the duties of a licensee under this chapter as prescribed by M.S. §
364.03, Subd. 3;



      (3)   Is not of good moral character or repute; or



      (4)   Has had a pawnbroker license revoked within five years
of the license application date.



('72 Code, § 468:30)  (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97; Am. Ord. 2004-1013,
passed 5-10-04)



§ 119.08  BOND.



   Before a license will be issued, every applicant must submit a bond
with corporate surety, cash, or a United States government bond in an amount
of $5,000.  All bonds must be conditioned that the principal will observe
all laws in relation to pawnbrokers, and will conduct business in conformity
thereto, and that the principal will account for and deliver to any person
legally entitled any goods which have come into the principal’s hand
through the principal’s business as a pawnbroker, or in lieu thereof, will
pay the reasonable value in money to the person.  The bond will contain a
provision that no bond may be canceled except upon 30 days written notice to
the city, which will be served upon the City Manager or designated
official.  The bond must provide that it is forfeited to the city upon a
violation of law or ordinance.



('72 Code, § 468:35)  (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)



§ 119.09  RECORDS REQUIRED.



   At the time of any reportable transaction other than renewals,
extensions or redemptions, every licensee must immediately record the
following in a computerized record approved by the Police Department:



   (A)   A complete and accurate description of each item including,
but not limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number,
model number, brand name, or other identifying marks on such an item.



   (B)   The purchase price, amount of money lent upon, or pledged
therefor.



   (C)   The maturity date of the transaction and the amount due,
including monthly and annual interest rates and all pawn fees and charges.



   (D)   Date, time, and place the item of property was received by the
licensee.



   (E)   Full legal name, residence address, residence telephone
number, date of birth, and accurate description of the person from whom the
item of the property was received, including:  sex, height, weight, race,
color of eyes, and color of hair.



   (F)   The identification number and state of issue from any of the
following forms of identification of the seller:



      (1)   Current valid photo Minnesota drivers’ license.



      (2)   Current valid photo Minnesota identification card.



      (3)   Current valid photo driver’s license issued by another
state.



      (4)   Current valid photo identification card issued by
another state.



   (G)   The signature of the person identified in the transaction.



   (H)   The licensee must also take a color photograph or color video
recording of:



      (1)   Each customer involved in a billable transaction.



      (2)   (a)   Every item pawned or sold that does not have a
unique serial or identification number permanently engraved or affixed.



         (b)   If a photograph is taken, it must be at least two
inches in length by two inches in width and must be maintained in such a
manner that the photograph can be readily matched and correlated with all
other records of the transaction to which they relate.  Such photographs
must be available to the Chief of Police, or the Chief’s designee, upon
request.  The licensee must keep the photograph for six months.  The major
portion of the photograph must include an identifiable front facial close-up
of the person who pawned or sold the item.  Items photographed must be
accurately depicted.  The licensee must inform the person that the person is
being photographed by displaying a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous
place in the premises.



         (c)   If a video photograph is taken, the video camera
must zoom in on the person pawning or selling the item so as to include an
identifiable close-up of that person’s face.  Items photographed by video
must be accurately depicted.  Video photographs must be electronically
referenced by time and date so they can be readily matched and correlated
with all other records of the transaction to which they relate.  The
licensee must inform the person that the person is being videotaped orally
and by displaying a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous place on the
premises.  The licensee must keep the exposed videotape for six months.



   (I)   Renewals, extensions and redemptions.  For renewals,
extensions and redemptions, the licensee will provide the original
transaction identifier, the date of the current transaction, and the type of
transaction.



   (J)   Inspection of records.  The records must at all reasonable
times be open to inspection by the Police Department or the License
Division.  Data entries will be retained for at least three years from the
date of transaction.



('72 Code, § 468:40)  (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 119.10  DAILY REPORTS TO POLICE.



   (A)   Method.  Licensees must provide to the Police Department the
information required in § 119.09(A) through (F), in an approved computerized
form.  The licensee must display a sign of sufficient size, and in a
conspicuous place in the premises, so as to inform all patrons that all
transactions are reported to the Police Department.



   (B)   Billable transaction fees.  Licensees will be charged for
billable transactions at the rate set forth in the Appendix to this code.



('72 Code, § 468:45)  (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 119.11  RECEIPT REQUIRED.



   Every licensee must provide a receipt to the party identified in every
reportable transaction and must maintain a duplicate of that receipt for
three years.  The receipt must include at least the following information:



   (A)   The name, address, and telephone number of the licensed
business.



   (B)   The date and time the item was received by the licensee.



   (C)   Whether the item was pawned or sold, or the nature of the
transaction.



   (D)   An accurate description of each item received including, but
not limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model
number, brand name, or other identifying marks on such an item.



   (E)   The signature or unique identifier of the licensee or employee
that conducted the transaction.



   (F)   The amount advanced or paid.



   (G)   The monthly and annual interest rates, including all pawn fees
and charges.



   (H)   The last regular day of business by which the item must be
redeemed by the pledgor without risk that the item will be sold and the
amount necessary to redeem the pawned item on that date.



   (I)   The full name, residence address, residence telephone number,
and date of birth of the pledgor or seller.



   (J)   The identification number and state of issue from any of the
following forms of identification of the pledgor or seller:



      (1)   Current valid photo Minnesota drivers’ license.



      (2)   Current valid photo Minnesota identification card.



      (3)   Current valid photo drivers’ license issued by another
state.



      (4)   Current valid photo identification card issued by
another state.



   (K)   Description of the pledgor or seller including sex, height,
weight, race, color of eyes and color of hair.



   (L)   The signature of the pledgor or seller.



   (M)  All printed statements required by M.S. § 325J.04, Subdivision
2, or any other applicable statutes.



('72 Code, § 468:50)  (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 119.12  REDEMPTION PERIOD.



   Any person pledging, pawning or depositing an item for security must
have a minimum of 90 days from the date of that transaction to redeem the
item before it may be forfeited and sold.  During the 90 day holding period,
items may not be removed from the licensed location except as provided in §
119.19.  Licensees are prohibited from redeeming any item to anyone other
than the person to whom the receipt was issued or, to any person identified
in a written and notarized authorization to redeem the property identified in
the receipt, or to a person identified in writing by the pledgor at the time
of the initial transaction and signed by the pledgor, or with approval of the
Police Chief or the Chief’s designee.  Written authorization for release
of property to persons other than original pledgor must be maintained along
with an original transaction record in accordance with § 119.09(J).



('72 Code, § 468:55)  (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)



§ 119.13  HOLDING PERIOD.



   Any item purchased by a licensee must not be sold or otherwise
transferred for 90 days from the date of the transaction.  An individual may
redeem an item 72 hours after the item was received on deposit, excluding
Sundays and legal holidays.



('72 Code, § 468:60)  (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)



§ 119.14  POLICE ORDER TO HOLD PROPERTY.



   (A)   Investigative hold.  Whenever a law enforcement official from
any agency notifies a licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold
or removed from the premises.  The investigative hold will be confirmed in
writing by the originating agency within 72 hours and will remain in effect
for 15 days from the date of initial notification or until the investigative
order is canceled, or until an order to hold/confiscate is issued, pursuant
to division (B) of this section, whichever comes first.



   (B)   Order to hold.  Whenever the Chief of Police, or the
Chief’s designee, notifies a licensee not to sell an item, the item must
not be sold or removed from the licensed premises until authorized to be
released by the Chief or the Chief’s designee.  The order to hold will
expire 90 days from the date it is placed unless the Chief of Police or the
Chief’s designee determines the hold is still necessary and notifies the
licensee in writing.



   (C)   Order to confiscate.  If an item is identified as stolen or
evidence in a criminal case, the Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee
may:



      (1)   Physically confiscate and remove it from the shop,
pursuant to a written order from the Chief of Police or the Chief’s
designee; or



      (2)   (a)   Place the item on hold or extend the hold as
provided in division (B) of this section, and leave it in the shop.



         (b)   When an item is confiscated, the person doing so
will provide identification upon request of the licensee, and will provide
the licensee the name and phone number of the confiscating agency and
investigator, and the case number related to the confiscation.



         (c)   When an order to hold/confiscate is no longer
necessary, the Chief of Police, or Chief’s designee will so notify the
licensee.



('72 Code, § 468:65)  (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)



§ 119.15  INSPECTION OF ITEMS.



   At all times during the terms of the license, the licensee must allow
the Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee(s) to enter the premises where
the licensed business is located, including all off-site storage facilities
as authorized in § 119.19 during normal business hours, except in an
emergency, for the purpose of inspecting such premises and inspecting the
items, ware and merchandise and records, therein to verify compliance with
this subchapter or other applicable laws.



('72 Code, § 468:70)  (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)



§ 119.16  LABELS REQUIRED.



   Licensees must attach a label to every item at the time it is pawned,
purchased or received in inventory from any reportable transaction. 
Permanently recorded on this label must be the number or name that identifies
the transaction in the shop’s records, the transaction date, the name of
the item, and the description or the model and serial number of the item as
reported to the Police Department, whichever is applicable, and the date the
item is out of pawn or can be sold, if applicable.  Labels will not be
re-used.



('72 Code, § 468:75)  (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 119.17  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years may pawn or sell or
attempt to pawn or sell goods with any licensee, nor may any licensee receive
any goods from a person under the age of 18 years.



   (B)   No licensee may receive any goods from a person of unsound
mind or an intoxicated person.



   (C)   No licensee may receive any goods, unless the seller presents
identification in the form of a current valid photo Minnesota driver’s
license, a current valid photo State of Minnesota identification card, or
current valid photo drivers’ license issued by another state of residency,
or current valid photo identification card issued by the state of residency
of the person from whom the item was received.



   (D)   No licensee may receive any item of property that possesses an
altered or obliterated serial number or “operation identification” number
or any item of property that has had its serial number removed.



   (E)   No licensee may receive any revolver, pistol, sawed-off
shotgun, automatic rifle, blackjack, switchblade knife, or other similar
weapons or firearms.



('72 Code, § 468:80)  (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 119.18  DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION.



   Any license under this subchapter may be denied, suspended, or revoked
for one or more of the following reasons:



   (A)   The proposed use does not comply with the zoning code.



   (B)   The proposed use does not comply with any health, building,
building maintenance, or other provisions of this code of ordinances or state
law.



   (C)   The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with one or
more provisions of this subchapter.



   (D)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or bribery in securing or renewing a
license.



   (E)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the
application and investigation for, or in the course of, the applicant’s
business.



   (F)   Violation within the preceding five years, of any law relating
to theft, damage, or trespass to property, sale of a controlled substance, or
operation of a business.



   (G)   The owner of the premises licensed or to be licensed would not
qualify for a license under the terms of this subchapter.



('72 Code, § 468:85)  (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97; Am. Ord. 2004-1013,
passed 5-10-04)



§ 119.19  PAYMENTS BY CHECK.



   When a pawnbroker buys or otherwise receives an item at the licensed
place of business, payment must be made by a check made payable to a named
payee who is the actual intended seller.



('72 Code, § 468:90)  (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)



§ 119.20  BUSINESS AT ONLY ONE PLACE.



   A license under this subchapter authorizes the licensee to carry on its
business only at the permanent place of business designated in the license. 
The licensee will permit inspection of the facility in accordance with §
119.16.  All provisions of this subchapter regarding record keeping and
reporting apply to the facility and its contents.  Property will be stored
in compliance with all provisions of the city code.  The licensee must
either own the building in which the business is conducted or have a lease on
the business premises which extends for more than six months.



('72 Code, § 468:95)  (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 119.21  APPLICABLE LAWS.



   A pawnbroker must meet all city, county, state, and federal regulations
relating to pawnbrokers and this subchapter shall not be construed or
interpreted to supersede or limit any other such applicable ordinance or law.



('72 Code, § 468:100)  (Ord. 1997-843, passed 3-24-97)  Penalty, see §
10.99



PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



§ 119.30  DEFINITIONS.



   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all
terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions.  For the purpose
of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PEDDLER/SOLICITOR.  A person who goes from house-to-house, door-
to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or any other type of
place-to-place, for the purpose of advertising, selling or attempting to sell
items that the person is carrying or otherwise transporting, or obtaining or
attempting to obtain orders for products or services of which the person may
be carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog or
by other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur at a later
time.  The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the
scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the person's activity is to
obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed above.



   PERSON.  Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation,
partnership or association.  As applied to groups, organizations,
corporations, partnerships and associations, the term includes each member,
officer, partner, associate, agent or employee.



   REGULAR BUSINESS DAY.  Any day during which the City Hall is open for
the purpose of conducting public business.  Holidays defined by state law
are not counted as regular business days.



(Am. Ord. 2014-1177, passed 7-7-14; Am. Ord. 2018-1235, passed 8-27-18)



§ 119.31  EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS; LICENSE EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of the requirements of this chapter, the terms
PEDDLER/SOLICITORdo not apply to any person selling or attempting to sell at
wholesale any goods, wares, products, merchandise or other personal property
to a retailer of the items being sold by the wholesaler.  The terms also do
not apply to any person who makes initial contacts with other people for the
purpose of establishing or trying to establish a regular customer delivery
route for the delivery of perishable food and dairy products such as baked
goods and milk, nor shall they apply to any person making deliveries of
perishable food and dairy products to the customers on the person’s
established regular delivery route.



   (B)   License exemptions.



      (1)   No license is required for any person to sell the
products of the farm or garden occupied and cultivated by that person.



      (2)   No license is required of any person going from
house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to- street, or
other type of place-to-place when such activity is for the purpose of
exercising that person's state or Federal Constitutional rights such as the
freedom of speech, press, religion and the like, except that this exemption
may be lost if the person's exercise of Constitutional rights is merely
incidental to a commercial activity.



      (3)   Professional fundraisers working on behalf of an
otherwise exempt person or group are exempt from the licensing requirements
of this chapter.



(Ord. 2018-1235, passed 8-27-18)



§ 119.32  LICENSING.



   (A)   City license required.  Except as otherwise provided for by
this chapter, it is unlawful to conduct business as a peddler/solicitor
without first having obtained a license from the city.



   (B)   Application.  Application for a city license to conduct
business as a peddler/solicitor, must be made at least 30 regular business
days before the applicant desires to begin conducting business.  Application
for a license must be made on a form approved by the city and available from
the city.  All applications must be signed by the applicant.  All
applications must include the following information:



      (1)   Applicant's full legal name.



      (2)   All other names under which the applicant conducts
business or to which applicant officially answers.



      (3)   Full address of applicant.



      (4)   Telephone number of applicant's permanent residence.



      (5)   Full legal name of any and all business operations
owned, managed or operated by applicant, or for which the applicant is an
employee or agent.



      (6)   Full address of applicant's regular place of business
(if any).



      (7)   Any and all business related telephone numbers of the
applicant.



      (8)   The type of business for which the applicant is applying
for a license.



      (9)   Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the
applicant can be reached while conducting business within the city.



      (10)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been
convicted within the last five years of any felony, gross misdemeanor, or
misdemeanor for violation of any state or federal statute or any local
ordinance, other than traffic offenses.



      (11)   A list of all cities where the applicant has conducted
business as a peddler/solicitor in the past two years.



      (12)   A general description of the items to be sold or
services to be provided.



      (13)   All additional information deemed necessary by the city.



      (14)   The applicant's valid state issued identification or
driver's license or other acceptable form of identification.



      (15)   The license plate number, registration information and
vehicle identification number for any vehicle to be used in conjunction with
the licensed business and a description of the vehicle.



   (D)   Fee.  All applications for a license must be accompanied by
the fee established in the city's fee schedule as adopted from time to time
by a resolution passed by the City Council.



   (E)   Procedure.  Upon receipt of the completed application and
payment of the license fee, the Licensing Division within five regular
business days of receipt, must determine if the application is complete. An
application is determined to be complete only if all required information is
provided. If it is determined that the application is incomplete, the
Licensing Division must inform the applicant of the required necessary
information which is missing. If the application is complete, any
investigation, including background checks, necessary to verify the
information provided with the application will be ordered. Upon receipt of
the completed application the license will be processed. If the Licensing
Division denies the license, the applicant must be notified in writing of the
decision, the reason for denial, and of the applicant's right to appeal the
denial by requesting, within 14 days of the date of the notice of denial, an
administrative hearing. The final decision of the administrative Hearing
Officer is appealable by petitioning the Minnesota Court of Appeals for a
Writ of Certiorari.



   (F)   Duration.  Licenses are valid for either 30 days, six months,
or annual and only during the time period indicated on the license.



   (G)   Any solicitor/peddler who was registered or licensed with the
city before September 1, 2018 may continue to operate under such registration
or license until December 31, 2018.



(Ord. 2018-1235, passed 8-27-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.33  LICENSE INELIGIBILITY.



   The following are grounds for denying a license under this chapter:



   (A)   The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the
information requested by the city as a part of the application, or the
failure to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee at
the time of application.



   (B)   The conviction of the applicant who has not shown sufficient
evidence of rehabilitation pursuant to M.S. § 364.03 for any violation of
any federal or state statute or regulation, or of any local ordinance, which
adversely reflects on the person's ability to conduct the business for which
the license is being sought in an honest and legal manner or that will not
adversely affect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the
city.  Such violations include but are not limited to burglary, theft,
larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, and any form of
actual or threatened physical harm against another person.



   (C)   The revocation within the past five years of any license
issued to the applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a
peddler/solicitor.



   (D)   The applicant or company that the applicant is representing is
determined to have a bad business reputation.  Evidence of a bad business
reputation includes, but is not limited to, the existence of more than three
complaints against the applicant with the Better Business Bureau, the
Attorney General's Office, or other similar business or consumer rights
office or agency, within the preceding 12 months.



   (E)   Prior violations of this chapter.



   (F)   Conducting business without the required license.



   (G)   A determination of previous fraudulent acts or conduct.



   (H)   A record of continual breaches of solicited contracts.



   (I)   Any prior revocations or suspensions of peddler or solicitor
licenses in any other city within the past 5 years.



(Ord. 2018-1235, passed 8-27-18)



§ 119.34  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   Generally.  Any license issued under this section may be
suspended or revoked for a violation of any of the following:



      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statements on the
application form.



      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during
the course of the licensed activity.



      (3)   Conviction of any offense for which granting of a
license could have been denied under § 119.33.



      (4)   Violation of any provision of this chapter.



   (B)   Notice.  Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued
under this chapter, the city must provide the license holder with written
notice of the alleged violations and inform the licensee of the licensee’s
right to a hearing on the alleged violation.  Notice must be delivered in
person or by mail to the permanent residential address listed on the license
application, or if no residential address is listed, to the business address
provided on the license application.



   (C)   Administrative hearing.  Upon receiving the notice provided
in division (C) of this section, the licensee has the right to request an
administrative hearing.  If no request for a hearing is received by the city
within 14 regular business days following the service of the notice, the city
may proceed with the suspension or revocation.  For the purpose of mailed
notices, service is considered complete as of the date the notice is placed
in the mail.  If a hearing is requested within the stated time frame, a
hearing must be scheduled within 30 days from the date of the request. If the
Hearing Officer determines that a violation of this chapter did occur, that
decision, along with the Hearing Officer's reasons for finding a violation
and the penalty to be imposed, must be recorded in writing, a copy of which
must be provided to the accused violator.  Likewise, if the hearing officer
finds that no violation occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any
penalty, the findings must be in writing and a copy provided to the licensee.



   (D)   Emergency.  If, in the discretion of the city, imminent harm
to the health or safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a
peddler/solicitorlicensed under this chapter, the city may immediately revoke
the person's license and provide notice of the right to hold a subsequent
administrative hearing as prescribed in division (C) of this section.



   (E)   Appeals.  The final decision of the administrative Hearing
Officer is appealable by petitioning the Minnesota court of Appeals for a
Writ of Certiorari.



(Ord. 2018-1235, passed 8-27-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.35  TRANSFERABILITY.



   A license issued under this chapter must not be transferred to any
person other than the person to whom the license was issued.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.36  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   It is unlawful for a peddler/solicitor to conduct business in any of
the following manners:



   (A)   Calling attention to the person’s business or items to be
sold by means of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out,
or by any other noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed
structure.



   (B)   Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian
traffic on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way.



   (C)   Conducting business in such a way as to create a threat to the
health, safety and welfare of any individual or the general public.



   (D)   Conducting business before 8:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.



   (E)   Failing to properly display approved license identification in
plain view attached to the outer clothing and provide proof of license and
identification, when requested.



   (F)   Using the license of another person.



   (G)   Making any false or misleading statements about the product or
service being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement.  It is
unlawful for a peddler/solicitor to claim to have the endorsement of the city
solely based on the city having issued a license or certificate of
registration to that person.



   (H)   Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave,
or to otherwise conduct business in a manner a reasonable person would find
obscene, threatening, intimidating or abusive.



(Ord. 2018-1235, passed 8-27-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.37  EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.



   It is unlawful for a peddler/solicitor unless invited to do so by the
property owner or tenant, to enter the property of another for the purpose of
conducting business as a peddler/solicitor when the property is marked with a
sign or placard at least four inches long and four inches wide with print of
at least 48 point in size stating “No Peddlers, Solicitors or Transient
Merchants,” or “Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient Merchants
Prohibited,” or other comparable statement.  It is unlawful for a person
other than the property owner or tenant to remove, deface or otherwise tamper
with any sign or placard under this section.



(Ord. 2018-1235, passed 8-27-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



ITINERANT PRODUCE MERCHANT



§ 119.40  DEFINITIONS.



   PERSON.   Includes the singular and the plural and also means and
includes any person, firm or corporation, association, club, co-partnership
or society, or any other organization.



   ITINERANT PRODUCE MERCHANT.   Any person who has lawfully applied for
a permit to sell produce in compliance with the provisions, restrictions, and
location(s) specified in the zoning ordinance. 



   ITINERANT PRODUCE SALES.   Any temporary sale of produce on property
specifically designated for that purpose.



   PRODUCE.   Fresh flowers, fruits, and vegetables.



(Ord. 2000-934, passed 11-13-00)



§ 119.41  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of itinerant
produce sales and to sell or offer for sale any produce without first
obtaining a permit and license as provided herein.  It is unlawful to sell
or offer for sale any produce anywhere within the city without a permit.



(Ord. 2000-934, passed 11-13-00)



§ 119.42  TIME PERIOD.



   Itinerant produce sales may only occur during the time period beginning
April 1 and ending October 31 of each year.



(Ord. 2000-934, passed 11-13-00)



§ 119.43  LOCATION.



   Itinerant produce sales may exist only in those locations specified in
the Zoning Ordinance.



(Ord. 2000-934, passed 11-13-00)



§ 119.44  TIME OF DAY.



   Itinerant produce sales may be permitted only during the following
hours:



   (A)   Monday through Friday.  12 p.m. (noon) to 5 p.m.



   (B)   Saturday.  8 a.m. to 1 p.m.



   (C)   Sunday.  11 a.m. to 3 p.m.



(Ord. 2000-934, passed 11-13-00)



§ 119.45  ITINERANT PRODUCE MERCHANT LIMIT.



   Itinerant produce merchants licenses are limited to ten merchants at
any one time period.



(Ord. 2000-934, passed 11-13-00)



§ 119.46  APPLICATION.



   Applicants for a permit under this subchapter must file with the
Licensing Division a sworn application in writing, in duplicate, on a form to
be furnished by the Licensing Division, which gives the following information:



   (A)   Full legal name and date of birth of the applicant.



   (B)   Address (legal and local).



   (C)   A brief description of the nature of the produce to be sold.



   (D)   The specific length of time and the dates for which the right
to do business is desired.



   (E)   If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same,
together with license number or other means of identification.



   (F)   The Licensing Division may refer the application to the
Community Development and Recreation and Parks Departments for comment and
recommendation.



(Ord. 2000-934, passed 11-13-00)



§ 119.47  TRANSFER.



   No permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter may be used or
exhibited at any time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued.



(Ord. 2000-934, passed 11-13-00)



§ 119.48  NUISANCE.



   No itinerant produce merchant may conduct business so as to annoy any
other person or to become a nuisance or so as to obstruct travel upon any
street, highway or public place in the city.  All merchants must be
responsible for removing all associated litter, trash and the like from the
site each and every day.



(Ord. 2000-934, passed 11-13-00)



§ 119.49  LOUD NOISES AND SPEAKING DEVICES.



   No itinerant produce merchant nor any person on their behalf may shout,
make any cry out, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device, include
any loud speaking radio or sound amplifying system to be plainly heard upon
any streets, avenues, adjacent property, or for the purpose of attracting
attention to any produce for sale.



(Ord. 2000-934, passed 11-13-00)



§ 119.50  SIGNS.



   The itinerant produce merchant signs must be in compliance with the
sign ordinance (Chapter 150).



(Ord. 2000-934, passed 11-13-00)



§ 119.51  DUTY OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AND POLICE DEPARTMENTS TO ENFORCE.



   It is the duty of the Community Development department and/or any
police officer of this municipality to require any person seen selling, who
is not known by such employee to have received a permit, to produce their
permit and to enforce the provisions of this subchapter against any person
found to be violating the same.



(Ord. 2000-934, passed 11-13-00)



§ 119.52  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Permits issued under the provisions of this subchapter may be
revoked by the city after notice for any of the following causes:



      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained
in the application for permit or made to the course of carrying out the
business as a merchant;



      (2)   Any violation of City Code;



      (3)   Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such
a manner as to constitute a nuisance, breach of the peace or to constitute a
menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public.



   (B)   Notice of the revocation of a permit may be given in writing,
setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint.



(Ord. 2000-934, passed 11-13-00)



CHAPTER 120:  SAUNAS



Section



   120.01   Definitions



   120.02   Massage distinguished



   120.03   License required



   120.04   Granting or denial of licenses



   120.05   Revocation or suspension of license



   120.06   Restrictions and regulations



   120.07   Construction and maintenance requirements



§ 120.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MASSAGE.  The rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping, or rolling of the
body with the hands, for the exclusive purposes of relaxation, physical
fitness, or beautification, and for no other purposes.



   MASSEUR.  A male person who practices massage.



   MASSEUSE.  A female person who practices massage.



   SAUNA.  Any commercial establishment in which is located a steam or
heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation or reducing,
utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent.



('72 Code, § 485:00)



§ 120.02  MASSAGE DISTINGUISHED.



   The practice of massage is declared to be distinct from the practice of
medicine surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical therapy, or podiatry,
and persons duly licensed or registered in this state to practice medicine,
surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical therapy, or podiatry, nurses who
work solely under the direction of any such persons, athletic directors, and
trainers are expressly excluded from the provisions of this chapter. Beauty
culturists and barbers who do not give, or hold themselves out to give,
massage treatments, as defined herein, other than is customarily given in
such shops or places of business, for the purpose of beautification only, are
exempt from the provisions of this chapter.



('72 Code, § 485:00)



§ 120.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It is unlawful to engage in the business of operating a sauna
either exclusively or in connection with any other business enterprise which
offers massage as part of its service without being licensed as provided in
this section.



   (B)   Application for a license must be made in writing, filed with
the City Clerk on the form prescribed by the Licensing Division and verified
by the applicant or if the applicant is a corporation by one of its officers
having knowledge of the facts.  At the time of filing an application the
applicant must pay the license fee and investigation fee of $500.



   (C)   License fees are in the amount set by the Council from time to
time.  A separate license will be obtained for each place of business.  The
licensee must display the license in a prominent place on the licensed
premises at all times.  The license, unless revoked, canceled or suspended,
is for the calendar year or part thereof for which it has been issued.  The
license is not transferable and should ownership change during the license
year, the new owner must immediately apply for a new license and pay the
license fee and a new investigation fee as set forth in division (B) of this
section.



   (D)   If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the
applicant must designate a person as the manager and responsible and in
charge of the business.  The person must remain responsible for the proper
conduct of the business until another suitable person has been designated in
writing by the applicant and approved by the City Manager.



('72 Code, § 485:05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 120.04  GRANTING OR DENIAL OF LICENSES.



   License applications must be reviewed by the Police Department,
Planning Department, Health Department and such other department as the City
Manager shall deem necessary.  The investigation reports must be submitted
to the City Council who will grant or deny the license applications subject
to the provisions of this section.  Renewal licenses must be approved by the
City Council.



('72 Code, § 485:10)



§ 120.05  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The City Manager is hereby empowered to revoke or suspend any
sauna license issued pursuant to this section.  The licensee may appeal to
the City Council from the Manager's decision.  The following are grounds for
revocation or suspension of the sauna license:



      (1)   Violation by the licensee or any of the licensee's
employees of any of the provisions of this section.



      (2)   The sale or consumption, on the premises, by employees
or customers of alcoholic beverages or narcotic drugs.



      (3)   Any conduct or activity contrary to the public health,
safety, morals or welfare.



   (B)   If any license is revoked pursuant to this section, the
licensee is not entitled to make application for a new license for a period
of five years commencing with the date of revocation by the City Manager.



('72 Code, § 485:15)



§ 120.06  RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Licenses may be granted only for lands in the B-3 General
Business District as set forth in the zoning ordinance.



   (B)   Licenses are granted only to establishments which can meet the
safety and sanitary requirements of this chapter.



   (C)   It is grounds for denial of a license application that the
applicant or persons in the applicant's employ are not complying with or have
a history of noncompliance with any state or municipal regulations relating
to health, safety or morals.



   (D)   A license is not to be granted to a person of bad repute or to
a partnership or to a corporation who has in its employ or is owned by any
persons of bad repute.



   (E)   Saunas will not be opened for business nor will patrons be
permitted on the premises between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. of
the same day.



   (F)   It is unlawful for an employee of the sauna to agree to
perform or perform any of the activities ordinarily incident to the
enterprise at any place other than the licensed premises.



   (G)   It is unlawful for a person under the age of 18 years to be
employed in a sauna requiring a license under the provisions of this chapter.



   (H)   Upon demand by any police officer, any person engaged in
providing services in any licensed premises must provide identification,
giving the person's true legal name and correct address.



('72 Code, § 485:20)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 120.07  CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All sauna rooms and all restrooms and bathrooms used in
connection therewith must be constructed of materials which are impervious to
moisture, bacteria, mold or fungus growth.  The floor to wall and wall to
wall joints must be constructed to provide a sanitary cove with a minimum
radius of one inch.



   (B)   All restrooms used in connection with saunas must be provided
with mechanical ventilation of two CFM per square foot of floor area, a
minimum of 30 foot candles of illumination, a hand washing sink, equipped
with hot and cold running water under pressure, sanitary towels and a soap
dispenser.



   (C)   Each sauna establishment must have a janitor's closet which
must provide for the storage of cleaning supplies.  The closets must have
mechanical ventilation with two CFM per square foot of floor area and a
minimum of 30 foot candles of illumination.  The closet must include a mop
sink.



   (D)   Walls, floors and equipment in sauna rooms and in restrooms
and in bathrooms used in connection therewith must be kept in a state of good
repair and clean at all times.  Linens and other materials must be stored at
least 12 inches off the floor.  Clean towels and wash cloths must be made
available for each customer.



   (E)   Individual lockers must be made available for use by
patrons.  The lockers must have separate keys for locking.



   (F)   The establishments must provide adequate refuse receptacles
which must be emptied as required.



   (G)   In addition to the requirements contained in this section the
licensed premise must conform in all ways to all of the applicable rules,
regulations and codes of the city.



('72 Code, § 485:25)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 121:  TAXICABS



Section



   121.01   Definitions



   121.02   Certificate of public convenience and necessity required



   121.03   Application for certificate



   121.04   Issuance of certificate



   121.05   Indemnity bond or liability insurance required



   121.06   License fees for certificate holders



   121.07   Transfer of certificates



   121.08   Suspension and revocation of certificates



   121.09   Licensing of taxicab drivers



   121.10   Vehicles; equipment and maintenance



   121.11   Designation of taxicabs



   121.12   Taximeter required



   121.13   Rates of fare



   121.14   Refusal of passenger to pay legal fare



   121.15   Open stands



   121.16   Call box stands



   121.17   Prohibitions of other vehicles



   121.18   Service



§ 121.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CALL BOX STAND.  A place alongside a street, or elsewhere, where the
Council has authorized a holder of a certificate of public convenience and
necessity to install a telephone or call box for the taking of calls and the
dispatching of taxicabs.



   CERTIFICATE.  A certificate of public convenience and necessity issued
by the Council authorizing the holder thereof to conduct a taxicab business
in the city.



   OPERATOR.  Any person owning or having control of the use of one or
more taxicabs used for hire upon the streets or engaged in the business of
operating a taxicab within the city.



   PERSON.  One or more persons of either sex, natural persons,
corporations, partnerships and associations.



   PRIVATE AUTO LIVERY.  An automobile used to carry persons for hire
other than by solicitation of business by cruising about the streets.



   STREET.  Any street, alley, avenue, court, bridge, lane or public
place in the city.



   TAXICAB.  Any motor vehicle engaged in the carrying of persons for
hire, whether over a fixed route or not, and whether the same is operated
from a street stand or subject to calls from a garage or otherwise operated
for hire except private auto liveries as herein defined, but the term does
not include vehicles subject to control and regulation by the Public Service
Commission or vehicles regularly used by undertakers in carrying on their
business.



   TAXICAB DRIVER.  Any person who drives a taxicab, whether the person
is the owner of the taxicab or is employed by a taxicab owner or operator.



   TAXICAB STAND.  Any place along the curb or street or elsewhere which
is exclusively reserved by the city for the use of taxicabs.



   TAXIMETER.  Any mechanical instrument or device by which the charge
for hire of a taxicab is mechanically calculated, whether by distance
traveled or waiting time or both, and upon which such charge is indicated by
figures.



('72 Code, § 475:00)



§ 121.02  CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for a person to operate or permit a taxicab owned or
controlled by that person to be operated as a vehicle for hire upon the
streets of the city without having first obtained a certificate of public
convenience and necessity from the Council, provided, that any taxicab
licensed to operate in any other municipality of this state may carry
passengers from that municipality where so licensed to any place or point
within the city and may receive local passengers for carriage to the
licensing municipality without procuring a license under this section,
provided, however, such foreign taxicab driver does not solicit business on
the streets of the city nor pick up passengers in the city, except where a
trip for such passenger had been arranged at a central office of the company
for whom the driver does business, which office is located outside the
boundaries of the city.  While in the city, the foreign driver must observe
all the regulations and conditions of this chapter.



('72 Code, § 475:05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 121.03  APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE.



   An application for a certificate must be filed with the Licensing
Division upon forms provided by the city and the application shall be
verified under oath and shall furnish the following information:



   (A)   The name and address of the applicant.



   (B)   The financial status of the applicants including the amounts
of all unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature of the
transaction or acts giving rise to the judgments.



   (C)   The experience of the applicant in the transportation of
passengers.



   (D)   Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that
public convenience and necessity require the granting of a certificate.



   (E)   The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the
applicant and the location of proposed open stands and call box stands.



   (F)   The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the
vehicle or vehicles of the applicant.



   (G)   Such further information as the Council may from time to time
require.



   (H)   Must provide a statement covering each vehicle to be so
licensed, giving the full name and address of the owner; the class and
passenger-carrying capacity of each vehicle for which a license is desired;
the length of time the vehicle has been in use; the make of car; the engine
number; the serial number and the state license number; whether the same is
mortgaged, the name of the mortgagee and the amount of said mortgage; also
the holder of legal title to said motor vehicle if other than the applicant;
or whether said vehicle is leased, licensed, or under any form of contract
permitted to be used and operated by some other person than the one holding
legal title thereto, and what person, firm, or corporation collects the
revenues from the operation of the taxicab and pays the expenses of operating
the same.



('72 Code, § 475:10)



§ 121.04  ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE.



   (A)   If the Council finds that further taxicab service in the city
is required by the public convenience and necessity and that the applicant is
fit, willing and able to perform such public transportation and to conform to
the provisions of this ordinance and the rules promulgated by the Council,
the Council will issue a certificate stating the name and address of the
applicant, the number of vehicles authorized under said certificate and the
date of issuance; otherwise, the application will be denied.



   (B)   In making the above finding as the Council must take into
consideration the number of taxicabs already in operation, whether existing
transportation is adequate to meet the public need, the probable effect of
increased service on local traffic conditions, and the character, experience
and responsibility of the applicant.



('72 Code, § 475:15)



§ 121.05  INDEMNITY BOND OR LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   No certificate of public convenience and necessity will be issued or
continued in operation unless there is in full force and effect a liability
insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in
the State of Minnesota for each vehicle authorized, in the amount of $50,000
for bodily injury to any one person, in the amount of $100,000 for injuries
to more than one person which are sustained in the same accident and $25,000
for property damage resulting from any one accident. The policy or
certificate of the insurer showing issuance of the policy must be filed in
the office of the City Clerk.



('72 Code, § 475:20)



§ 121.06  LICENSE FEES FOR CERTIFICATE HOLDERS.



   No certificate will be issued or continued in operation unless the
holder thereof has paid a license fee for the right to engage in the taxicab
business for each vehicle operated under a certificate of public convenience
and necessity.  The license fees are for the calendar year and are in
addition to any other license fees or other charges established by proper
authority and applicable to the holder of the vehicle or vehicles under the
license holder's operation and control.



('72 Code, § 475:25)



Cross-reference:



   License fees, see Appendix



§ 121.07  TRANSFER OF CERTIFICATES.



   No certificate or public convenience and necessity may be sold,
assigned, mortgaged, or otherwise transferred without the consent of the
Council.



('72 Code, § 475:30)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 121.08  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATES.



   (A)   A certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter may
be revoked or suspended by the Council if the holder thereof has:



      (1)   Violated any of the provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   Discontinued operations for more than 60 days.



      (3)   Violated any ordinances of the City of Brooklyn Park, or
the laws of the United States or the State of Minnesota, the violations of
which reflect unfavorably on the fitness of the holder to offer public
transportation.



   (B)   Prior to suspension or revocation, the holder must be given
notice of the proposed action to be taken and must have an opportunity to be
heard by the Council.



('72 Code, § 475:35)



§ 121.09  LICENSING OF TAXICAB DRIVERS.



   Prior to the commencement of operation under this chapter, the holder
of a certificate must furnish to the city the names of all persons who will
be operating taxicabs for the certificate holder.  Each of such persons must
be the holder of a valid chauffeur's license issued by the State of
Minnesota.  The Police Department must conduct an investigation of each such
person and a report of such investigation must be furnished to the Council,
together with the recommendation of the Chief of Police as to whether or not
such persons should be permitted to operate taxicabs within the city.  Upon
a finding by the Council that such persons are to be permitted to operate
taxicabs within the city, the Licensing Division must issue a taxicab
driver's license to such persons upon the payment by them of the required
license fee.  The license is valid for the calendar year in which issued and
must be renewed at the commencement of each subsequent calendar year.  It is
unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab within the City of Brooklyn Park
for or on behalf of any certificate holder without having a valid taxicab
driver's license in the person's possession.



('72 Code, § 475:40)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 121.10  VEHICLES; EQUIPMENT AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   The Council will cause the Chief of the Police Department or
name other employee, on behalf of the city, to thoroughly and carefully
examine each taxicab before a license is granted to operate the same.



   (B)   No taxicab will be licensed which does not comply with the
following:



      (1)   It must be in a thoroughly safe condition for the
transportation of passengers.



      (2)   It must be clean and of good appearance and well painted
or varnished.



      (3)   Such other examinations and tests of licensed taxicabs
as may be ordered by the Council from time to time as it may deem advisable.



('72 Code, § 475:45)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 121.11  DESIGNATION OF TAXICABS.



   Each taxicab must bear on the outside of each rear door, in painted
letters not less than four inches nor more that eight inches in height, the
name of the owner and, in addition, may bear an identifying design approved
by the Council.  No vehicle covered by the terms of this chapter will be
licensed whose color scheme, identifying design, monogram, or insignia to be
used thereon, in the opinion of the Council, conflicts with or imitates any
color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia used on a vehicle or
vehicles already operating under the ordinance, in such a manner as to be
misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public and provided further,
that if, after a license has been issued for a taxicab hereunder, the color
scheme; identifying design, monogram or insignia thereof is changed so as to
be in the opinion of the Council, in conflict with or imitate any color
scheme, identifying design, monogram, or insignia used by any other person,
owner or operator, in such a manner as to be misleading or tend to deceive
the public, the license of or certificate covering such taxicab or taxicabs
will be suspended or revoked.



('72 Code, § 475:50)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 121.12  TAXIMETER REQUIRED.



   All taxicabs operated under the authority of this chapter must be
equipped with taximeters fastened in front of the passengers, visible to them
at all times day and night; and after sundown, the face of the taximeter must
be illuminated.  The taximeter must be operated mechanically by a mechanism
of standard design and construction, driven either from the transmission or
from one of the front wheels by a flexible and permanently attached driving
mechanism.  They must be sealed at all points and connections which, if
manipulated would affect their correct reading and recording.  Each
taximeter must have thereon a flag to denote when the vehicle is employed and
when it is not employed, and it is the duty of the driver to throw the flag
of such taximeter into a non-recording position at the termination of each
trip.  The taximeters are subject to inspection from time to time by the
Police Department.  Any inspector or other officer of the Department is
authorized, either on complaint of any person or without such complaint, to
inspect any meter and, upon discovery of any inaccuracy therein, to notify
the person operating the taxicab to cease operation.  The taxicab must then
be kept off the highways until the taximeter is repaired and in the required
working condition.



('72 Code, § 475:55)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 121.13  RATES OF FARE.



   Every taxicab operated under this chapter must have a rate card setting
forth the authorized rates of fare displayed in such a place as to be in view
of all passengers, rates charged may not exceed taxicab rates which are
lawful in the City of Minneapolis.



('72 Code, § 475:60)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 121.14  REFUSAL OF PASSENGER TO PAY LEGAL FARE.



   It is unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any of
the vehicles mentioned in this chapter after having hired the same, and it is
unlawful for any person to hire any vehicle herein defined with intent to
defraud the person from whom it is hired of the value of such service.



('72 Code, § 475:65)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 121.15  OPEN STANDS.



   (A)   The Council is authorized and empowered to establish open
stands in such place or places upon the streets as it deems necessary for the
use of taxicabs operated in the city.  The Council must not create an open
stand without taking into consideration the need for such stands by the
companies and the convenience of the general public.  The Council must
prescribe the number of cabs that may occupy such open stands.  The Council
must not create an open stand in front of any place of business where the
abutting property owners object to the same or where such stand would tend to
create a traffic hazard.



   (B)   Open stands may be used by the different drivers on a first
come first served basis.  The driver must pull onto the open stand from the
rear and must advance forward as the cabs ahead pull off.  Drivers must stay
within five feet of their cabs; they must not solicit passengers or engage in
loud or boisterous talk while at an open stand.  Nothing in this chapter is
to be construed as preventing a passenger from boarding the cab of the
passenger's choice that is parked at open stands.



('72 Code, § 475:70)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 121.16  CALL BOX STANDS.



   (A)   The Council is authorized and empowered to establish call box
stands upon the streets of the city in such places as in its discretion it
deems proper.  A holder desiring to establish a call box stand must make
written application to the Council.  The applicant must attach to the
application the written approval of the abutting property owners of the
space, consenting to the creation of such stand.  Upon filing of the
application, the Police Department must thereafter file their written
recommendation to the Council.  The Council shall then either grant or
refuse the application.  When a call box stand has been established an
herein provided, it must be used solely by the holder to whom the same was
granted and the holder's agents and servants and no other holder will be
permitted to use the same.



   (B)   A holder operating a call box stand as provided for in this
chapter is allowed to have on duty at such stand, a starter or other employee
for the purpose of assisting in the loading or unloading of passengers from
cabs, for receiving calls and dispatching cabs, and for soliciting passengers
at such stand.  The words “at such stand” mean that part of the sidewalk
immediately adjacent to and of equal length with such call box stand.



('72 Code, § 475:75)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 121.17  PROHIBITIONS OF OTHER VEHICLES.



   Private or other vehicles for hire must not at any time occupy the
space upon the streets that has been established as either open stands or
call box stands.



('72 Code, § 475:80)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 121.18  SERVICE.



   Persons engaged in the taxicab business in the City of Brooklyn Park
operating under the provisions of this chapter must render an overall service
to the public desiring to use taxicabs.  Holders of certificates of public
convenience and necessity must maintain a central place of business and keep
the same open for such hours of each day as the Council may direct for the
purpose of receiving calls and dispatching cabs.  They shall answer all
calls received by them for services inside the corporate limits as soon as
they can do so and if said services cannot be rendered within a reasonable
time, they shall then notify the prospective passengers how long it will be
before the call can be answered and give the reason therefor.  A holder who
refuses to accept a call anywhere in the corporate limits of the City of
Brooklyn Park at any time when the holder has available cabs, or who fails or
refuses to give overall service, is deemed a violator of this chapter.



('72 Code, § 475:85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 122:  TOBACCO REGULATIONS



Section



   122.01   Purpose and intent



   122.02   Definitions



   122.03   License



   122.04   Fees



   122.05   Basis for denial of license



   122.06   Prohibited sales



   122.07   Vending machines



   122.08   Self-service sales



   122.09   Responsibility



   122.10   Compliance checks and inspections



   122.11   Other illegal acts



   122.12   Exceptions and defenses



 



   122.99   Violations and penalty



§ 122.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   Because the city recognizes that many persons under the age of 18 years
purchase or otherwise obtain, possess and use tobacco, tobacco products,
tobacco-related devices, electronic delivery devices, and nicotine or lobelia
delivery devices; and because smoking has been shown to be the cause of
several serious health problems which subsequently place a financial burden
on all levels of government; this chapter is intended to regulate the sale,
possession, and use of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices,
and nicotine or lobelia delivery devices for the purpose of enforcing and
furthering existing laws, to protect minors against the serious effects
associated with the illegal use of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related
devices, electronic delivery devices and nicotine or lobelia delivery devices
and to further the official public policy of the State of Minnesota  as
stated in M.S. § 144.391.



(Ord. 1998-873, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord. 2015-1192, passed 5-26-15)



§ 122.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all
terms are given their commonly accepted definitions.  For the purpose of
this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMPLIANCE CHECKS.  The system the city uses to investigate and ensure
that those authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related
devices, electronic delivery devices and nicotine or lobelia delivery devices
are following and complying with the requirements of this chapter. 
Compliance checks may also be conducted by other units of government for the
purpose of enforcing appropriate federal, state or local laws and regulations
relating to tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, electronic
delivery devices and nicotine or lobelia delivery devices.



   ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE.  Any product containing or delivering
nicotine, lobelia, or any other substance intended for human consumption that
can be used by a person to simulate smoking in the delivery of nicotine or
any other substance through inhalation of vapor from the product. ELECTRONIC
DELIVERY DEVICE includes any component part of a product, whether or not
marketed or sold separately. ELECTRONIC DELIVERY DEVICE does not include any
product that has been approved or certified by the United States Food and
Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco-cessation product, as a
tobacco-dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is marketed
and sold for such an approved purpose.



   INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED.  The practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco
product wrapped individually for sale.  Individually wrapped tobacco and
tobacco products include but are not limited to single cigarette packs,
single bags or cans of loose tobacco in any form, and single cans or other
packaging of snuff or chewing tobacco.  Cartons or other packaging
containing more than a single pack or other container as described in this
definition are not considered individually packaged.



   LOOSIES.  The common term used to refer to a single or individually
packaged cigarette.



   MINOR.  Any natural person who has not yet reached the age of 18 years.



   MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS.  Any form of business operated out of a
truck, van, automobile or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and
not a fixed address store front or other permanent type of structure
authorized for sales transactions.



   NICOTINE OR LOBELIA DELIVERY DEVICE.  Any product containing or
delivering nicotine or lobelia intended for human consumption, or any part of
such a product, that is not tobacco as defined in this section, not including
any product, that is not tobacco as defined in this section, not including
any product that has been approved or otherwise certified for legal sale by
the United States Food and Drug Administration for tobacco cessation, harm
reduction, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold
solely for that approved purchase.



   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT.  Any place of business where tobacco, tobacco
products,  tobacco-related devices, electronic delivery devices, or nicotine
or lobelia delivery devices are available for sale to the general public. 
The phrase includes but is not limited to grocery stores, convenience stores
and restaurants.



   SALE.  Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter or other
consideration.



   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING.  Open displays of tobacco, tobacco
products, tobacco-related devices, electronic delivery devices, or nicotine
or lobelia delivery devices in any manner where any person has access to the
tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, electronic delivery
devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices without the assistance or
intervention of the licensee or the licensee's employee.  The assistance or
intervention entails the actual physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco
product, tobacco- related device, electronic delivery devices, or nicotine or
lobelia delivery device between the customer and the licensee or employee.



   TOBACCO or TOBACCO PRODUCTS.  Any substance or item containing tobacco
leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes and any product containing,
made, or derived from tobacco that is intended for human consumption, whether
chewed, smoked, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested
by any other means, or any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco
product; cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, fine cut or other chewing tobacco,
cheroots, stogies, perique, granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed,
and other smoking tobacco, snuff flowers, cavendish, shorts, plug and twist
tobaccos, dipping tobaccos, refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings, and sweepings
of tobacco, and other kinds and forms of tobacco leaf prepared in such manner
as to be suitable for chewing, sniffing or smoking. This term excludes any
tobacco product that has been approved or otherwise certified for legal sale
by the United States Food and Drug Administration for tobacco cessation, harm
reduction, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold
solely for that approved purchase.



   TOBACCO-RELATED DEVICES.  Any tobacco product as well as a pipe,
rolling papers or other device intentionally designed or intended to be used
in a manner which enables the chewing, sniffing or smoking of tobacco or
tobacco products.



   VENDING MACHINE.  Any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other
type of device which dispenses tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related
devices, electronic delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices
upon the insertion of money, tokens or other form of payment directly into
the machine by the person seeking to purchase the tobacco, tobacco product, 
tobacco-related device, electronic delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia
delivery device.



(Ord. 1998-873, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord. 2015-1192, passed 5-26-15)



§ 122.03  LICENSE.



   (A)   License required.  It is unlawful to sell or offer to sell
any tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related device, electronic delivery
devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery device without first having obtained
a license to do so from the city.



   (B)   Application.  An application for a license to sell tobacco,
tobacco products, tobacco- related devices, electronic delivery devices, or
nicotine or lobelia delivery devices must be made on a form provided by the
city.  The application must contain the full name of the applicant, the
applicant's residential and business addresses and telephone numbers, the
name and address of the business for which the license is sought, and any
additional information the city deems necessary.  Upon receipt of a
completed application, the Licensing Division must forward the application to
the City Council for action at its next regularly scheduled City Council
meeting.  If the licensing Division determines that an application is
incomplete, they will return the application to the applicant with notice of
the information necessary to make the application complete.



   (C)   Action.  The City Council may either approve or deny the
license.



   (D)   Term.  All licenses issued under this chapter terminate on
December 31 of the calendar year in which issued.



   (E)   Revocation or suspension.  Any license issued under this
chapter may be revoked or suspended as provided in § 122.99.



   (F)   Transfers.  All licenses issued under this chapter are valid
only on the premises for which the license was issued and only for the person
to whom the license was issued.



   (G)   Moveable place of business.  No license will be issued to a
moveable place of business.



   (H)   Display.  All licenses must be posted and displayed in plain
view of the general public on the licensed premise.



   (I)   Renewals. The renewal of a license may be approved by the City
Manager or designated official provided that the licensee meets all of the
requirements for renewal. If the renewal of a license is denied by the City
Manager or designated official, the licensee has the right to appeal that
decision to the City Council. The issuance of a license issued under this
chapter is considered a privilege and not an absolute right of the applicant
and does not entitle the holder to an automatic renewal of the license.



(Ord. 1998-873, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord. 2015-1192, passed 5-26-15) 
Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.04  FEES.



   No license will be issued under this chapter until the appropriate
license fee is paid in full.  The fee for a license under this chapter is
established in the city's schedule of fees.



(Ord. 1998-873, passed 4-13-98)  Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.05  BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.



   The following are grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a
license under this chapter; however, except as may otherwise be provided by
law, the existence of any particular ground for denial does not mean that the
city must deny the license. If a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a
person, it must be revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible
for the license under this section.



   (A)   The applicant is under the age of 18 years.



   (B)   The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of
any violation of a federal, state, or local law, ordinance provision, or
other regulation relating to tobacco or tobacco products, tobacco-related
devices, electronic delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices.



   (C)   The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco
products, tobacco-related devices, electronic delivery devices, or nicotine
or lobelia delivery devices revoked within the preceding 12 months of the
date of application.



   (D)   The applicant fails to provide any information required on the
application, or provides false or misleading information.



   (E)   The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or other local
law, ordinance, or other regulation from holding such a license.



   (F)   The applicant is applying for a renewal of a license under
this section and there have been three or more illegal sales of tobacco,
tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, electronic delivery devices, or
nicotine or lobelia delivery devices to minors documented at the licensed
place of business in the preceding 12 months.



   (G)   The proposed location of a store that has over 40% of the
floor area (not including controlled access storage or office areas)
dedicated to tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related device, electronic
delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery device display or sale, is
within 500 feet of a public or private elementary, junior high (or middle),
or senior high school.



   (H)   The applicant has failed to pay any outstanding administrative
penalties.



(Ord. 1998-873, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord. 2015-1192, passed 5-26-15) 
Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.06  PROHIBITED SALES.



   It is a violation of this chapter for any person to sell or offer to
sell any tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related device, electronic
delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery device:



   (A)   If the person does not hold a valid license.



   (B)   To any person under the age of 18 years.



   (C)   By means of any type of vending machine.



   (D)   By means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not
need to a make a verbal or written request to an employee of the licensed
premise in order to receive the tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related
device, electronic delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery device
and whereby there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco
product,  tobacco-related device, or nicotine or lobelia delivery device
between the licensee, or the licensee's employee, and the customer.



   (E)   By means of loosies as defined in § 122.02.



   (F)   Containing opium, morphine, jimson weed, bella donna,
strychnos, cocaine, marijuana, or other deleterious, hallucinogenic, toxic or
controlled substances except nicotine and other substances found naturally in
tobacco or added as part of an otherwise lawful manufacturing process.



   (G)   If the seller is under the age of 16 years.



   (H)   By any other means, to any other person, on in any other
manner or form prohibited by federal, state or other local law, ordinance
provision, or other regulation.



(Ord. 1998-873, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord. 2015-1192, passed 5-26-15) 
Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.07  VENDING MACHINES.



   It is unlawful for any person licensed under this chapter to allow the
sale of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, electronic
delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices by the means of a
vending machine.



(Ord. 1998-873, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord. 2015-1192, passed 5-26-15) 
Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.08  SELF-SERVICE SALES.



   (A)   It is unlawful for a licensee under this chapter to allow the
sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco related devices by any means
where by the customer may have access to such items without having to request
the item from the licensee or the licensee's employee and whereby there is
not a physical exchange of the tobacco, tobacco product, tobacco-related
device, electronic delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery device
between the licensee or licensee’s employee and the customer. All tobacco,
tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, electronic delivery devices, or
nicotine or lobelia delivery devices must either be stored behind a counter
or other area not freely accessible to customers, or in a case or other
storage unit not left open and accessible to the general public.  Any
retailer selling tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices,
electronic delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices at the
time this chapter is adopted must comply with this section within 30 days.



   (B)   This subdivision does not apply to retail stores which derive
at least 90% of their revenue from tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related
devices, electronic delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices
and which cannot be entered at any time by persons younger than 18 years of
age.



(Ord. 1998-873, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord. 2015-1192, passed 5-26-15) 
Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.09  RESPONSIBILITY.



   All licensees under this chapter are responsible for the actions of
their employees, or any persons acting on their behalf,  in regard to the
sale of tobacco, tobacco products, tobacco-related devices, electronic
delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia delivery devices on the licensed
premises, and the sale of such an item by an employee is considered a sale by
the license holder.  Nothing in this section is construed as prohibiting the
city from also subjecting the clerk to whatever penalties are appropriate
under this chapter, state or federal law, or other applicable law or
regulation.



(Ord. 1998-873, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord. 2015-1192, passed 5-26-15) 
Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.10  COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.



   All licensed premises must be open to inspection by the Police
Department or other authorized city official during regular business hours. 
From time to time, but at least as often as required by state law, the city
will conduct compliance checks, following the procedures and requirements
outlined in Minnesota state statutes. Nothing in this section prohibits other
compliance checks authorized by state or federal law for educational,
research, or training purposes, or as required for the enforcement of any
local ordinance, or  state or federal law.



(Ord. 1998-873, passed 4-13-98)  Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.11  OTHER ILLEGAL ACTS.



   Unless otherwise provided, the following acts are a violation of this
chapter:



   (A)   Illegal sales.  It is a violation of this chapter for any
person to sell or otherwise provide any tobacco, tobacco product,
tobacco-related device, electronic delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia
delivery device to any minor.



   (B)   Illegal possession.  It is a violation of this chapter for
any minor to have in the minor’s possession any tobacco, tobacco product,
tobacco-related device, electronic delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia
delivery device.  This division (B) does not apply to minors lawfully
involved in a compliance check.



   (C)   Illegal use.  It is a violation of this chapter for any minor
to smoke, chew, snuff or otherwise use any tobacco, tobacco product,
tobacco-related device, electronic delivery devices, or nicotine or lobelia
delivery device.



   (D)   Illegal procurement. It is a violation of this chapter for any
minor to purchase or attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain any tobacco,
tobacco product, tobacco-related device, electronic delivery devices, or
nicotine or lobelia delivery device and it is a violation of this chapter for
any person to purchase or otherwise obtain such items on behalf of a minor. 
It is further a violation for any person to coerce or attempt to coerce a
minor to illegally purchase or otherwise obtain or use any tobacco, tobacco
product, tobacco-related device, electronic delivery devices, or nicotine or
lobelia delivery device.  This division (D) does not apply to minors
lawfully involved in a compliance check.



   (E)   Use of false identification.  It is a violation of this
chapter for any minor to attempt to disguise their true age by the use of a
false form of identification, whether the identification is that of another
person or one on which the age of the person has been modified or tampered
with to represent an age older than the actual age of the person.



(Ord. 1998-873, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord. 2015-1192, passed 5-26-15) 
Penalty, see § 122.99



§ 122.12  EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES.



   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a native Indian from furnishing
tobacco, tobacco products  or tobacco related devices to an Indian under the
age of 18 years if the tobacco is furnished as a part of a traditional Indian
spiritual or cultural ceremony.



(Ord. 1998-873, passed 4-13-98)



§ 122.99  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY.



   (A)   Violations.



      (1)   Notice. Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the
alleged violator must be issued, either personally or by mail, a citation
that sets forth the alleged violation and which must inform the alleged
violator of their right to be heard on the accusation.



      (2)   Hearings.  If a person accused of violating this
chapter so requests, a hearing will be scheduled, the time and place of which
must be published and provided to the accused violator.



      (3)   Hearing Officer. The City Council will periodically
approve a list of persons, from which the City Manager or designated agent
will randomly select a hearing officer to hear and determine a matter for
which a hearing is requested.



      (4)   Decision.  If the hearing officer determines that a
violation of this chapter did occur, that decision, along with the hearing
officers reasons for finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed under
division (B) of this section, must be recorded in writing, a copy of which
must be provided to the accused violator.  Likewise, if the hearing officer
finds that no violation occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any
penalty, the findings must be recorded and a copy provided to the acquitted
accused violator.



      (5)   Appeals.  Appeals of any decision made by the hearing
officer must be filed in the district court for the city in which the alleged
violation occurred.



      (6)   Misdemeanor prosecution.  Nothing in this section
prohibits the city or any other legitimate jurisdiction from seeking criminal
prosecution for violations of this chapter or any other state or federal law
regulating tobacco products.



      (7)   Continued violation.  Each violation, and every day in
which a violation occurs or continues, constitutes a separate offense.



   (B)   Administrative penalties.



      (1)   Licensees.  Any licensee found to have violated this
chapter, or whose employee have violated this chapter, will be charged as
follows:



         (a)   First violation of this chapter, an administrative
fine of $75.



         (b)   Second offense at the same licensed premises
within a 24-month period, an administrative fine of $200.



         (c)   Third offense at the same licensed location within
a 24-month period, an administrative fine of  $250 and the license will be
suspended for seven days.



         (d)   Fourth offense at the same licensed location
within a 24-month period, an administrative fine of $300 and the license will
be suspended for 30 days.



         (e)   Fifth offense at the same licensed location within
a 24-month period, an administrative fine of $350 and the license will be
revoked.



         (f)   It is an affirmative defense to the charge of
selling tobacco to a person under the age of 18 years in violation of this
ordinance that the licensee or individual making the sale relied in good
faith upon proof of age as follows:



            1.   A valid driver’s license or identification
card issued by the State of Minnesota, another state, or a province of
Canada, and including the photograph and date of birth of the licensed
person; or



            2.   A valid military identification card issued
by the United States Department of Defense; or



            3.   In the case of a foreign national, from a
nation other than Canada, by a valid passport.



      (2)   Other individuals.  Other individuals, other than
minors regulated by division (B)(3) of this section, found to be in violation
of this chapter will be charged an administrative fee of $50.



      (3)   Minors. charges for minors found in unlawful possession
of, or who unlawfully purchase or attempt to purchase, tobacco, tobacco
products, or tobacco related devices, will be routed through the Hennepin
County Juvenile diversion program.



      (4)   Criminal prosecution.  Nothing in this section
prohibits the city from seeking criminal prosecution for violations of this
chapter or any other state or federal law regulating tobacco, tobacco
products, tobacco-related devices, electronic delivery devices, or nicotine
or lobelia delivery devices.



(Ord. 1998-873, passed 4-13-98; Am. Ord. 2015-1192, passed 5-26-15)



CHAPTER 123:  BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS



Section



   123.01   Findings and purpose



   123.02   General provisions



   123.03   Definitions



   123.04   License administration



   123.05   License expiration



   123.06   Transfer and display of license



   123.07   Location restricted



   123.08   Activities prohibited



   123.09   Inspection and plan review



   123.10   Grounds for emergency closure



   123.11   Standards for health and safety



   123.12   Industry self survey and training responsibility



   123.13   Fees



 



   123.99   Penalty



§ 123.01  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   This chapter is enacted to establish standards to protect
health, safety and general welfare of the people of the City of Brooklyn Park
through regulation of body art establishments.



   (B)   The principal objectives of this chapter are:



      (1)   To prevent disease transmission;



      (2)   To correct and prevent conditions that may adversely
affect persons utilizing body art establishments;



      (3)   To provide standards for the design, construction,
operation, and maintenance of body art establishments; and



      (4)   To meet consumer expectations of the safety of body art
establishments.



(Ord. 2011-1123, passed 1-3-11)



§ 123.02  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)    Scope. This chapter shall apply to all body art
establishments where body art are conducted. Nothing in this chapter is
intended to supersede the provisions in M.S. Chapter 146B that are otherwise
applicable to body art establishments or body art technicians.



   (B)   Incorporation by reference. Except as otherwise provided for
in this chapter, the provisions in M.S. Chapter 146B are incorporated by
reference.



(Ord. 2011-1123, passed 1-3-11)



§ 123.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BODY PIERCING. The penetration or puncturing of the skin or tongue by
any method for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other objects in or
through the body. BODY PIERCING does not include the piercing of the outer
perimeter or the lobe of the ear using a presterilized single-use
stud-and-clasp ear-piercing system.



   ESTABLISHMENT PLAN. A to-scale drawing of the establishment's physical
and equipment layout illustrating the requirements of this chapter.



   HEALTH AUTHORITY. The City of Brooklyn Park Code Enforcement and Public
Health Division, its designated employees, or other designated agents.



(Ord. 2011-1123, passed 1-3-11)



§ 123.04  LICENSE ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Administrative procedures. Provisions of the City of Brooklyn
Park General Business Regulations, Chapter 110, that are not covered by this
chapter and do not conflict with provisions of this chapter shall apply as if
fully set forth herein.



   (B)   License required. No person may own or operate a body art
establishment without first having obtained an establishment license from the
Health Authority.



   (C)   Limit on number of licenses. The number of licenses for body
art establishments shall be limited to no more than one such license for
every 4,000 residents.



   (D)   Licensing procedure.



      (1)   Application. All applications, new and renewal, for
licenses must be made upon forms furnished by the city. Upon payment of the
required fee(s), the Health Authority will review the application. If the
application is approved, a license will be issued.



      (2)   Establishment license application. Each establishment
license application must describe the general nature of the business, the
location, and any other information deemed necessary by the city.



(Ord. 2011-1123, passed 1-3-11)



§ 123.05  LICENSE EXPIRATION.



   Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall commence and expire on
the dates indicated on the license certificate.



(Ord. 2011-1123, passed 1-3-11)



§ 123.06  TRANSFER AND DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



   Only a person who complies with the requirements of this chapter may be
entitled to receive a license. A license is not transferable as to person or
place. A valid license must be located onsite and available to the public
upon request.



(Ord. 2011-1123, passed 1-3-11) 



§ 123.07  LOCATION RESTRICTED.



   (A)   No individual may engage in body art activities at any place
other than a licensed establishment.



   (B)   A body art establishment may only be located in
non-residential areas and in districts as further determined by the city
zoning code. Temporary body art establishments are prohibited.



   (C)   A body art establishment must be separated by at least 500
feet from another body art establishment, as measured from the closest point
on the property lines of the body art establishments. No more than one body
art establishment may be located on a single parcel of land.



(Ord. 2011-1123, passed 1-3-11)  Penalty, see § 123.99



§ 123.08  ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.



   A body art establishment, a body art technician, or any other person
may not perform branding, scarification, suspension, subdermal implantation,
microdermal, or tongue bifurcation procedures.



(Ord. 2011-1123, passed 1-3-11)  Penalty, see § 123.99



§ 123.09  INSPECTION AND PLAN REVIEW.



   (A)   Inspection required. The Health Authority will inspect each
body art establishment before issuing a license for a new establishment, as
part of a construction or remodeling plan review, as part of a complaint
investigation, or at least once a year for a routine inspection, and as
necessary to ensure compliance with all applicable regulations.



   (B)   Construction inspections. The body art establishment must be
constructed in conformance with the approved plans. The Health Authority may
inspect the body art establishment as frequently as necessary during the
construction to ensure that the construction occurs in conformance with this
chapter. The licensee or owner must contact the Health Authority to schedule
a final inspection prior to the start of operations and issuance of a license
or to resume operations after remodeling.



   (C)   Access to premises and records. The operator of the body art
establishment must, upon request of the Health Authority and after proper
identification, permit access to all parts of the establishment at any
reasonable time, for the purpose of inspection. The operator must allow
review of any records necessary for the Health Authority to ascertain
compliance to this chapter.



   (D)   Interference with the Health Authority. No person may
interfere with or hinder the Health Authority in the performance of its
duties, or refuse to permit the Health Authority to make such inspections.



   (E)   Removal and correction of violations. Operator(s) or
technician(s) must correct or remove each violation upon receipt of an
inspection report giving notification of one or more violations of this
chapter in a reasonable length of time as determined by the Health Authority.
The length of time for the correction or removal of each such violation shall
be noted on the inspection report. Failure to remove or correct each
violation within the time period noted on the inspection report will
constitute a separate violation of this chapter. The Health Authority may
issue orders to halt construction or remodeling, or to take corrective
measures to ensure compliance with this chapter.



(Ord. 2011-1123, passed 1-3-11)  Penalty, see § 123.99



§ 123.10  GROUNDS FOR EMERGENCY CLOSURE.



   If any violation of this code or relevant state statutes exists, the
operator(s) or technician(s) may be ordered to discontinue all operations of
the body art establishment. Body art establishments may only reopen with
permission from the Health Authority.



(Ord. 2011-1123, passed 1-3-11)



§ 123.11  STANDARDS FOR HEALTH AND SAFETY.



   No operator or body art establishment may engage in body art activities
without complying with the following health and safety requirements:



   (A)   Facilities.



      (1)   Establishment plan. Any new or remodeled establishment
must submit to the Health Authority a to-scale establishment plan in
sufficient detail to ascertain compliance with conditions in this chapter.



      (2)   Procedure area. No less than 45 square feet of floor
space for each procedure area must be provided. The procedure area(s) must be
separated from the bathroom, retail sales area, hair salon area, or any other
area that may cause potential contamination of work surfaces. For clients
requesting privacy, dividers, curtains, or partitions at a minimum must
separate multiple procedure areas.



      (3)   Hand sink.  Each establishment must have a readily
accessible hand sink that is not in a public restroom and is equipped with:



         (a)   Hot and cold running water under pressure;



         (b)   No touch faucet controls such as wrist or foot
operated;



         (c)   Dispensed liquid hand soap;



         (d)   Dispensed single use paper towels: and



         (e)   A waste container.



      (4)   Toilet facilities. Every establishment must have at
least one available bathroom equipped with a toilet and a hand lavatory, and
in compliance with building codes. The hand lavatory must be supplied with:



         (a)   Hot and cold running water under pressure;



         (b)   Dispensed liquid hand soap;



         (c)   Dispensed single use paper towels or mechanical
hand drier/blower;



         (d)   A waste container;



         (e)   A self-closing door; and



         (f)   Adequate ventilation.



      (5)   Lighting. The establishment must have an artificial
light source equivalent to 20 foot candles at three feet above the floor. At
least 100 foot candles of light must be provided at the level where body art
procedure is performed, where sterilization takes place, and where
instruments and sharps are assembled.



      (6)   Surfaces. All procedure surfaces must be smooth,
nonabsorbent and easily cleanable.



      (7)   Ceiling. All ceilings must be in good condition.



      (8)   Walls and floors. All walls and floors must be free of
open holes or cracks and washable. Carpeting may not be used in areas where
body art procedures are performed.



      (9)   Maintenance. All facilities must be maintained in good
working order. All facilities must be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition.



      (10)   Facility use. No establishment must be used or occupied
for living or sleeping quarters.



      (11)   Service animals. Only service animals may be allowed in
the establishment. No animals are allowed in the procedure area(s).



      (12)   Pest control. Effective measures must be taken by the
operator to prevent entrance, breeding, and harborage of insects, vermin, and
rodents in the establishment.



(Ord. 2011-1123, passed 1-3-11)  Penalty, see § 123.99



§ 123.12  INDUSTRY SELF SURVEY AND TRAINING RESPONSIBILITY.



   Every licensee of a body art establishment must arrange for and
maintain a program of sanitation self-inspection conducted by the owner,
operator, technician, or apprentice and approved by the Health Authority. The
self-inspection program must include written policies, appropriate forms for
logging self-inspections, and evidence that routine self-inspection of all
aspects of the body art establishment takes place. A description of the body
art establishment self-inspection program must be available for review.



(Ord. 2011-1123, passed 1-3-11)  Penalty, see § 123.99



§ 123.13  FEES.



   (A)   License fees. Fees for licenses and plan review issued
hereunder shall be those established from time to time by resolution of the
City of Brooklyn Park City Council. An additional fee shall be charged for
each additional service or operation that is separate, distinct or unique
from the central or main body art establishment, as determined by the Health
Authority.



   (B)   Late fees.  If work has commenced prior to approval of
construction or remodeling plans, late fees may be assessed in accordance
with the fee schedule.



(Ord. 2011-1123, passed 1-3-11)



§ 123.99  PENALTY.



   A person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished as provided by law if he/she:



   (A)   Violates this chapter;



   (B)   Permits a violation to exist on the premises under his/her
control; or



   (C)   Fails to take action to abate the existence of the
violationf(s) within a specified time period, when ordered or notified to do
so by the Health Authority.



(Ord. 2011-1123, passed 1-3-11)



CHAPTER 124: MASSAGE THERAPY



Section



   124.01   Purpose



   124.02   Findings



   124.03   Definitions



   124.04   License required



   124.05   License application



   124.06   License terms and fees



   124.07   License application verification and consideration



   124.08   License eligibility



   124.09   General license restrictions



   124.10   Restrictions regarding sanitation and health



   124.11   License suspension and revocation



   124.12   Transfer and display of license



   124.13   Inspections



   124.14   Appeal and hearing procedure



§ 124.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate massage therapists and
therapeutic massage enterprises requiring that all be licensed pursuant to
this chapter.  The licensing regulations prescribed in this chapter are
necessary in order to prevent criminal activity and to protect the health,
safety, and general welfare of the people of the City of Brooklyn Park.



(Ord. 2013-1154, passed 3-4-13)



§ 124.02  FINDINGS.



   It is found and determined that:



   (A)   Persons who have recognized and standardized training in
therapeutic massage including in health and hygiene provide a legitimate and
necessary service to the general public;



   (B)   Health and sanitation regulations governing therapeutic
massage enterprises and massage therapists will minimize the risk of the
spread of communicable diseases and promote health and sanitation;



   (C)   License qualifications for therapeutic massage enterprises and
massage therapists will minimize the risk that such businesses and persons
may facilitate prostitution and other criminal activity in the city;



   (D)   Massage services provided by persons without recognized and
standardized training in massage can endanger members of the public by
facilitating the spread of communicable diseases, by exposing persons to
unhealthy and unsanitary conditions, and by increasing the risk of personal
injury; and



   (E)   The training of professional massage therapists through
accredited institutions and programs is an important means of ensuring the
fullest measure of protecting the public health, safety, and welfare.



(Ord. 2013-1154, passed 3-4-13)



§ 124.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCREDITED INSTITUTION.  An educational institution holding accredited
status from a school which has been licensed or registered by the Minnesota
Office of Higher Education or similar agency of another state either
presently or at the time the applicant obtained his or her diploma or
certificate of graduation.



   ACCREDITED PROGRAM.  A professional massage program that is presently,
or at the time the applicant obtained his or her diploma or certificate of
graduation, accredited by the Commission on Massage Therapy Accreditation
("COMTA").



   CLEAN.  The absence of dirt, grease, rubbish, garbage, and other
offensive, unsightly, or extraneous matter.



   GOOD REPAIR.  Free of corrosion, breaks, cracks, chips, pitting,
excessive wear and tear, leaks, obstructions, and similar defects so as to
constitute a good and sound condition.



   HEALTH AUTHORITY.  The city's registered sanitarian.



   MASSAGE.  Any method of pressure on, or friction against, or the
rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding, vibrating, stimulating,
stretching, or rolling of the external parts of the human body with the hands
or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus, or other
appliances or devices, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing
alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil, powder, cream, lotion, ointment, or other
similar preparations.



   MASSAGE THERAPIST.  An individual who practices or administers
therapeutic massage to another for a fee or other consideration paid either
directly or indirectly and who can demonstrate to the city that he or she has
current insurance coverage of $1,000,000 for professional liability in the
practice of massage and



      (1)   Has completed 600 hours of therapeutic massage training
with content that includes the subjects of anatomy, physiology, hygiene,
ethics, massage theory and research, and massage practice from an accredited
institution or program.  These training hours must be authenticated by a
single provider through a certified copy of the transcript of academic record
from the institution issuing the certificate or diploma.  Individuals who
completed training prior to the effective date of this chapter are only
required to complete 500 hours of certified therapeutic massage training; or



      (2)   Has one year of experience practicing massage therapy as
established by an affidavit and can document within two years of adoption of
this chapter that he or she has completed at least 600 hours of certified
therapeutic massage training with content that includes the subjects of
anatomy, physiology, hygiene, ethics, massage theory and research, and
massage practice from an accredited institution or program.  These training
hours must be authenticated by a single provider through a certified copy of
the transcript of academic record from the institution issuing the
certificate or diploma.  This provision is only available to persons that
are issued massage therapist licenses by the city within the first two years
of the adoption date of this chapter.



   MASSAGE THERAPIST LICENSE.  A license issued by the city to a massage
therapist authorizing the licensee to practice or administer massage in the
city.



   OPERATE.  To own, manage, or conduct or to have control, charge, or
custody over.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation,
joint venture, or combination of individuals.



   THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE ENTERPRISE.  A business which hires licensed
massage therapists to provide therapeutic massage within the city for a fee
or other consideration paid either directly or indirectly, that:



      (1)   Has one or more massage therapists employed or
contracted to provided massage therapy for the therapeutic massage
enterprise; or



      (2)   Is located in a fixed location within the city wherein
massage therapy services are provided.



   WITHIN THE CITY.  Physical presence in the city as well as telephone
referrals such as phone-a-massage operations in which the business premises,
although not physically located within the city, serves as a point of
assignment for employees who respond to requests for services within the city.



(Ord. 2013-1154, passed 3-4-13)



§ 124.04  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Massage therapy license.  It shall be unlawful for any person
to practice massage therapy or provide or offer to provide massage therapy
within the city without a massage therapist license issued by the city. 
This includes persons providing massage therapy at therapeutic massage
enterprises that have therapeutic massage enterprise licenses.



   (B)   Therapeutic massage enterprise license.  It shall be unlawful
for any person or entity to operate a therapeutic massage enterprise within
the city without a therapeutic massage enterprise license issued by the
city.  The owner or operator of a therapeutic massage enterprise need not be
licensed as a massage therapist unless he or she personally provides massage
services.



   (C)   A therapeutic massage enterprise located in a residential
district must comply with all requirements set forth in § 152.262(B) of the
City Code but shall be exempt from the vocation administrative permit
requirement.



   (D)   A therapeutic massage enterprise license or massage therapist
license is not required for the following:



      (1)   Persons licensed by the state to practice medicine,
surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical therapy, or podiatry or persons
working for a licensed medical professional, provided that the massage is
administered in the regular course of the medical treatment and is not being
provided as part of a separate and distinct massage business;



      (2)   Persons licensed by the state as beauty culturists or
barbers, provided the persons do not hold themselves out as giving massage
treatments and further provided that massage by beauty culturists is limited
to the head, hands, neck, and feet and massage by barbers is limited to the
head and neck;



      (3)   Places licensed or operating as a hospital, nursing
home, hospice, sanitarium, group home, or other health care office, clinic,
or facility established for hospitalization or medical care;



      (4)   Athletic coaches, directors, and trainers employed by
public or private schools;



      (5)   Accredited institutions and students of accredited
institutions which provide an accredited program of study or course work in
massage therapy, provided that the massage is provided during and as a part
of the course or clinical component of the institution's program or course
work and students are supervised by an instructor while performing the
massage.



      (6)   Persons providing temporary massage services such as a
"chair massage" provided that all of the following requirements are met:



         (a)   The massage is provided in a location where the
massage can easily be seen by employees and visitors;



         (b)   The establishment where the massage is being
provided does not hold a license to sell alcoholic beverages;



         (c)   Massages are offered at the establishment no more
than ten days per calendar year;



         (d)   Each recipient of a massage remains in an upright
position during the massage, either in a seated or standing position; and



         (e)   Each recipient of a massage remains fully clothed
in the normal daytime attire worn when he or she enters the establishment and
clothing except for outerwear such as coats and jackets is not removed.



(Ord. 2013-1154, passed 3-4-13)



§ 124.05  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   (A)   Therapeutic massage enterprise license application.  An
application for a therapeutic massage enterprise license shall be filed,
along with all required fees and information with the city Licensing
Division.  The city shall conduct a background investigation on all
first-time applicants.  The application for a license under this section
shall be made on a form supplied by the city and must contain the following
information:



      (1)   For all applicants:



         (a)   Whether the applicant is an individual,
corporation, partnership, or other form of organization and the name of the
individual or organization;



         (b)   The full name, address, date and place of birth,
social security number, and telephone number of the natural person designated
by the applicant as the business's on-site manager or agent along with the
notarized written consent of the person to:



            1.   Take full responsibility for the conduct of
the licensed premises and operation;



            2.   Serve as the business's agent for purposes of
service of notice and other processes related to the license by the city;



            3.   If the premises is under construction or
undergoing substantial alteration, the application shall be accompanied by a
set of preliminary plans showing the design of the proposed premises to be
licensed.  If the plans for design are already on file with the city's
Building Inspections Division, no plans need be submitted;



            4.   Proof of identification consisting of one of
the following:



               a.   A valid driver's license or
identification card issued by a state of the United States that includes the
photograph and date of birth of the applicant;



               b.   A valid military identification card
issued by the United States Department of Defense; or



               c.   A valid passport issued by the United
States or another country if the applicant is a foreign national.



For purposes of satisfying this requirement, the "applicant" is deemed to be
the on-site manager or agent for the business that is signing the application
on behalf of the business; and



            5.   Such other information as the city may
require.



   (B)   Massage therapist license application.  An application for a
massage therapist license shall be filed, along with all required fees and
information with the city Licensing Division.  The city shall conduct a
background investigation on all first-time applicants.  The application for
a license under this section shall be made on a form supplied by the city and
shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The full name, address, date and place of birth, social
security number, and telephone number of the applicant;



      (2)   Evidence that the applicant has legal work status in the
United States;



      (3)   Documentation to verify whether the applicant has met
the definition of a massage therapist set forth by this chapter;



      (4)   Proof of identification consisting of one of the
following:



         (a)   A valid driver's license or identification card
issued by a state of the United States that includes the photograph and date
of birth of the applicant;



         (b)   A valid military identification card issued by the
United States Department of Defense; or



         (c)   A valid passport issued by the United States or
another country if the applicant is a foreign national; and



      (5)   Such other information as the city may require.



(Ord. 2013-1154, passed 3-4-13)



§ 124.06  LICENSE TERMS AND FEES.



   (A)   The license and background investigation fees for licenses
required by this chapter shall be determined by the City Council in the
city's fee schedule.  Penalties for late payments of license fees are set
forth in § 110.38 of the City Code.   



   (B)   Licenses expire annually on March 31.  If a license
application is received in the middle of a license term, the license fee
shall be prorated for the remaining term of the license in accordance with §
110.39 of the City Code.



(Ord. 2013-1154, passed 3-4-13)



§ 124.07  LICENSE APPLICATION VERIFICATION AND CONSIDERATION.



   (A)   Background investigation.  The City Manager must verify the
information supplied in the license application and investigate the
background, including the criminal background, of the applicant to assure
compliance with this chapter, by referring the application to the Police
Chief for a CCH Investigation.



   (B)   Massage therapist and therapeutic massage enterprise licenses
will be issued by the City Manager upon completion of the investigation and
review of the application.  In the event that the license is denied, notice
will be sent to the applicant informing the applicant of the decision and his
or her right to appeal the decision to the hearing officer pursuant to §
124.14 of this chapter. 



(Ord. 2013-1154, passed 3-4-13)



§ 124.08  LICENSE ELIGIBILITY.



   (A)   Therapeutic massage enterprise licenses.  The city may deny
issuance of a therapeutic massage enterprise license in any of the following
circumstances:



      (1)   The owner, operator, or any person who has a five
percent financial interest in the business or the appointed on-site manager
or agent has a conviction for, or was charged with, but convicted of a lesser
charge of any crime which would reasonably pose an increased danger to the
health and welfare of the public should the applicant be granted a license in
the city as prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 2, and who has not shown
competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to
perform the duties and responsibilities of a licensee as prescribed by M.S.
§ 364.03, Subd. 3;



      (2)   The owner, operator, or any person who has a five
percent financial interest in the business or the appointed on-site manager
or agent had a massage therapist or massage therapy business-related license
in the city or another jurisdiction that was either suspended or revoked
within five years preceding the date of application;



      (3)   The information provided in the application does not
meet the requirements of this chapter;



      (4)   The applicant provided false or misrepresented
information in the application;



      (5)   The business is proposed to be operated on premises on
which property taxes, assessments, or other financial claims by the state,
county, or city are due, delinquent, or unpaid, provided the applicant or
other entity in which the applicant has an interest has the legal duty to pay
said taxes, assessments, or claims due and owing;



      (6)   The applicant does not have insurance coverage in effect
as required by this chapter;



      (7)   The applicant has been denied a license under this
chapter within the preceding 12 months;



      (8)   The owner, operator, or any person who has a five
percent financial interest in the business or the appointed on-site manager
or agent applicant is not of good moral character or repute; or



      (9)   The proposed premises in which the business proposes to
operate is located in a zoning district where the use is not allowed.



   (B)   Massage therapist licenses.  The city may deny issuance of a
massage therapist license in any of the following circumstances:



      (1)   The applicant has a conviction for, or was charged with,
but convicted of a lesser charge of any crime which would reasonably pose an
increased danger to the health and welfare of the public should the applicant
be granted a license in the city as prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 2,
and who has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and
present fitness to perform the duties and responsibilities of a licensee as
prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 3;



      (2)   The applicant had a massage therapist or massage therapy
business-related license in the city or another jurisdiction that was either
suspended or revoked within five years preceding the date of application;



      (3)   The applicant is not 18 years of age or older;



      (4)   The information provided in the application does not
meet the requirements of this chapter;



      (5)   The applicant provided false or misrepresented
information on the application;



      (6)   The applicant does not have insurance coverage in effect
as required by this chapter;



      (7)   The applicant has been denied a license under this
chapter within the preceding 12 months; or



      (8)   The applicant is not of good moral character or repute.



(Ord. 2013-1154, passed 3-4-13)



§ 124.09  GENERAL LICENSE RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Area.  A therapeutic massage enterprise license is effective
only for the compact and contiguous space specified in the approved license
application.  If the licensed premises is proposed to be enlarged, altered,
or extended, the licensee must inform the City Manager.



   (B)   Coverings.  When performing a massage, the massage therapist
must require that the person who is receiving the massage have his or her
breasts (with respect to females), buttocks, anus, and genitals covered with
clothing or a non-transparent material at all times.  The massage therapist
performing the massage must have his or her breasts, buttocks, anus, and
genitals covered with clothing at all times.



   (C)   Prohibited massages.  A massage therapist must not
intentionally massage or offer to massage the penis, scrotum, mons veneris,
vulva, or vaginal area of a person.



   (D)   Unlicensed massage therapists prohibited. No therapeutic
massage enterprise shall employ or use any person to perform massage who is
not licensed by the city as a massage therapist under this chapter, unless
the person is specifically exempted by this chapter from obtaining a massage
therapist license.



(Ord. 2013-1154, passed 3-4-13)



§ 124.10  RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SANITATION AND HEALTH.



   (A)   A therapeutic massage enterprise must be equipped with
adequate and conveniently located toilet rooms for the accommodation of its
employees and patrons.  The toilet room must be well ventilated by natural
or mechanical methods and be enclosed with a door.  The toilet room must be
kept clean and in good repair.  It must be fully and adequately illuminated.



   (B)   A therapeutic massage enterprise must provide single-service
disposal paper or clean linens to cover the table, chair, furniture, or area
on which the patron receives the massage.  If the table, chair, or furniture
on which a patron receives the massage is made of material impervious to
moisture, such table, chair, or furniture must be sanitized after each
massage.



   (C)   The massage therapist must wash his or her hands and arms with
water and soap, anti-bacterial scrubs, alcohol, or other disinfectants prior
to and following each massage service performed.



   (D)   Massage tables, chairs, or furniture on which the patron
receives the massage must have surfaces that can be readily disinfected after
each massage.



   (E)   Rooms in a therapeutic massage enterprise must be adequately
illuminated.



   (F)   Therapeutic massage enterprises must have a janitor's closet
that provides for the storage of cleaning supplies.



   (G)   Therapeutic massage enterprises must provide adequate refuse
receptacles that must be emptied as required by this chapter.



   (H)   Therapeutic massage enterprises must be continuously
maintained in good repair and in a sanitary condition and must take
reasonable steps to prevent the spread of infections and communicable
diseases on the premises.



   (I)   Massage therapists must wear clean clothing when performing
massage services.



(Ord. 2013-1154, passed 3-4-13)



§ 124.11  LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   A massage therapist license or therapeutic massage enterprise
license may be revoked, suspended, or not renewed by the city if the licensee
has engaged in any of the following conduct:



      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or a false statement contained
in a license application or a renewal application;



      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or a false statement made in
the course of carrying on the licensed occupation or business;



      (3)   Any violation of this chapter or state law;



      (4)   A licensee or in the case of a therapeutic massage
enterprise license, the business's owner, operator, or any person who has a
five percent financial interest in the business or the appointed on-site
manager or agent's criminal conviction that is directly related to the
occupation or business licensed as defined by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 2,
provided that the person cannot show competent evidence of sufficient
rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of the licensed
occupation or business as defined by M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 3.



      (5)   Conduct involving moral turpitude or permitting or
allowing others within their employ or organization to engage in conduct
involving moral turpitude or failing to prevent agents, officers, or
employees from engaging in conduct involving moral turpitude; or



      (6)   Conducting the licensed business or occupation in an
unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or
to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the
community.



   (B)  Before the city may revoke, suspend, deny or not renew a license,
written notice must be sent to the applicant or owner/licensee setting forth
the alleged grounds for the potential action.  The notice must also specify
a date upon which hearing on the action before the city's Hearing Officer
must be requested, which must not be less than ten days from the date of the
notice.



(Ord. 2013-1154, passed 3-4-13)



§ 124.12  TRANSFER AND DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Transfer.  Only a person who complies with the requirements
of this chapter is entitled to receive a license.  The license issued is for
the person or the entity named on the license.  The license is not
transferrable.  However, a massage therapist license is not considered to be
transferred with respect to this section if the licensed individual moves to
a different place of employment or location.



   (B)   Display/possession.  A therapeutic massage enterprise license
issued must be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises for which it is
used.  A person licensed as a massage therapist must have in his or her
possession a copy of the license when massage services are being rendered.



(Ord. 2013-1154, passed 3-4-13)



§ 124.13  INSPECTIONS.



   The Health Authority and law enforcement shall have the right to enter,
inspect, and search the licensee's premises without a search and seizure
warrant during the hours in which the massage business is being operated. 
The business records of the licensee shall be available for inspection by the
city during the hours in which the massage business is being operated.



(Ord. 2013-1154, passed 3-4-13)



§ 124.14  APPEAL AND HEARING PROCEDURE.



   A hearing officer shall hold hearings on contested massage therapist
and therapeutic massage enterprise license revocations, suspensions, denials,
and non-renewals.  The hearing officer shall be a person appointed by the
City Council.  At the hearing, the applicant/licensee may speak on his or
her behalf and may present witnesses and other evidence he or she deems
necessary.  In the event that a violation of this chapter is involved, the
hearing officer may give due regard to the frequency and seriousness of
violations, the ease with which such violations could have been cured or
avoided, and the licensee's good faith efforts to comply.  Upon the
conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision
that includes findings of fact.  The city shall provide the
applicant/licensee with a copy of the hearing officer's decision.  The
applicant/licensee may appeal the hearing officer's decision to the Minnesota
Court of Appeals by writ of certiorari.



(Ord. 2013-1154, passed 3-4-13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



      Chapter



         130.   GENERAL OFFENSES



         131.   OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE



         132.   CURFEW FOR MINORS



         133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



         134.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY



         135.   DRUG OFFENSES



         136.   WEAPONS



CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Section



   130.01   Loitering prohibited



   130.02   Attempted offenses and liability



   130.03   Use of motor powered craft on Shingle Creek



§ 130.01  LOITERING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Petty misdemeanors.  Whoever commits any of the following
acts is guilty of a petty misdemeanor:



      (1)   Lingering about the doorway of any building, or sitting
or lingering upon the steps, window sills, railing, fence, or parking area
adjacent to any building in such a manner so as to obstruct or partially
obstruct ingress to or egress from such building or in such a manner to annoy
the owner or occupant.



      (2)   Remaining for more than five minutes on any private
business premise which is posted with a conspicuous sign containing the words
“No Loitering” when the business establishment is closed; or the person
charged does not visibly demonstrate any intent to conduct business at the
establishment or to leave the premise after having conducted such business.



      (3)   Remaining for more than five minutes on any public
business premise which is posted with a conspicuous sign containing the words
“No Loitering” when such premise neither has been nor will be open for
business within 30 minutes.



      (4)   Remaining for more than five minutes on any public or
private non-business premise which is posted with a conspicuous sign
containing the words “No Loitering.”



      (5)   Lingering for any length of time upon any public or
private premises or moving in a slow and deliberate manner without purpose or
otherwise interfering with, obstructing, or rendering dangerous or
unreasonable for passage, any public highway, sidewalk, parking area or
right-of-way after having been warned within the preceding four months,
either orally or in writing, by the owner, agent, manager or person in charge
thereof, or by any law enforcement agent or official, that such conduct will
result in a charge under this section.



   (B)   Misdemeanors.  Whoever commits any of the following acts is
guilty of a misdemeanor:



      (1)   Failing or refusing to vacate or leave any premises
after being requested or ordered, either orally or in writing, to do so by
the owner, agent, manager or person in charge thereof, or by any law
enforcement agent or official or returning at any time thereafter to any such
premise after having been so requested or ordered to vacate such premise.



      (2)   Any of the acts described in division (A) of this
section within one year of being found guilty of any violation of division
(A) of this section.



   (C)   Premises.  For purposes of this section, PREMISES includes
any yard, lot, parcel, sidewalk, boulevard, street, highway, alley, park,
playground, restaurant, café, church, school, any car or other motor
vehicle, parking lot, drive-in, building used for business, commercial or
industrial purposes, washroom or lavatory, apartment hallway or other
location whether public or private in the City of Brooklyn Park.  Business
premises include all premises, whether public or private, which include a
facility that has established open and closed hours.  Non-business premises
include all other premises in the City of Brooklyn Park.



('72 Code, § 914:00)  (Ord. 1993-733, passed 9-27-93)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 130.02  ATTEMPTED OFFENSES AND LIABILITY.



   (A)   Attempts.  Whoever, with intent to commit a penal offense or
misdemeanor, does an act which is a substantial step toward, and more than
preparation for, the commission of the penal offense or misdemeanor is guilty
of an attempt to commit that penal offense or misdemeanor.



   (B)   Liability for illegal acts of another.  A person is guilty of
a penal offense and is personally liable for any penal offense or misdemeanor
committed by another if the person intentionally aids, advises, hires,
counsels, or conspires with or otherwise procures the other to commit the
penal offense or misdemeanor.



('72 Code, § 980:00)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.03  USE OF MOTOR POWERED CRAFT ON SHINGLE CREEK.



   It is unlawful to operate a motor operated or powered watercraft or
boat, including waterborne aircraft, on Shingle Creek within the city.



('72 Code, § 985:00)  (Ord. 1978-256(A), passed 1-9-78)  Penalty, see §
10.99



CHAPTER 131:  OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE



Section




Obstructing Justice




   131.01   Threats



   131.02   Conspiracy



   131.03   Obstructing legal process or arrest



   131.04   Resisting arrest



   131.05   Falsely reporting crime



OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE



§ 131.01  THREATS.



   It is unlawful to directly or indirectly address any threat or
intimidation to a public officer or to a referee, arbitrator, appraiser or
assessor or to any other person authorized by law to hear or determine any
controversy or matter with intent to induce the person contrary to the
person's duty to do or make or to omit or delay any act, decision or
determination.



('72 Code, § 940:00)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.02  CONSPIRACY.



   It is unlawful for two or more persons to conspire to commit any act
injurious to public health, public morals, trade or commerce or for the
perversion or obstruction of public justice or the due administration of the
law.



('72 Code, § 940:05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.03  OBSTRUCTING LEGAL PROCESS OR ARREST.



   It is unlawful to intentionally obstruct, hinder, or prevent the lawful
execution of any legal process, civil or criminal, or apprehension of another
on a charge or conviction of a criminal offense or interfere with a peace
officer while the officer is engaged in the performance of the officer's
official duties.



('72 Code, § 940:10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.04  RESISTING ARREST.



   It is unlawful to resist in any way any police officer engaged in the
lawful discharge of the officer's duty in attempting to take such person into
custody.



('72 Code, § 940:11)  (Ord. 1973-142(A), passed 5-14-73; Am. Ord.
1984-445(A), passed 2-27-84)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.05  FALSELY REPORTING CRIME.



   It is unlawful to inform a law enforcement officer that a crime has
been committed, knowing that it is false and intending that the officer shall
act in reliance upon it.



('72 Code, § 940:15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 132:  CURFEW FOR MINORS



Section



   132.01   Curfew for minors



 



   132.99   Penalty



§ 132.01  CURFEW FOR MINORS.



   (A)   Purpose.  The curfew for minors established by this section
is maintained for four primary reasons:



      (1)   To protect the public from illegal acts of minors
committed during the curfew hours;



      (2)   To protect minors from improper influences that prevail
during the curfew hours, including involvement with gangs;



      (3)   To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs
during the curfew hours; and



      (4)   To help parents control their minor children.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   EMERGENCY ERRAND.  A task that if not completed promptly threatens the
health, safety, or comfort of the minor or a member of the minor's
household.  The term shall include, but shall not be limited to, seeking
urgent medical treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law enforcement or
fire department personnel, and seeking shelter from the elements or urgent
assistance from a utility company due to a natural or human-made calamity.



   OFFICIAL CITY TIME.  The time of day as determined by Hennepin County
Dispatch.



   PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT OR REFRESHMENT.  Those places that
include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades, shopping
malls, nightclubs catering to minors, restaurants, and pool halls.



   PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY.  The person who is responsible for
providing food, clothing, shelter, and other basic necessities to the
minor.  The person providing primary care or custody to the minor must not
be another minor.



   SCHOOL ACTIVITY.  An event which has been placed on a school calendar
by public or parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned event.



   (C)   Hours.



      (1)   Minors under the age of 12 years.  It is unlawful for a
minor under the age of 12 years to be in or upon the public streets, alleys,
parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings;
or in or upon places of amusement, entertainment or refreshment; or in or
upon any vacant lot, after 9:00 p.m., official city time, on Sunday through
Thursday nights, and after 10:00 p.m., official city time, on Friday and
Saturday nights.



      (2)   Minors ages 12 to 14.  It is unlawful for a minor of
the age of 12, 13,  or 14 years to be in or upon the public streets, alleys,
parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings;
or in or upon places of amusement, entertainment or refreshment; or in or
upon any vacant lot, after 10:00 p.m., official city time, on Sunday through
Thursday nights, and after 11:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday nights.



      (3)   Minors ages 15 years to 18 years.  It is unlawful for a
minor of the age of 15, 16 or 17 years to be in or upon the public streets,
alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public
buildings; or in or upon places of amusement, entertainment or refreshment;
or in or upon any vacant lot, after 11:00 p.m., official city time, on Sunday
through Thursday nights, and after 12:01 a.m. on Friday and Saturday.



   (D)   Effect on control by adult responsible for minor.  Nothing in
this section will be construed to give a minor the right to stay out until
the curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed by a
parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody
of the minor; nor will this section be construed to diminish or impair the
control of the adult person having the primary care or custody of the minor.



   (E)   Exceptions.  The provisions of this section do not apply in
the following situations:



      (1)   To a minor accompanied by the minor's parent or
guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the
minor;



      (2)   To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the
direction of the minor's parent, guardian, or other adult person having the
primary care and custody of the minor;



      (3)   To a minor who is in any of the places described in this
section if in connection with or as required by an employer engaged in a
lawful business, trade, profession, or occupation; or to a minor traveling
directly to or from the location of such business trade, profession, or
occupation and the minor's residence.  Minors who fall within the scope of
this exception must carry written proof of employment and proof of the hours
the employer requires the minor's presence at work.



      (4)   To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly
to or from an event which has been officially designated as a school activity
by public or parochial school authorities; or who is participating in or
traveling directly to or from an official activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the city, a civic organization, school, religious institution,
or similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor and with the
permission of the minor's parent, guardian, or other adult person having the
primary care and custody of the minor.



      (5)   To a minor who is passing through the city in the course
of interstate travel during the hours of curfew.



      (6)   To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or
from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free
speech, freedom of assembly, or freedom of religion.



      (7)   To minors on the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence
or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor does not
complain to the city's designated law enforcement provider about the minor's
presence.



      (8)   To a minor who is married or has been married, or is
otherwise legally emancipated.



   (F)   Duties of person legally responsible for minor.  It is
unlawful for a parent, guardian, or other adult having the primary care or
custody of any minor to permit any violation of the requirements of this
section by the minor.



   (G)   Duties of other persons.  It is unlawful for a person
operating or in charge of any place of amusement, entertainment, or
refreshment to permit any minor to enter or remain in the person's place of
business during the hours prohibited by this section unless the minor is
accompanied by the minor's parent, guardian or other adult person having
primary care or custody of the minor, or unless one of the exceptions to this
section apply.



   (H)   Defense. It is a defense to prosecution under this section
that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified
the city's designated law enforcement provider that a minor was present on
the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.



Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Minors.  Any minor found to be in violation of § 132.01 may
be adjudicated delinquent and is subject to the dispositional alternatives
set forth in M.S. § 260.185, as amended.



   (B)   Adults.  Any adult person found to be in violation of §
132.01 is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be sentenced up to the maximum
penalty authorized by state law for a misdemeanor.



CHAPTER 133:  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



Section




Trespassing on Private Property




   133.01   Purpose



   133.02   Definitions



   133.03   When trespass notice may issue



   133.04   Prohibited conduct



   133.05   Additional provisions




Injury to Property




   133.15   Injury to property



   133.16   Crops



   133.17   Buildings



TRESPASSING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY



§ 133.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to enable private owners of real
property, situated within the city and to which the public has some implicit
right of access, to exclude persons from that property where the person has
committed a crime on the premises or violated the properly posted rules of
conduct for the property.



('72 Code, § 912:00)  (Ord. 1993-727, passed 7-12-93)



§ 133.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMON AREAS.  All areas of the property which are maintained for the
common use of its tenants or the general public incidental to the conduct of
the normal and legitimate activities upon the premises, including but not
limited to parking lots and ramps, private roadways, reception areas,
rotunda, waiting areas, hallways, restroom facilities, elevators, escalators,
and staircases.



   COVERED PREMISES.  Any improved real property, or portion thereof, to
which the public has an implicit right of access including, but not limited
to, places of worship, shopping malls, retail sales facilities, hotels,
motels, nursing homes, restaurants, multiple-family residential buildings,
hospitals, medical and dental offices, clubs, lodges, office buildings, banks
and financial institutions, transit stations, athletic and recreational
facilities, personal service establishments, theaters, and day care
facilities.



   PROPERTY MANAGER.  Any owner of a covered premises or the agent
thereof who is authorized to exercise control over the property, including
common areas.  The term PROPERTY MANAGER includes any tenant who is an owner
of the property or agent of the owner and authorized to exercise control over
the property, including common areas.



   TENANT.  Any authorized occupant of a covered premises, or the agent
thereof.



   TRESPASS NOTICE.  A written notice which contains minimally the
following information:



      (1)   A verbatim copy of § 133.04 hereof.



      (2)   The name, date of birth, and address of the person to
whom the notice is issued and the name of the person's custodial parent or
guardian where that person is a juvenile.



      (3)   A description of the specific conduct which serves as a
basis for the notice's issuance.



      (4)   A description of the specific property to which the
trespass notice applies.



      (5)   The period during which the trespass notice is in
effect, including the date of its expiration.



      (6)   The name, title, and telephone number of a person with
authority to modify, amend, or rescind the trespass notice prior to its
normal expiration.



      (7)   The method by which the trespass notice was served upon
the person to whom it was issued.



('72 Code, § 912:05)  (Ord. 1993-727, passed 7-12-93)



§ 133.03  WHEN TRESPASS NOTICE MAY ISSUE.



   A property manager or tenant may issue a trespass notice as provided
under this subchapter only under the following circumstances:



   (A)   Where there is probable cause to believe that the person has
committed an act prohibited by state statute or city ordinance while on the
covered premises, whether on common areas or a tenant's space; or



   (B)   Where there is probable cause to believe that the person has
violated the rules of conduct for the property which have been conspicuously
posted at all public entrances to the property or have been personally
provided to the person in writing by the property manager or tenant.



('72 Code, § 912:10)  (Ord. 1993-727, passed 7-12-93)



§ 133.04  PROHIBITED CONDUCT.



   (A)   It is unlawful to trespass in or upon any private property
and, without claim of right, refuse to depart therefrom on demand of the
property manager or tenant.



   (B)   It is unlawful for a person who has been served with a
trespass notice in conformity with this section to enter the premises
described therein during its effective period without the written permission
of the issuing property manager or tenant or the authorized agent thereof
named in the notice.  Violation of the terms of the notice will result in
criminal prosecution with potential incarceration of up to 90 days in jail
and a potential fine of up to $700.



   (C)   It is unlawful to enter any area of private property in
violation of conspicuously posted signs prohibiting or restricting access
thereto, including but not limited to the following signs:  “No
Trespassing,” “Authorized Personnel Only,” “Private,” “Employees
Only,” or “Emergency Exit Only.”



('72 Code, § 912:15)  (Ord. 1993-727, passed 7-12-93)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 133.05  ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Where a trespass notice is issued by a tenant, who is not the
property manager, the notice is effective only as to that portion of the
premises over which the tenant is entitled to exercise control.



   (B)   No trespass notice will be effective for more than one year
from the date of its original issuance.



   (C)   All trespass notices issued pursuant to this section must be
properly served upon the person named therein as follows:



      (1)   Personal service documented by either a receipt signed
by the person to whom it was issued or an affidavit of the issuer; or



      (2)   Where the person named in the trespass notice is
arrested by a police officer for an act prohibited by state statute or city
ordinance, the arresting officer may personally serve the notice on behalf of
the property manager or tenant and so document that fact in the officer's
official police report detailing the incident.



('72 Code, § 912:20)  (Ord. 1993-727, passed 7-12-93)



INJURY TO PROPERTY



§ 133.15  INJURY TO PROPERTY.



   It is unlawful to wilfully or maliciously displace, remove, injure or
destroy:



   (A)   A highway or private way laid out by authority of law or
bridge upon such public or private way;



   (B)   A tree, rod, post or other monument which has been erected or
marked for the purpose of designating a point in any boundary or any mark or
inscription thereon;



   (C)   A mile board, milestone or guide post erected upon a highway
or any inscription thereon;



   (D)   A line of telegraph or telephone or any part thereof or any
appurtenance or apparatus connected with the working of any magnetic or
electric telegraph or telephone or the sending or conveying of messages
thereby;



   (E)   The pipe or main for conducting gas or water or heat or any
works erected for supplying building with gas or water or heat or any
appurtenance or appendage connected therewith;



   (F)   A sewer or drain or a pipe or a main connected therewith or
forming a part thereof.



('72 Code, § 935:00)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 133.16  CROPS.



   It is unlawful to maliciously injure or destroy any standing crops,
grain, cultivated fruits or vegetables, the property of another, in any case
for which punishment has not been otherwise prescribed.



('72 Code, § 935:05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 133.17  BUILDINGS.



   It is unlawful in any manner to wilfully damage any building or part
thereof, throw any stone or other missile at or break any window therein or
aid, counsel, hire or procure any persons to do so.



('72 Code, § 935:10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 134:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY



Section




General Provisions




   134.01   Assault



   134.02   Lurking



   134.03   Noisy parties



   134.04   Social host




Disorderly Conduct




   134.15   Disorderly conduct defined



   134.16   Exclusions



   134.17   Offense



   134.18   Noise in residential areas



   134.19   Radios, tapes, and disc players, and the like




Conduct on School Grounds




   134.30   Defacement of school buildings



   134.31   Breach of peace on school grounds



   134.32   Offensive language and conduct



   134.33   Improper conduct while school in session



   134.34   Loitering



   134.35   Trespassing on school property



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 134.01  ASSAULT.



   Whoever commits an act with intent to cause fear in another of
immediate bodily harm or death or intentionally inflicts or attempts to
inflict bodily harm upon another commits an assault and is guilty of a
misdemeanor.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 134.02  LURKING.



   It is unlawful for any person in a public or private place to lurk, lie
in wait or be concealed with intent to do any mischief or to commit any crime
or unlawful act.



('72 Code, § 922:00)  (Ord. 1978-274(A), passed 8-28-78)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 134.03  NOISY PARTIES.



   (A)   It is unlawful, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.,
to congregate because of or participate in any party or gathering of people
from which noise emanates of a sufficient volume so as to disturb the peace,
quiet or repose of persons residing in any residential area.



   (B)   It is unlawful to visit or remain within any residential
dwelling unit wherein such party or gathering is taking place except persons
who have gone there for the sole purpose of abating the disturbance.



('72 Code, § 965:00)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 134.04  SOCIAL HOST.



   (A)   Purpose and findings. 



      (1)   The Brooklyn Park City Council seeks to reduce underage
possession and consumption of alcohol by imposing criminal penalties on those
person(s) who host events or gatherings where persons under 21 years of age
possess or consume alcohol.



      (2)   The Brooklyn Park City Council finds that:



         (a)    Alcohol is an addictive drug, which, if used
irresponsibly, could have drastic effects on those who use it as well as
those who are affected by the actions of the irresponsible user.



         (b)   Events and gatherings held on private or public
property where alcohol is possessed or consumed by persons under the age of
21 are harmful to those persons and constitute a potential threat to public
health, safety, and welfare requiring prevention or abatement.



         (c)   Holding persons criminally responsible for hosting
or permitting an event or gathering where underage possession or consumption
of alcohol occurs will help deter underage consumption.



   (B)   Definitions.  For purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of
wine, liqueur, cordials, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled
spirits including dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by
whatever process produced.



      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE.  Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and
every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and which
contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is
fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined
with other substances.



      ADULT.  Any person 18 years of age or older.



      EVENT  or  GATHERING.  Any group of three or more persons who
have assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other
activity.  An event or gathering shall not include assemblies or gatherings
occurring on the licensed property of a retail intoxicating liquor or 3.2
percent malt liquor licensee, municipal liquor store, or bottle club permit
holder who is regulated by M.S. § 340A.503.



      HOST.  To permit, aid, conduct, entertain, organize, supervise,
or control an event or gathering.



      PARENT.  Any person having legal custody of a juvenile as a
natural parent, adoptive parent, step parent, legal guardian, or a person to
whom legal custody has been given by order of the court.



      PERSON.  An individual, partnership, co-partnership,
corporation, or any association of one or more individuals.



      RESIDENCE  or  PREMISES.  Any home, yard, field, land,
apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a
hall or meeting room, park or any other place of assembly, public or private,
whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a
dwelling or specifically for a party or other social function, and whether
owned, leased, rented, or used with or without permission or compensation.



      UNDERAGE PERSON.  Any person under the age of 21 years.



   (C)   Prohibited acts.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person(s) to:



         (a)   Host an event or gathering;



         (b)   At any residence, premises, or on any other
private or public property;



         (c)   Where alcohol or alcoholic beverages are present;
and



         (d)   When the person knows or has reason to know that
an underage person will or does:



            1.   Consume any alcohol or alcoholic beverage; or



            2.   Possess any alcohol or alcoholic beverage
with the intent to consume it.



      (2)   It is a violation of this division (C) if the person
intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels, or conspires with another or
otherwise procures another to commit the prohibited act.



      (3)    A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have
to be present at the event or gathering to be criminally responsible for a
violation of this division (C).



   (D)   Penalty.  A violation of this section is a misdemeanor.



   (E)   Exceptions.



      (1)   It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of
division (C) that the defendant is the parent of the underage person and that
the defendant gave or furnished the alcoholic beverage to that person solely
for consumption in the defendant's household. 



      (2)    It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of
division (C) that the conduct was part of a legally protected religious
observance.



   (F)   Severability.  If any section, subsection, sentence, clause,
part, provision, phrase, word, or other portion of this section is, for any
reason, held to be unconstitutional or invalid, in whole or in part by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed severable, and
such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this chapter, which remaining portions shall continue
in full force and effect.



(Ord. 2011-1125, passed 4-4-11)



DISORDERLY CONDUCT



§ 134.15  DISORDERLY CONDUCT DEFINED.



   A person is guilty of disorderly conduct if, with a purpose to cause
danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, or if with the knowledge that the person
is likely to create such public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, the
person willfully:



   (A)   Creates a disturbance of the public order by an act of
violence or by any act likely to produce violence; or



   (B)   Engages in fighting, or in violent, threatening or tumultuous
behavior; or



   (C)   Makes any unreasonably loud noise; or



   (D)   Addresses abusive language or threats to any person present
which creates a clear and present danger of violence; or



   (E)   Causes likelihood of harm or serious inconvenience by failing
to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a police officer, where three or more
persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity;
or



   (F)   Damages, befouls or disturbs public property or property of
another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive
condition; or



   (G)   Disturbs any assembly, or meeting not unlawful in its
character or the peace and quiet of any family or neighborhood; and



   (H)   Lewdly exposes his or her person or the private parts thereof
or procuring another to expose himself or herself and any open or gross
lewdness or lascivious behavior or any act of public indecency;



   (I)   Uses profane, vulgar or indecent language in or about any
public building, store or place of business or upon any of the streets,
alleys, or sidewalks of this municipality so as to be audible and offensive;



   (J)   Drinks intoxicating liquor on any street or in a vehicle upon
a public street;



   (K)   Commits a trespass on residential, public, or commercial or
business property.  Trespass for the purpose of this ordinance means:



      (1)   Entering upon, or refusing to leave, any residential
property of another, either where such property has been posted with “NO
TRESPASSING” signs, or where immediately prior to such entry, or subsequent
thereto, notice is given by the owner or occupant, orally or in writing, that
such entry, or continued presence, is prohibited.



      (2)   Entering upon, or refusing to leave, any public property
in violation of regulations promulgated by the official charged with the
security, care or maintenance of the property and approved by the governing
body of the public agency owning property, where such regulations have been
conspicuously posted or where immediately prior to such entry, or subsequent
thereto, such regulations are made known by the official charged with the
security, care or maintenance of the property, or designated agent or a
police officer.



      (3)   Entering upon, or refusing to leave, any commercial or
business property, including semi-public areas such as parking lots, malls,
corridors, and commons, where immediately prior to such entry, or subsequent
thereto, notice is given by the owner or lessee, or designated agent, orally
or in writing, that such entry, or continued presence, is prohibited.



('72 Code, § 920:00)  (Am. Ord. 1984-458(A), passed 6-11-84)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 134.16  EXCLUSIONS.



   This subchapter does not apply to peaceful picketing, public speaking
or other lawful expressions of opinion not in contravention of other laws.



('72 Code, § 920:05)



§ 134.17  OFFENSE.



   It is unlawful to engage in disorderly conduct in the City of Brooklyn
Park.



('72 Code, § 920:10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 134.18  NOISE IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.



   (A)   It is unlawful, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.,
to congregate because of or participate in any party or gathering of people
from which noise emanates of a sufficient volume so as to disturb the peace,
quiet or repose of persons residing in any residential area.



   (B)   It is unlawful to visit or remain within any residential
dwelling unit wherein such party or gathering is taking place except persons
who have gone there for the sole purpose of abating the disturbance.



   (C)   A police officer may order all persons present, other than the
owners or tenants of the dwelling unit, to immediately disperse in lieu of
being charged under this subchapter.  Owners or tenants of the dwelling unit
must immediately abate the disturbance and if they do not abate the
disturbance they are in violation of this subchapter.



('72 Code, § 920:15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 134.19  RADIOS, TAPES, AND DISC PLAYERS, AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   It is unlawful to play, use, or operate any radio, tape or
disc player, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for
the production of sound in such a manner, considering the time and place and
the purpose for which the sound is produced, as to unreasonably disturb the
peace, quiet, or repose of a person or persons of ordinary sensibility.



   (B)   The play, use, or operation of any radio, tape or disc player,
musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the production
of sound in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet
from said machine or device is prima facie evidence of a violation of this
section.



   (C)   When sound violating this section is produced by a machine or
device that is located in or on a vehicle, the vehicle's owner is not
present, the person in charge of the vehicle at the time is guilty of the
violation.



   (D)   This section does not apply to sound produced by the following:



      (1)   Amplifying equipment used in connection with activities
for which permits have been granted;



      (2)   Anti-theft devices; and



      (3)   Machines or devices for the production of sound on or in
authorized emergency vehicles.



   (E)   With the exception of the machines and devices listed in
division (D) of this section, this section applies to all radios, tape and
disc players, musical instruments, phonographs, and machines and devices for
the production of sound, whether on public or private property.



   (F)   A violation of this section is punishable as a petty offense.



('72 Code, § 920:20)  (Ord. 1994-762, passed 5-23-94)  Penalty, see §
10.99



CONDUCT ON SCHOOL GROUNDS



§ 134.30  DEFACEMENT OF SCHOOL BUILDINGS.



   It is unlawful to mark with ink, paint, chalk or other substance, or
post hand bills on, or in any other manner deface or injure any school
building or structure used or usable for school purposes within the city, or
to mark, deface or injure fences, trees, lawns, or fixtures appurtenant to or
located on the site of such buildings, or to post hand bills on such fences,
trees or fixtures, or to place a sign anywhere on any such site.



('72 Code, § 910:00)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 134.31  BREACH OF PEACE ON SCHOOL GROUNDS.



   It is unlawful to willfully or maliciously make or assist in making on
any school grounds adjacent to any school building or structure any noise,
disturbance or improper diversion or activity by which peace, quiet and good
order shall be disturbed.



('72 Code, § 910:05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 134.32  OFFENSIVE LANGUAGE AND CONDUCT.



   It is unlawful to use offensive obscene or abusive language or engage
in boisterous or noisy conduct tending reasonably to arouse alarm, anger or
resentment in others on any school grounds or in buildings or structures.



('72 Code, § 910:10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 134.33  IMPROPER CONDUCT WHILE SCHOOL IN SESSION.



   It is unlawful to, in any school room or in any building or on the
grounds adjacent to the same, disturb or interrupt the peace and good order
of such school while in session.  It is unlawful for a person not in
immediate attendance in such school and being in such building or upon the
premises belonging thereto to conduct or behave himself or herself
improperly.  It is unlawful for a person, upon the request of a teacher of
such school or the person in charge thereof to leave said building or
premises, to neglect or refuse so to do.



('72 Code, § 910:20)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 134.34  LOITERING.



   It is unlawful to loiter on any school grounds or in any school
building or structure.



('72 Code, § 910:20)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 134.35  TRESPASSING ON SCHOOL PROPERTY.



   (A)   Definitions.  For purposes of this section, the terms defined
in this section have the meanings given them.



   PUBLIC SCHOOL.  Any school building, school grounds, play area,
parking lot or athletic field owned or leased by Independent School District
11, 279, 281 or 287.



   SCHOOL OFFICIAL.  The licensed administrators or instructional staff
or any other person so authorized by the school boards named in the
definition for “public school.”



   VEHICLE.  This term includes:  automobiles; motorcycles; trucks;
snowmobiles; recreational vehicles or any other type of vehicle used to
transport people and/or goods.



   (B)   Trespassing prohibited.  It is unlawful to trespass in or
upon any public school by remaining upon the school premises after being
ordered to leave the public school by a school official.



   (C)   Permission required for re-entry.  It is unlawful for a
person, having been ordered by a school official to leave a public school and
having left the premises, to re-enter the public school without the written
permission of the school administrator in charge or the school official who
gave the order to leave the public school.



   (D)   Operation of vehicles.  It is unlawful to operate or be in
actual physical control of any vehicle in or upon any public school premises,
except for the purpose of using designated parking areas for parking in
connection with a school or school sanctioned function.  The parking areas
are as designated and appropriately marked by the officials of each school.



('72 Code, § 910:25)  (Ord. 1982-390(A), passed 5-24-82)  Penalty, see §
10.99



CHAPTER 135:  DRUG OFFENSES



Section



   135.01   State statute incorporated



   135.02   Prohibited acts



   135.03   Possession defined



   135.04   Excepted lawful businesses and professions



   135.05   Unlawful procuring, purchase, delivery or possession



   135.06   Confiscation and disposition of controlled substances



   135.07   Use of original containers and labels required



   135.08   Possession of injection implement



§ 135.01  STATE STATUTE INCORPORATED.



   The five schedules of controlled substances listed in M.S. § 152.02,
as amended, are hereby incorporated in and made a part of this chapter as
completely as if set out herein in full.  For the purposes of this chapter,
a CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE is any substance listed in the five schedules of
controlled substances in M.S. § 152.02.



('72 Code, § 961:00)  (Ord. 1984-458(A), passed 6-11-84; Am. Ord.
1991-686(A), passed 12-23-91)



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 135.02  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   It is unlawful for any person to grow, cultivate, manufacture, possess,
constructively possess, sell, give away, barter, exchange, distribute, or
otherwise transfer any controlled substance, except on a lawful prescription
by a person licensed by law to prescribe and administer controlled substances.



('72 Code, § 961:05)  (Ord. 1984-458(A), passed 6-11-84; Am. Ord.
1991-686(A), passed 12-23-91)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 135.03  POSSESSION DEFINED.



   POSSESSION  means having the controlled substance on one's person or
in constructive possession including, but not limited to, constructive
possession by that owner of a motor vehicle or by that driver of a motor
vehicle if the owner is not present who keeps or allows to be kept in the
motor vehicle a controlled substance.



('72 Code, § 961:10)  (Ord. 1984-458(A), passed 6-11-84)



§ 135.04  EXCEPTED LAWFUL BUSINESSES AND PROFESSIONS.



   Section 135.02 of this chapter does not apply to the following in the
ordinary course of their trade, their business, or profession provided,
however, this exception is not a defense to the doing of the acts prohibited
in § 135.05 of this chapter:



   (A)   Practitioners, persons licensed by law to prescribe and
administer controlled substances.



   (B)   Pharmacists duly registered and licensed with the Minnesota
State Board of Pharmacy.



   (C)   Manufacturers.



   (D)   Pharmacists as manufacturers.



   (E)   Wholesalers.



   (F)   Warehouse person.



   (G)   Persons engaged in transporting such controlled substances as
agent or employee of a practitioner, pharmacist, manufacturer, warehouse
person, wholesaler, common carrier.



   (H)   Public officers or public employees in the performance of
official duties requiring possession or control of such controlled
substances, or persons aiding such officers or employees in the performance
of such duties.



   (I)   Any patient as herein defined with respect to procuring,
possession and use of a controlled substance in accordance with the terms of
a prescription and prescribed treatment.



   (J)   Persons who procure, possess or use such controlled substance
for the purpose of lawful research, teaching or testing, and not for sale.



   (K)   Lawfully licensed and registered hospitals or bona fide
institutions wherein sick or injured persons are cared for and treated, or by
bona fide hospitals for the treatment of animals.



('72 Code, § 961:15)  (Ord. 1984-458(A), passed 6-11-84)



§ 135.05  UNLAWFUL PROCURING, PURCHASE, DELIVERY OR POSSESSION.



   It is unlawful to procure, purchase, deliver or possess, or attempt to
procure, purchase, deliver or possess a controlled substance in any of the
following manners:



   (A)   By fraud, deceit, misrepresentation or subterfuge; or



   (B)   By the forgery or alteration of a prescription; or



   (C)   By the concealment of a material fact; or



   (D)   By the use of a false name or the giving of a false address; or



   (E)   By making a false statement in any prescription, order,
report, or record relative to a controlled substance; or



   (F)   By falsely assuming the title of, or falsely representing any
person to be a manufacturer, wholesaler, warehouse person, pharmacist,
practitioner or other person described in § 135.04 of this chapter.



   (G)   By making, issuing or uttering any false or forged
prescription.



('72 Code, § 961:20)  (Ord. 1984-458(A), passed 6-11-84)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 135.06  CONFISCATION AND DISPOSITION OF CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.



   Any controlled substance found in the possession of any person
convicted of a violation of this chapter will be confiscated and must be
forfeited to the Chief of Police who will make proper and timely disposition
thereof by destroying it.



('72 Code, § 961:25)  (Ord. 1984-458(A), passed 6-11-84)



§ 135.07  USE OF ORIGINAL CONTAINERS AND LABELS REQUIRED.



   All patients having possession of any controlled substance, by lawful
prescription of practitioner while such controlled substance is lawfully in
such person's possession, must keep such controlled substance in the original
container in which it was delivered until used in accordance with such
prescription, and must not remove the pharmacist's original label identifying
the prescription from the original container.



('72 Code, § 961:30)  (Ord. 1984-458(A), passed 6-11-84)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 135.08  POSSESSION OF INJECTION IMPLEMENT.



   It is unlawful,  except for dealers in surgical instruments,
apothecaries, physicians, dentists, veterinarians, nurses, attendants and
interns of hospitals, sanitoriums or any other institution in which persons
are treated for disability or disease, to at any time have or possess any
hypodermic syringe or needle or any instrument adapted for the use of cocaine
or narcotic drugs or any dangerous drugs defined in M.S. § 152.01,
Subdivision 5, or as defined in 21 USC 321 (Section 201 of the Federal Food,
Drug and Cosmetic Act (v)) by subcutaneous injections and which is possessed
for that purpose, unless such possession be authorized by the certificate of
a physician issued within a period of one year prior to any time of such
possession.



('72 Code, § 961:35)  (Ord. 1984-458(A), passed 6-11-84)  Penalty, see §
10.99



CHAPTER 136:  WEAPONS



Section



   136.01   Definitions



   136.02   Prohibition



   136.03   Aiming prohibited



   136.04   Selling to minors



   136.05   Possession by minors



   136.06   Concealed weapons



   136.07   Use of weapons for defense purposes



   136.08   Permits



   136.09   Issuance of permits



   136.10   Transporting firearms and facsimile firearms



   136.11   Hunting prohibited



§ 136.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DEADLY WEAPONS.  This term includes the following:



      (1)   All firearms;



      (2)   Bows and arrows when the arrows are pointed tipped;



      (3)   All instruments used to expel at high velocity any
pellets of any kind, including, but not limited to B-B guns and air rifles;



      (4)   Sling shots;



      (5)   Sand clubs;



      (6)   Metal knuckles; and



      (7)   Daggers, dirks, stilettos, switch blade knife, spring
blade knife, push button knife, or figures or discs with sharpened points or
edges (commonly known as “throwing stars”).



   FACSIMILE FIREARMS.  This term includes the following:



      (1)   Any object which is a replica of an actual firearm,
which substantially duplicates an actual firearm or which could reasonably be
perceived to be an actual firearm, unless:



         (a)   The entire exterior surface of such object is
colored white, bright red, bright orange, bright yellow, bright green, bright
blue, bright pink or bright purple, either singly or as the predominant color
in combination with other colors in any pattern, or such object is
constructed entirely of transparent or translucent materials which permit
unmistakable observation of the object's complete contents; and



         (b)   Such object has a blaze orange extension that
extends at least six millimeters from the muzzle end of the barrel of such
object which is as an integral part of the object and is permanently affixed;
and



         (c)   Such object does not have a laser pointer attached
to it.



      (2)   FACSIMILE FIREARM does not include any actual firearm as
otherwise regulated by the terms of this chapter or by the Minnesota Statutes.



('72 Code, § 950:00)  (Am. Ord. 1984-457(A), passed 6-11-84; Am. Ord.
2008-1084, passed 2-4-08)



§ 136.02  PROHIBITION.



   Except as authorized by law, all discharging, use and possession of
deadly weapons within the corporate limits of Brooklyn Park are prohibited
except for the possession of bows and arrows at a city-authorized archery
target range.



('72 Code, § 950:05)  (Am. Ord. 2008-1084, passed 2-4-08)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 136.03  AIMING PROHIBITED.



   Except as authorized by law, the aiming of any deadly weapon or
facsimile firearm, whether loaded or not, at or toward any human being,
building or occupied vehicle is prohibited.



('72 Code, § 950:10)  (Am. Ord. 2008-1084, passed 2-4-08)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 136.04  SELLING TO MINORS.



   The selling, giving, loaning, or furnishing in any way of any deadly
weapon or facsimile firearm to a minor under the age of 18 years without the
written consent of the minor's parents or guardian, or of a police officer or
magistrate is prohibited.



('72 Code, § 950:15)  (Am. Ord. 2008-1084, passed 2-4-08)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 136.05  POSSESSION BY MINORS.



   It is unlawful for a minor under the age of 18 years to handle or have
in the minor's possession or under the minor's control, except while
accompanied by or under the immediate charge of the minor's parent or
guardian, any deadly weapon or facsimile firearm.



('72 Code, § 950:20)  (Am. Ord. 2008-1084, passed 2-4-08)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 136.06  CONCEALED WEAPONS.



   Except for a pistol or antique firearm carried in compliance with M.S.
§§ 624.714 and 624.715, the possession by any person other than a law
enforcement officer of any deadly weapon or facsimile firearm concealed or
furtively carried on the person is prohibited.



('72 Code, § 950:25)  (Am. Ord. 2008-1084, passed 2-4-08)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 136.07  USE OF WEAPONS FOR DEFENSE PURPOSES.



   Nothing in this section is to be construed to include any firing of a
gun or use of other weapons when done in the lawful defense of persons or
property or family, or the necessary enforcement of the law.



('72 Code, § 950:30)



§ 136.08  PERMITS.



   Subject to reasonable regulation by the Council for the protection of
persons and property, the Council may issue special permits to duly organized
clubs and their members for shooting or practicing on lands owned or leased
by the club or trap shooters shooting on grounds selected for that purpose,
or to persons firing salutes over the graves of deceased persons.



('72 Code, § 950:35)



§ 136.09  ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.



   The permits provided by the previous sections will be issued at the
discretion of the Chief of Police.  Appeals may be taken from the Chief's
determination to the Council.  No permits issued under this section are
deemed valid unless they are in writing and in the possession of the person
using the permit.



('72 Code, § 950:45)  (Am. Ord. 1987-578(A), passed 10-12-87)



§ 136.10  TRANSPORTING FIREARMS AND FACSIMILE FIREARMS.



   (A)   Except for a pistol or antique firearm carried in compliance
with M.S. §§ 624.714 and 624.715, it is unlawful to transport any firearm
including a muzzle loading firearm or a facsimile firearm, on the person or
in a motor vehicle or airplane, snowmobile, or ATV unless:



      (1)   The firearm or facsimile firearm and magazines are
unloaded and contained in a gun case expressly made for that purpose which is
fully enclosed by being zipped, snapped, buckled, tied or otherwise fastened,
with no portion of the firearm or facsimile firearm being left exposed; or



      (2)   The firearm or facsimile firearm is unloaded and in the
trunk of a car with the trunk door closed.



   (B)   It is also unlawful to transport a bow on the person or in a
motor vehicle, airplane, snowmobile, or ATV unless it is:



      (1)   Unstrung;



      (2)   Completely contained in a case; or



      (3)   Contained in the trunk of the car with the trunk door
closed.



   (C)   A muzzle loading firearm with a flintlock ignition is fully
unloaded if it has no priming powder in any pan and a muzzle loading firearm
with percussion ignition is fully unloaded if it has no percussion cap on any
nipple.



   (D)   As used in this section, TRANSPORT means to carry by any means
on the person or in a motor vehicle, airplane, snowmobile, or ATV, except
where the act of transportation occurs on property owned or leased by the
transporter or the employer of the transporter if such act of transportation
is required by said employer.



   (E)   This section does not apply to law enforcement officers in the
performance of their duties.



('72 Code, § 950:50)  (Ord. 1986-552(A), passed 12-8-86; Am. Ord.
2008-1084, passed 2-4-08)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 136.11  HUNTING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It is unlawful, within the city, to hunt or shoot any animals
or birds except as follows:



      (1)   Law enforcement officers working in an official capacity.



      (2)   For the destruction of diseased, injured, or dangerous
birds, animals, or reptiles by persons specifically authorized to do so by
the Chief of Police or the City Manager.



      (3)   Persons authorized by the City Manager or Chief of
Police for purposes of protecting the health, safety, or general welfare.



   (B)   The Council or the Manager, as the case may be, may limit type
of animal or bird to be hunted or shot and the manner and means of
accomplishing this task.



('72 Code, § 950:55)  (Ord. 1990-645(A), passed 2-26-90; Am. Ord.
2008-1084, passed 2-4-08)  Penalty, see § 10.99



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



      Chapter



         150.   SIGNS



         151.   SUBDIVISIONS



         152.   ZONING CODE



         153.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT



CHAPTER 150:  SIGNS



Section




General Provisions




   150.01   Short title



   150.02   Purpose and intent



   150.03   Definitions



   150.04   General provisions applicable to all zoning districts



   150.05   Prohibited signs



   150.06   Temporary signs



   150.07   Non-conforming signs



   150.08   Variances



   150.09   Sign application



   150.10   Bond and license



   150.11   Construction standards



   150.12   Permit and fee exemptions



   150.13   Enforcement



   150.14   Violations



   150.15   Right of appeal



District Regulations



   150.25   R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-2B, R-3, R-3A, R-4 and R-4A Residential
Districts and areas guided for low- and medium-density residential in the
Planned Community Development District and Planned Unit Development District



   150.26   R-5, R-6 and R-7 Multiple Residential Districts and area
guided for high-density residential in the Planned Community Development
District and Planned Unit Development District



   150.27   B-1 Office Park District



   150.28   B-2 Neighborhood Retail Business District, B-3 General
Business District, and B-4 Vehicle Sales and Showroom District



   150.29   BP Business Park and I General Industrial Districts



   150.30   PCDD Planned Community Development District and PUD Planned
Unit Development District



   150.31   PI Public Institutional District



   150.32   Highway Overlay



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 150.01  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter may hereafter be known and cited as the “Sign
Ordinance.”



('72 Code, § 356:00)  (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88)



§ 150.02  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   This chapter is established to protect and promote the health,
safety, general welfare and order within the City of Brooklyn Park through
the establishment of a comprehensive and impartial series of standards,
regulations and procedures governing the type, numbers, size, structure,
location, height, lighting, erection, maintenance, use and/or display of
devices, signs or symbols serving as a visual communicative media to persons
situated within or upon public right-of-ways or properties.



   (B)   The provisions of this chapter are intended to establish an
opportunity for effective communication, and a sense of concern for visual
amenities on the part of those designing, displaying or otherwise utilizing
needed communicative media of the types regulated by this chapter; while at
the same time, assuring that the public is not endangered, annoyed or
distracted by the unsafe, disorderly, indiscriminate or unnecessary use of
such communicative media.



('72 Code, § 356:05)  (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88)



§ 150.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.  The singular
number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.  The
present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future the
present.  The word “must” is mandatory and the word “may” is
permissive.  The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter
genders.  Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of
this chapter, its meaning is construed as set forth in such definition
thereof.  All measured distances must be expressed in feet and inches.



   ADVERTISEMENT.  Displayed information that calls public attention to a
business, product, service, political or non-profit organization, idea, or
event.



   ADMINISTRATOR.  The officer charged by the City Manager with the
administration and enforcement of this chapter.



   ALTERATION.  This refers to any alteration to a sign excluding routine
maintenance, painting, or change of copy of an existing sign.



   AREA IDENTIFICATION SIGN.  A sign which identifies a development such
as a shopping center consisting of three or more separate business concerns,
a singular free-standing commercial or institutional building 50,000 square
feet or larger, an industrial building in excess of 100,000 square feet, an
industrial area, an office or institutional complex consisting of three or
more buildings or any combination of the above.  An area identification sign
must not contain advertisement, except on a reader board.



   AWNING.  A temporary roof like structure or cover which projects from
the wall of a building or projects over any entrance and can be retracted,
folded or collapsed against the face of a supporting building.



   BANNER.  Refers to temporary sign such as used to announce open
houses, grand openings or special announcements or sales.



   BENCH SIGN.  A sign which is affixed to or painted on a bench, such as
at a public transit terminal or stop.



   BILLBOARD SIGN.  A sign which is erected and used for the purpose of
selling or leasing advertising space or for the purpose of selling goods
and/or services other than those offered on the premises.



   BUILDING.  Any structure having a roof which may provide shelter or
enclosure for persons, animals or chattel, and when the structure is divided
by party walls without openings, each portion of such building so separated
is deemed a separate building.



   BUILDING FACADE.  That area of any exterior elevation of a building
extending from grade to the top of the exterior wall and the entire width of
the building elevation, including parapets, awnings, canopies, mansards or
other appendages or architectural treatments to the wall.  The facade does
not include flat roof sections of multi-level buildings nor the shingled
faces of hip roofs or gable roofs.



   CANOPY/WALKWAY.  A permanent roof-like structure or cover which
projects from the wall of a building, or projects over any entrance or
walkway.



   CANOPY/VEHICULAR SERVICE.  A permanent roof-like structure, either
attached or detached from a permitted building, designed to provide cover for
off-street vehicle service areas, (such as gasoline station pump islands,
drive-in establishments, truck loading berths, and the like).



   CONSTRUCTION SIGN.  A sign placed at a construction site identifying
the project or the name of the architect, engineer, contractor, developer,
financier or other involved parties.



   DIRECTIONAL SIGNS.  A sign which bears only directional arrows or
information on location plus the address and/or name of a business,
institution, or other use activity, provided the primary message and purpose
is to provide directional information.



   DISTRICT.  Refers to a specific zoning district as defined in the
Brooklyn Park Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 152.



   DWELLING.  A building of one or more portions thereof occupied or
intended to be occupied for residential purposes; but not including rooms in
motels, hotels, nursing hones, boarding houses, trailers, tents, cabins or
trailer coaches.



   DWELLING UNIT.  A single-family dwelling.



   EVENT.  For the purposes of this chapter, an event is defined as an
organized function, which occurs on two consecutive weekends or over a period
of no more than ten consecutive days,  that serves to advertise and/or
promote a non-profit agency or organization as defined by the State of
Minnesota.  Section 150.06(A)(1) regulates those events that use banners or
mobile reader boards.



   FEATHER FLAG.  A free-standing, temporary sign constructed of a
singular vertical pole, tube, or post supporting one edge of a single sheet
of weather resistant cloth, vinyl, or similar material printed with
advertising, graphics, or other messages on each opposing side, incorporating
movement only as provided by surrounding winds or other unassisted ambient
air movement. 



   FLASHING SIGN.  A sign which contains rotating, flashing, or
intermittent lights, animation, or exhibits noticeable changes in color,
intensity, texture, shape, pattern or light intensity.



   FREE-STANDING SIGN.   Any stationary, self-supporting sign not affixed
to any other structure and supported by a pole(s).  A reader board or
electronic message center  may be attached to the free-standing sign
structure, but the reader board must not exceed 30% of the area containing
the sign copy.  The reader board must be included in calculating the
allowable sign square foot area as required in the individual district.



   GOVERNMENTAL SIGN.  A sign which, is erected by a governmental unit
for the purpose of identification, direction, and/or guiding traffic.



   GRADE.  The main elevation of curb along public street frontage
closest to the sign to which reference is made, or center line of street-if
no curb is available.



   HOME OCCUPATION SIGN.  A sign directing attention to a home occupation
as defined in the city's zoning ordinance, Chapter 152.



   IDENTIFICATION SIGN (NAME PLATE).  Any sign which states the name
and/or address of the business or occupant of the lot or building where the
sign is placed or may be a directory listing the names, addresses and/or
businesses of occupants.  IDENTIFICATION SIGNS must contain no advertisement.



   ILLUMINATED SIGN.  Any sign which is designed to be and/or is lighted
by an artificial light source either directed upon it or illuminated from an
interior source.  All illuminated signs must have light sources shielded to
confine direct illumination to the face area of the sign.



   INSTITUTIONAL SIGN.  A sign and/or reader board which identifies the
name and other characteristics of an institutional use located within any
zoning district and allowed by zoning code.  Institutional signs must  not
contain advertisement (examples:  churches, schools, sanitariums, hospitals,
government buildings, nursing homes).



   INTEGRAL SIGN.  A sign carrying the name of a building, its date of
erection, monumental citations, commemorative tablets and the like when
carved into stone, concrete or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum
or other permanent type of construction and made an integral part of the
building walls.



   MONUMENT SIGN.   A sign which is attached to or supported by a
monument structure which bears entirely on the ground, extending horizontally
for a minimum of 80% of the entire length of the sign face.  The sign base
must be constructed of any one or combination of the following materials: 
brick, stone, decorative masonry, plastic, aluminum, colored metals, or decay
resistive wood.  The base and supporting material must constitute at least
25% of the total allowable sign square footage.  A reader board or
electronic message center may be attached to the monument sign but must not
exceed 30% of the area.  The sign copy, reader board or message must have a
minimum clearance of three feet above grade.  The area containing sign copy,
including reader board, and the area of the monument structure itself must be
combined for determining the total square footage and height.  A sign
attached to a retaining wall is considered to be a monument sign provided the
message or copy does not exceed the allowable sign area as specified for the
applicable zoning district, and all other provisions for a monument sign are
met.







 



   An example of a 100 square foot monument sign.



   MOTION SIGN.  Any sign which revolves, rotates, has any moving parts
or gives the illusion of motion, electronically or otherwise.



   NON-CONFORMING SIGN.  A sign which was lawfully constructed prior to
the time of the passage of this chapter or amendment thereto, but which does
not conform with the regulations of this chapter.



   NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATION.   An incorporated organization organized
under the laws of the state for civic, fraternal, social, or business
purposes, for intellectual improvement, or for the promotion of sports, a
congressionally chartered veterans' organization, or religious institution. 
For the purposes of this chapter, this definition includes the governments of
the City of Brooklyn Park, Hennepin County, State of Minnesota, United States
of America, and any school district within the city limits.



   OFF-SITE DIRECTIONAL SIGN.   A sign that is located on the same pole
and  beneath an existing street name sign for the purpose of providing
directional information for a public or institutional use that is located on
a local street.  The City Engineer may determine whether a sign or signs are
warranted to direct traffic in this manner on a case by case basis.  No more
than one off-site directional sign may be located on a single pole, the sign
must have  same color,  size and font as the accompanying street name sign
and must contain only the name of the use and a directional arrow and must be
constructed and maintained by the city at the expense of the benefitting
property.



   PEDESTRIAN SIGN.  A temporary sign, which is constructed of durable
materials and is designed to be readily moved from one location to another
(ex. sandwich board sign or any item containing a message). For purposes of
this chapter, any sign mounted to, or conveyed by means of, a vehicle shall
not be considered a pedestrian sign.



   PENNANT.  Attention getting devices (such as streamers) constructed of
paper, cloth, plastic or similar materials, (excluding banners and flags).



   PERMANENT SIGN.  Any sign which is not a temporary sign.



   PORTABLE SIGN.  A temporary sign and/or reader board so designed as to
be movable from one location to another and which is not permanently attached
to the ground, or any permanent structure.



   PRODUCT IDENTIFICATION SIGNS.  A sign that is not necessary to
identify a business and identifies a product or service either sold on or off
the premises on which the sign is located.



   PROJECTING SIGN.  A sign, other than a wall sign, which is affixed to
a building and which has sign faces extending perpendicular from the building
wall.



   READER BOARD (ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER).   That portion of the sign
used for removable or electronically changeable graphics, letters, and/or
numbers to convey messages.



   REAL ESTATE SIGN.  A business sign placed upon a property advertising
that particular property for sale, rent or lease.



   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT SIGN. A sign that identifies the name of a
neighborhood, a residential subdivision, or a multiple residential complex.



   ROOF SIGN.  Any sign which is erected, constructed or attached wholly
or in part upon or above the roof of a building.



   RUMMAGE OR GARAGE SALE.  The infrequent, temporary display and sale of
used personal property by a tenant or owner on the tenant's or owner's
residential premises.



   SEARCHLIGHT.  An apparatus containing a source of light and a
reflector that projects the light produced in a concentrated, far-reaching
beam for the purpose of advertisement.



   SETBACK.  The minimum horizontal distance from the closest part of a
sign to the property line, or public street easement or right-of-way.



   SIGN.  Any structure, device, advertisement, or visual representation
intended to advertise, identify, or communicate information, or attract the
attention of the public for any purpose; and without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing includes:  any symbols, letters, figures,
illustrations, or wall graphics painted or otherwise affixed to a building or
structure.



   SIGN AREA.  That area measured within the perimeter lines of the sign
which bears the advertisement; or in the case of messages, figures, or
symbols, including those attached directly to any part of a building.  That
area which is included in the smallest rectangle which can be made to
circumscribe the message, figure, or symbol displayed for the purpose of
advertisement.  The specified maximum sign area for a free-standing or
monument sign refers to a single facing and not to the aggregate area of both
faces.  The sign area for a monument sign includes the sign structure.



   SIGN, MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF.  The vertical distance measured from grade or
other reference elevation as herein specified to the upper limit of such a
sign.



   SIGN, MINIMUM HEIGHT OF.  The vertical distance measured from grade or
other reference elevation as herein specified to the lower limit of such sign.



   SIGN STRUCTURE.  The base, supports, uprights, bracing and framework
for a sign including the sign area.



   STREET.  Refers to a public highway, road, or thoroughfare which
affords the principal means of access to adjacent lots.



   STREET FRONTAGE.  The linear length in feet of the property line
adjacent to public street(s).  An interior lot has one street frontage and a
corner lot has two street frontages.



   TEMPORARY SIGN.  Any sign which is erected or displayed with or
without a permit for a specified period of time (such as banners, portable
signs, searchlights, window signs, and the like).



   UNLAWFUL SIGN.  A sign which exists prior to or after the passage of
this chapter or amendments thereto, which does not conform with the
regulations of this chapter and is not an existing legal, or is not a legal
nonconforming sign, or is not a sign erected with a sign permit, is an
unlawful sign.



   WALL.  The building facade area that defines the front of the
building.  The front is the continuous line of a building that connects side
wall to side wall and faces one public right-of-way.  For a multi-tenant
building on a corner lot, the front is the continuous line of a building
which faces either a public right-of-way or a private road in a planned unit
development.



   WALL SIGN.  A sign with permanent lettering which is affixed to the
exterior wall of a building and has a sign face which is parallel to the
building wall.  A wall sign must not project more than 12 inches from the
surface to which it is attached, nor may it extend beyond the top of the
building wall.



   WALL GRAPHICS.  A graphic design or decorative mural not intended for
identification or advertising purposes, which is painted directly on or
affixed to an exterior wall surface.



   WINDOW SIGN.  A temporary sign affixed to the interior of a window in
view of the general public.  This does not include merchandise that is for
sale and on display.



('72 Code, §§ 356:10 - 356:15)  (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am.
Ord. 1992-694, passed 5-11-92; Am. Ord. 1994-766, passed - -94; Am. Ord.
1999-900, passed 5-24-99; Am. Ord. 1999-914, passed - -99; Am. Ord. 2000-935,
passed 11-13-00; Am. Ord. 2000-939, passed 11-13-00; Am. Ord. 2003-1002,
passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 2004-1026, passed 12-13-04; Am. Ord. 2012-1152,
passed 10-22-12; Am. Ord. 2014-1165, passed 2-3-14; Am. Ord. 2014-1186,
passed 12-15-14)



§ 150.04  GENERAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL ZONING DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Nothing in this chapter will be interpreted as authorizing the
erection or construction of any sign not permissible under the zoning or
building ordinances of the city.



   (B)   All electrical signs, temporary or permanent, are subject to
the State Electrical Code and approval of the Electrical Inspector.



   (C)   No sign other than bench signs at public transit stops and
governmental traffic safety or roadway information signs and off-site
directional signs as defined in § 150.03 may be permanently or temporarily
erected within any street right-of-way or upon any public easement.



   (D)   Directional signs are permitted in all districts provided the
directional signs are located on the property referred to by the sign or
within a planned unit development.  The area of such signs must not exceed
ten square feet per sign face for a single tenant building or 20 square feet
per sign face for a multiple tenant building or a multi-building complex. 
Such signs must not have more than two sign faces.  Maximum sign height for
free-standing or monument-type directional signs is six feet above grade.



   (E)   It is unlawful to park any vehicle or trailer on a public
right-of-way or public property or on private property so as to be visible
from a public right-of-way, which has attached thereto or located thereon any
sign or advertising device for the basic purpose of directing people to a
business or activity located on the same or nearby property or any other
premises.



   (F)   Businesses that utilize permanent, legal outdoor sales, (such
as lumber yards, nurseries, and the like) are allowed generic product
identification signs for customer convenience, and to assist in traffic
movement.  These signs must not exceed 36 square feet in area, nor exceed
eight feet in height, and may be illuminated.  These signs are allowed for
orientation information purposes only and must not be visible from public
streets.  These product identification signs must be setback 100 feet or
more from all public streets.



   (G)   If a free-standing sign or monument sign is constructed so
that the faces are not constructed so as to be back to back, the total area
of all sides added together must not exceed the maximum allowable sign area
for the district.



   (H)   Architectural building extensions such as awnings or canopies,
other than vehicular service canopies, primarily built as shelter for
entrances or for aesthetic purposes, are allowed to display signage.  These
signs are considered as wall signs for the purpose of determination of the
maximum allowable sign area.



   (I)   Vehicular service canopy signs are limited to a business logo
and/or graphic design not to exceed ten percent of each canopy face area or
ten square feet on each canopy face, whichever is smaller.  Service station
canopy signs are restricted to two faces of the canopy and must not be
located above or below the canopy area.



   (J)   Service stations may advertise gasoline prices on reader
boards attached to a permitted free-standing sign or attached to canopy
supports.  If attached to the canopy supports, these signs must be no larger
than 15 square feet in area.  In no case may a free-standing sign be
constructed for the sole purpose of advertising prices.  Service stations
may have gas pump topper signs advertising products for sale on the premises,
not to exceed two square feet per gas pump.



   (K)   No sign except bench signs and billboards, may in its
entirety, separately advertise a product, commodity, service, or contain
other miscellaneous language that is not directly related to the business
name, except as allowed by § 150.06(B)(5)(h).



   (L)   A product identification sign may be integrated into a
permitted free-standing, monument or wall business sign and will be included
as part of the maximum allowable sign area.  Product identification sign
area must not exceed ten percent of the maximum allowable sign area.



   (M)    Buildings, premises or lots are not allowed to have pennants,
pinwheels, or other attention attracting devices, or temporary signs except
in, accordance with § 150.06 of this chapter.



   (N)   One flagpole may be erected for each 100 feet of street
frontage, not to exceed a total of three flagpoles.  Height of the poles
must not exceed the building height regulations, as specified by the zoning
ordinance for the district where the poles are located, and flag length must
not exceed 25% of the pole height, and no more than two flags per pole are
permitted.



   (O)   It is unlawful for a sign permitted by this chapter, by reason
of its location, color intensity, to create hazard to the safe, efficient
movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.  A private sign must  not
contain alarming words which might be construed as traffic controls, such as
“stop,” “caution,” “warning,” and the like, unless such sign is
intended to direct traffic on the premises.



   (P)   A sign must not contain any indecent or offensive picture or
written matter.



   (Q)   State and federal government agencies and their political
subdivisions are exempt from the provisions of the sign ordinance except for
setback requirements.



   (R)   All sign permits for multiple tenant buildings require the
signature of the property owner or the property owner's agent.



('72 Code, § 356:20)  (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord. 1992-694,
passed 5-11-92; Am. Ord. 2000-939, passed 11-13-00; Am. Ord. 2014-1165,
passed 2-3-14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.05  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   The following signs are specifically prohibited in all districts:



   (A)   Motion signs - exempted are temporary search lights and
permanent electronic message center signs which only display time and/or
temperature information or have a message that does not change more
frequently than once every sixty seconds.



   (B)   Flashing signs except electronic motion signs as exempted
above.



   (C)   Roof signs - signs installed above the building facade.



   (D)   Projecting signs.



   (E)   Signs which have more than two sign faces.



   (F)   Signs which are attached to trees, fences, utility poles or
other such permanent supports, not specifically intended as sign structures.



   (G)   Signs painted directly on building walls.  Exempted are
non-commercial non-lettered wall graphics in accordance with § 150.03 of
this chapter.



   (H)   Wall signs are not permitted on any building wall facing an
abutting residential property or properties, unless separated by a city
street or highway right-of-way.



   (I)   Signs affixed to the exterior side of windows, except
addresses and other minor directional information.



   (J)   Billboards in the T.H. 610 Corridor as delineated in the T.H.
610 Corridor Plan.



   (K)   Portable reader board signs unless specifically allowed in
other sections of this code.



('72 Code, § 356:25)  (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord. 1992-694,
passed 5-11-92; Am. Ord. 1994-766, passed 9-12-94; Am. Ord. 1999-900, passed
5-24-99; Am. Ord. 2010-1121, passed 12-6-10; Am. Ord. 2017-1227, passed
12-4-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.06  TEMPORARY SIGNS.



   (A)   Multi-family apartment, commercial, industrial, organization,
and institutional users in all zoning districts.  The following sections
concern temporary signs in all zoning districts.  The signs are regulated
according to the requirements set forth below:



      (1)   Temporary banner advertisement signs.  Temporary
advertisement signs in the form of durable, weather resistant banners, may be
erected with a sign permit, provided:



         (a)   A temporary sign permit is necessary for all signs
identified in this section. 



         (b)   Minimum setbacks:  All temporary  advertisement
signs in the form of banners and feather flags must be set back at least 10
feet from all property lines and may in no case be permitted within the 30
foot clear-view triangle at public or private streets or driveway
intersections.



         (c)   The total area of all temporary signs in the form
of banners must not exceed 200 square feet.



         (d)   Banners are allowed to be displayed on existing
fences, accessory buildings, and principle building facades providing they
meet the setback requirements.



         (e)   In a multi-tenant structure the banner must not
exceed the width of the front of the space to be occupied or 200 square feet,
whichever is less.



          (f)   Businesses possessing a valid and current
temporary sign permit may display for that allotted time period (in addition
to the permitted banner), up to three feather flags for advertising
purposes.  Feather flags must be less than or equal to 15 feet in height,
displayed on the property where the permit holding business is located, may
not impede vehicle or pedestrian traffic, and are not allowed to be displayed
in a public right-of-way or other prohibited areas.



      (2)   Permit required.  Each business concern or organization
is allowed a maximum of three permits in a calendar year, except temporary
non-profit organization events which are allowed an unlimited number of
permits.  Each permit for a banner will be for 30 consecutive days.  Permit
fee is set by the City Council.  No temporary sign permit will be issued to
any business, institution, or organization found guilty of violating the
provisions of the temporary sign code more than once in a calendar year for
the period of one year from the second occurrence.



         (a)   Exception - grand opening banner.  A business
must receive a one-time permit at no cost to place a "grand opening" banner
for 60 consecutive days from the opening date.  The banner must follow size
and setbacks described in the section above.  This permit will not count
towards the three allotted annual permits. 



      (3)   Window signs.  Window sign area must not exceed 25% of
the total area of the window(s) located on the wall face in which it is
displayed.  No permit is required for signs located on the inside of windows
or for interior store displays.



      (4)   Flashing or rotating signs prohibited.  Flashing or
rotating signs or lights are not permitted on temporary signs.  However,
search lights may be used on site for four days for the calendar year.



      (5)   Itinerant produce sales signs.  Vendors who have
received permits to operate at the Brooklyn Park Farmers' Market, are allowed
one sign without a permit.  That sign must be no larger than 16 square feet
in size and be located no more than five feet of the merchant's stand, table,
vehicle, or the like,  and can only be displayed the day and time of the
sale. This sign limitation does not include small price signs, less than
one-half square foot in size, located on or near the produce. The signs must
be removed from the site at the end of each sale day.



      (6)   Pedestrian signs.  Each business is allowed one
pedestrian sign not to exceed 10 square feet on each of two sides displayed
outside only during regular business hours.  Pedestrian signs must be
located within 20 feet of a customer entrance to the business, but must not
block pedestrian walkways.  Pedestrian signs must be located on the same
parcel as the business and must not be located within the public right-of-way.



   (B)   All zoning districts.  The following sections concern
temporary campaign signs, temporary construction signs, temporary real estate
signs, temporary non-profit organization event signs, and temporary
residential garage and/or rummage sale signs in all zoning districts, and the
signs are regulated according to the requirements set forth below:



      (1)   Temporary campaign signs.  Temporary campaign signs
posted by a candidate for public office or by a person or group promoting a
political issue or a political candidate may be erected subject to the
following:



         (a)   Signs must not exceed sizes authorized by state
statute for state general elections.



         (b)   Pursuant to M.S. § 211B.045, campaign signs may
be posted 46 days before the state primary in a state general election year
until ten days following the state general election.



         (c)   Minimum setbacks:  There is no setback
requirement; however, these signs must not be erected on the public
right-of-way, on public property or in the public street intersection 30 foot
clear-view triangle.



         (d)   Maximum height of signs:  No temporary campaign
sign may exceed 12 feet above grade.



      (2)   Temporary construction sign.  One temporary
identification sign may be installed upon a construction site denoting the
names of involved parties provided:



         (a)   Sign area must not exceed 100 square feet.



         (b)   Sign must be removed within two years after
issuance of first building permit or upon issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, whichever is sooner.



         (c)   Minimum setbacks:  These signs must comply with
setback requirements of subdivision (B)(1)(c) of this section.  Signs must
be erected only on the property where work is being done.



         (d)   Maximum height of signs:  No temporary
construction sign may exceed 12 feet above grade.



      (3)   Temporary real estate signs.



         (a)   Free-standing sign.  A temporary free-standing
sign for the purpose of selling or leasing individual lots, parcels, homes or
buildings may be erected provided:



            1.   Sign area must not exceed six square feet for
residential property and 20 square feet for non-residential property.



            2.   Sign must be removed within seven days
following the closing of a sale or lease of the property.



            3.   Minimum setbacks:  There is no setback
requirement; however, these signs must not be erected on the public
right-of-way nor in the public street intersection 30 foot clear- view
triangle.  Sign must be erected only on the property being sold or leased.



            4.   Maximum height of signs:  No temporary
freestanding real estate sign may exceed eight feet above grade.



            5.   Banners, streamers, pennants, balloons,
directional signs, and the like, may be erected for two 21-day periods per
year to coincide with the spring “Preview of Homes” and the fall
“Parade of Homes.”



            6.   Temporary open house and/or directional
signs:  Temporary open house and/or directional signs may be placed in
public view no earlier than 9:00 a.m. on the actual day of the open house and
must be removed no later than 9:00 p.m. on the same day.  Only one sign per
intersection is allowed for each open house.  Placement of open house
directional signs should not block pedestrian or bicycle pathways or
sidewalks.  Signs must not be placed within the 30 foot clear view triangle
at public street intersections. Open house directional signs may not be
attached to federal, state, county or city sign posts.  The signs may not be
placed on center medians or street islands or within four feet of the roadway
surface.



         (b)   Area identification sign.  A temporary area
identification sign for the sale or lease of residential projects of two or
more dwelling units or lots, and for non-residential projects, may be erected
provided:



            1.   Sign area must not exceed 100 square feet.



            2.   Such sign must be removed when the project is
80% sold or leased.



            3.   Minimum setbacks:  All temporary real estate
area identification signs must be set back at least 25 feet from all property
lines.  Sign must be erected only on the property being sold or leased.



            4.   Maximum height of sign:  No temporary real
estate area identification sign may exceed eight feet above grade.



      (4)   Temporary residential garage and/or rummage sale signs.



         (a)   Sign area must not exceed four square feet.



         (b)   Signs must be erected for no longer than four days
and must be removed by the owner immediately following this time.  Signs
which remain in place for more than four days are deemed litter.  The
beginning and end date of sale, and address of the sale must be prominently
displayed on every sign erected.



         (c)   Minimum setbacks:  There is no setback
requirement; however, these signs must not be erected in the public
right-of-way, on public property, or in the public street intersection 30
foot clear-view triangle.  Signs may be erected on private properties other
than the property where the sale is conducted.



         (d)   Maximum height of signs:  No temporary
residential garage and/or rummage sale sign may exceed six feet above grade.



      (5)   Temporary non-profit organization event signs.



         (a)   Signs must not exceed eight square feet per sign
face.



         (b)   An unlimited number of signs are allowed per
event, but must be located as follows:



            1.   No more than one sign per event may be
located on a single parcel, and



            2.   No more than four signs per event may be
located in a single street intersection.



         (c)   A map or list of addresses designating the
specific sites of each sign must be kept by the applicant.



         (d)   Signs must not be posted in excess of 15 days
prior to the event and must be removed no later than two days following the
final date of the event.  The promoting organization, location and date(s)
of the event must be prominently placed on each sign.



         (e)   Minimum setbacks:  There is no setback
requirement; however, these signs must not be erected on the public
right-of-way, on public property, or in the public street intersection 30
foot clear-view triangle.



         (f)   Maximum height of signs:  A temporary non-profit
organizational event sign must not exceed six feet in height above grade.



         (g)   A portable reader board must not be used off the
premises from which the event is being held nor may this type of advertising
precede or exceed the actual dates of the event.  A portable reader board
must not be used on public property.  An on-site reader board must not
exceed 32 square feet.  These signs must be set back 15 feet from all
property lines but not within the 30 foot clear-view triangle of entrances or
public street intersections.



         (h)   A non-profit organization may display messages
directly related to their organization on the reader board of any lawful sign
with the permission of the sign owner.



      (6)   Temporary roadside agricultural products advertisement
signs.  Temporary advertisement signs may be erected with a sign permit,
provided:



         (a)   Signs advertise agricultural products grown on the
property in compliance with this chapter of the City Code.



         (b)   Maximum size: Signs may not exceed 16 square feet
in area per sign face.  No more than three signs are allowed, per property,
and only two of which may be permitted off the site where the agricultural
products is grown.  For all off-site signs, written permission from the
property owner of the proposed sign location shall be submitted with the sign
application.



         (c)   Signs are allowed to be posted for a period of
time not to exceed three months.  The specific time period requested must be
specified in the permit application.



         (d)   Minimum setbacks:  There is no setback
requirement; however, these signs may not be erected on the public
right-of-way, on public property, or in the clear view triangle as defined in
this chapter of the City Code.



         (e)   Maximum height of signs: No temporary roadside
agricultural products advertisement sign may exceed eight feet in height
above grade.



('72 Code, § 356.35)  (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord.
1990-657(A), passed 8-27-90; Am. Ord. 1992-694, passed 5-11-92; Am. Ord.
1997-848, passed 6-9-97; Am. Ord. 2000-933, passed 10-9-00; Am. Ord.
2000-935, passed 11-13-00; Am. Ord. 2004-1026, passed 12-13-04; Am. Ord.
2012-1147, passed 8-20-12; Am. Ord. 2012-1152, passed 10-22-12; Am. Ord.
2014-1165, passed 2-3-14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.07  NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.



   (A)   Any lawfully constructed non-conforming or any legal sign
existing upon the effective date of this chapter may be maintained and
continued at the size and in the manner of operation existing upon such date
except as hereinafter specified.



   (B)   Upon adoption of this chapter, a non-conforming sign must not
be:



      (1)   Changed to another non-conforming sign.



      (2)   Structurally altered or moved except to bring such
nonconforming sign into conformance with this chapter.



      (3)   Expanded or enlarged.



      (4)   Repaired or otherwise rehabilitated after damage or
deterioration of more than 50%, except to bring into conformance with this
chapter.



   (C)   Notwithstanding the foregoing divisions of this section, all
signs which are made non-conforming by this sign ordinance, must be brought
into conformance, on a sign-by-sign basis, at the time that a sign face or
copy is changed or altered except for routine maintenance as required by this
chapter.  Billboard signs must be brought into conformance at the time that
the main structure is removed and must follow the provisions of § 150.29(F).



   (D)   Temporary signs as provided in § 150.06 are not entitled to
non-conforming status.  Such signs must be brought into compliance with §
150.06 as directed by the sign enforcement office, or it may be summarily
removed from display by the enforcement officer.



('72 Code, § 356:40)  (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord. 1992-694,
passed  5-11-92)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.08  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Any request for a variance to the sign ordinance must follow
the same procedure as outlined in the zoning code.



   (B)   (1)   In considering all variance requests and in taking
subsequent action, the Planning Commission and the City Council must make a
finding showing that all of the following conditions exist:



         (a)   There are special conditions or circumstances
affecting the property such that the strict application of the provisions of
this ordinance would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the
applicant's land.



         (b)   The variance is necessary for the preservation and
enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner.



         (c)   The granting of the variance will not be
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the other property in the
area in which the property is situated and will not have an adverse effect
upon traffic or traffic safety.



      (2)   In making an application for a variance, the petitioner
must state in writing why the petitioner believes the above conditions
exist.  Upon granting a variance, the Council may attach those conditions it
deems desirable or necessary to protect the public interest.



('72 Code, § 356.45)  (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88)



§ 150.09  SIGN APPLICATION.



   (A)   Permits required.  Except as specifically provided by this
chapter, it is unlawful for any person to erect, alter, or relocate within
the city any sign, without first obtaining a permit(s) from the Sign
Ordinance Administrator and making payment of the fee required.  Application
for permits must be made upon application forms provided by the City of
Brooklyn Park and must be accompanied by:



      (1)   A site plan drawn to scale based on and accompanied by a
certificate of survey, or on a certificate of survey, showing the relation of
the sign to the nearest buildings, private and public streets, right-of-ways
and property lines.



      (2)   Sign plans, specifications and methods of construction.



      (3)   A copy of structural calculations and details showing
the structure is designed for live and dead loads including wind velocity in
the amount required by all ordinances of the city.  Electrical permits will
be required by the State Board of Electricity.



   (B)   Permit issued if application in order.  It is the duty of the
Sign Ordinance Administrator, upon the filing of the application for a
permit, to examine such plans and specifications and other data, and the
premises upon which the sign is proposed to be erected, and if it appears
that the proposed structure is in compliance with all other laws and
ordinances of Brooklyn Park, the Administrator must then issue the permit. 
If the work authorized under a permit has not been completed within 90 days
after the date of issuance, the permit will become null and void.



   (C)   Permit fees.  Every applicant, before being granted a permit
hereunder, must pay to the city the permit fee for each sign regulated by
this code in an amount as established by the fee resolution, set forth in the
Appendix to this code.



   (D)   Permit revocable at any time.  All rights and privileges
acquired by obtaining a permit under the provisions of this chapter or any
amendment thereto are mere licenses, revocable for cause at any time by the
Council, and all such permits must contain this provision.



('72 Code, § 356.50)  (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88)



§ 150.10  BOND AND LICENSE.



   (A)   It is unlawful to engage in the business of erecting signs,
and no person is entitled to a permit to erect a sign under this chapter
unless licensed to do so by the City of Brooklyn Park, except as provided in
division (B) of this section.  Such license may be granted on written
application accompanied by an annual license fee in the amount set by the
Council, to the Sign Ordinance Administrator in such form as the Sign
Administrator prescribes.  The license may be terminated by the Council at
any time for cause.  No license will take effect until the licensee files
with the city a bond with corporate surety in a form approved by the City
Attorney in the penal sum of $2,000, conditioned that the licensee will pay
all permit fees required under this chapter, pay any fines imposed upon the
licensee for violation thereof, will conform to all of the provisions of this
chapter, and will indemnify and hold the city, its officers and agents
harmless from any damage or claim resulting from or related to the erection
or maintenance of any sign in the city by the licenses.



   (B)   Bonding and licensing requirements are not required of a
property owner(s) erecting signs on their own property.  All other
provisions of this chapter apply.



('72 Code, § 356.55)  (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord. 1992-694,
passed  5-11-92)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.11  CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   The design and construction standards for signs and sign structures as
set forth in Chapter 4 of the 1997 Edition of the Uniform Sign Code are
adopted by reference, a copy of which is on file and on record with the City
Clerk.



('72 Code, § 356.60)  (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 150.12  PERMIT AND FEE EXEMPTIONS.



   The exemptions permitted by this section apply only to the requirement
of a permit and/or fee, and are not construed as relieving the installer of
the sign, or the owner of the property upon which the sign is located, from
conforming with the other provisions of this chapter:



   (A)   Temporary signs erected by non-profit organizations must
obtain a permit but are exempted from any fee.



   (B)   No permit or fee is required for the following:



      (1)   Temporary signs displayed in accordance with §
150.06(A)(2), (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4) and (B)(5).



      (2)   Integral signs.



      (3)   Residential identification (name plate) signs.



      (4)   Directional signs.



      (5)   Signs which are located completely on the interior of a
building and not visible from the outside of the building.



('72 Code, § 356.65)  (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord. 1992-694,
passed 5-11-92)



§ 150.13  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Unsafe, non-maintained and unlawful signs.



      (1)   If the Sign Ordinance Administrator finds that any
permanent sign regulated herein is unsafe or insecure, or adversely affects
the health safety and general welfare of the public, or has been constructed
or erected or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this
chapter; the administrator must give written notice by mail to the permittee
thereof.



      (2)   If the permittee fails to remove or alter the structure
so as to comply with the standards herein set forth within 14 days after the
mailing notice, the sign or other advertising structure may be removed or
altered at the expense of the permittee or owner of the property upon which
it is located or legal action may be taken to force compliance with this
chapter.  The Sign ordinance Administrator must refuse to approve and the
City of Brooklyn Park must refuse to issue a permit to any permittee or owner
who refuses to pay costs so assessed.



      (3)   The Sign Ordinance Administrator may cause any sign or
other advertising structure which is a safety hazard to persons to be removed
summarily and without notice.  The Sign Ordinance Administrator may cause
any temporary sign erected not in conformance with the sign ordinance to be
removed summarily and without notice or legal action may be taken to force
compliance with this chapter.



   (B)   Painting required.  The owner of any sign as defined and
regulated by this chapter is required to have the sign and sign structure
properly painted upon order of the Sign Ordinance Administrator.  It is the
intent of this provision that the sign appearance does not create a blighting
influence upon the neighborhood where the sign is located.



   (C)   Wood supports to be decay resistive.  All posts, anchors and
bracing of wood must be decay resistive or approved wood preventative treated
to protect them from physical or aesthetic deterioration.



   (D)   Premises to be kept free of weeds, and the like.  All the
premises surrounding signs must be maintained by the owner thereof in a
clean, sanitary and inoffensive manner and free and clear of all obnoxious
substances, rubbish and weeds.



('72 Code, § 356.70)  (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord. 1992-694,
passed 5-11-92; Am. Ord. 1997-848, passed 6-9-97)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.14  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   If the Sign Ordinance Administrator finds any permanent sign
in violation of the terms of this chapter, a written notice will be issued to
the owner, and/or possessor (tenant in possession, operator or manager of the
premises on which the sign is located), specifying the violation and allowing
the time period specified in § 150.13(A) above in which to correct or remove
the violation.  After the expiration of the time period specified by written
notice, if the violation is not corrected or discontinued, the owner and/or
possessor of the property will be guilty of a misdemeanor, and each day of
violation after the initial time period as specified by written notice
constitutes a separate offense.



   (B)   It is unlawful to display any temporary sign in violation of
the terms of this chapter.  The owner, and or possessor (tenant in
possession, operator, or manager of the premises on which the sign is
located) of the property is guilty of a misdemeanor and each day of the
violation constitutes a separate offense.



('72 Code, § 356.75)  (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord. 1997-848,
passed 6-9-97)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.15  RIGHT OF APPEAL.



   When it is alleged by any person to whom a compliance order is directed
that such compliance order is based upon erroneous interpretation of this
chapter, or upon a misstatement or mistake of fact, the person may appeal the
compliance order to a Board of Appeals and Adjustments as established in the
zoning code portion of the city code.  The Board as an advisory body must
forward their recommendation to the City Council.  Such appeals must be in
writing, must specify the grounds for the appeal, must be accompanied by a
filing fee as designated by the City Council in cash or cashier's check, and
must be filed with the compliance official within five business days after
service of the compliance order.  The filing of an appeal stays all
proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed unless such a stay would
cause imminent peril to life, health or property.



('72 Code, § 356.76)  (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord. 1992-694,
passed 5-11-92)



DISTRICT REGULATIONS



§ 150.25  R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-2B, R-3, R-3A, R-4 AND R-4A RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS AND AREAS GUIDED FOR LOW- AND MEDIUM-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL IN THE
PLANNED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT AND PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.



   The following provisions concern signs in the R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-2B,
R-3, R-3A, R-4 and R-4A Residential Districts and area guided for low- and
medium-density residential in the Planned Community Development District and
Planned Unit Development District, and said signs are regulated according to
the requirements set forth below:



   (A)   Identification signs (name plate).  One free-standing or wall
sign/name plate per dwelling unit, not greater than two square feet in area,
indicating the name and/or address of the occupant.  A sign must not be
constructed so as to have more than two surfaces.



   (B)   Institutional signs.  Institutional uses which do not meet
the criteria stated in § 150.03 of this chapter for area identification
signs, are allowed only one monument sign per street frontage.  Such sign
must not exceed 60 square feet in area.



   (C)   Residential development signs.  These signs shall be reviewed
and approved as part of a preliminary plat, site plan review, conditional use
permit, or development plan application.  Sign area shall be determined by
the text copy area only and be limited to 60 square feet per structure face. 



   (D)   Home occupation signs.  One non-illuminated sign with a
maximum square footage of two feet for each dwelling unit wherein a permitted
home occupation exists.



   (E)   Minimum setbacks.  A sign must not be erected in the public
right-of-way.  For divisions (A) and (B) of this section, signs must be set
back at least 15 feet from front property lines, at least ten feet from side
and rear property lines and at least 15 feet from the property lines of
corner lots. For division (C) signs, no setback is required. For division (D)
of this section, signs must be set back at least 20 feet from front property
lines. All signs must allow for an unobstructed view of traffic at
intersections of streets or driveways.



   (F)   Maximum height of signs.  For signs described in divisions
(A) and (D) of this section, no sign may exceed six feet above grade.  For
signs described in divisions (B) and (C) of this section, no sign may exceed
ten feet above grade.



   (G)   Residential development signs. Signs must be constructed of
durable materials. Residential development signs may be placed in median
islands, roundabouts, or cul-de-sac islands provided that the island is a
separate platted lot privately owned and maintained by a homeowners
association, management company, or the like, and approved through the
preliminary plat, site plan review, or conditional use permit application.



('72 Code, § 356.30(1))  (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord.
1992-694, passed 5-11-92; Am. Ord. 2000-935, passed 11-13-00; Am. Ord.
2003-1002, passed 8-25-03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.26  R-5, R-6 AND R-7 MULTIPLE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS AND AREAS GUIDED
FOR HIGH-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL IN THE PLANNED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
AND PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.



   The following sections concern signs in the R-5, R-6, and R-7 Multiple
Residential Districts and areas guided for high-density residential
development in the Planned Community Development District and Planned Unit
Development District, and said signs are regulated according to the
requirements set forth below:



   (A)   Identification signs (name plate).  One wall sign/name plate
per institution or multiple residential building, not to exceed six square
feet in area, or one wall sign/name plate per dwelling unit where separate
entrances occur, not to exceed two square feet in area.



   (B)   Institutional signs.  Institutional uses which do not meet
the criteria stated in § 150.03 of this chapter for area identification
signs, are allowed only one monument sign per street frontage, not to exceed
60 square feet in area.



   (C)   Residential development signs.  These signs shall be reviewed
and approved as part of a preliminary plat, site plan review, conditional use
permit, or development plan application.  Sign area shall be determined by
the text copy area only and be limited to 60 square feet per structure face. 



   (D)   Minimum setbacks.  For division (B) of this section, monument
signs must be set back at least 15 feet from front property lines and at
least ten feet from side and rear property lines.  On corner lots, all
monument signs must be set back at least 15 feet from front and side corner
property lines.  All signs must be set back a minimum of three feet from
driveways to edge of sign, and a 30 foot clear-view triangle must be
maintained at public street intersections.  All signs must allow for an
unobstructed view of traffic at intersections of streets or driveways.



   (E)   Maximum height of signs.  For division (B) of this section,
no sign may exceed eight feet above grade.  For division (C) of this
section, no sign may exceed ten feet above grade.



   (F)   Residential development signs.  Signs must be constructed of
durable materials.  Residential development signs may be placed in median
islands, roundabouts, or cul-de-sac islands provided that the island is a
separate platted lot privately owned and maintained by a homeowners
association, management company, or the like, and approved through the
preliminary plat, site plan review, or conditional use permit application.



('72 Code, § 356.30(2))  (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord.
1992-69, passed 5-11-92; Am. Ord. 2003-1002, passed 8-25-03)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 150.27  B-1 OFFICE PARK DISTRICT.



   The following sections concern signs in the B-1 Office Park District,
and said signs are regulated according to the requirements set forth below:



   (A)   In B-1 Districts, a business property may erect only signs
described in subdivisions (1) and (3) below, or in subdivisions (1) and (4)
below, or in subdivision (2) and (3) below, or in subdivisions (2) and (4)
below, or in subdivision (5) unless modified by a planned unit development.



      (1)   Free-standing or monument sign.  One free-standing
sign, not to exceed 75 square feet in area, or one monument sign not to
exceed 120 square feet.



      (2)   Area identification sign.  One free-standing or
monument sign per development, as described by § 150.03 of this chapter not
to exceed 100 square feet in area.



      (3)   Wall signs.  One and two story, single or multiple
tenant buildings:  Signs attached to two walls, immediately adjacent to a
public street or the parking lot which serves customers of the site, not to
exceed ten percent of the building facade to which the signs are attached.



      (4)   Wall signs.  Multiple story buildings (three or more
stories).



         (a)   Identification signs:  One identification sign
per building facade identifying the name and/or address of the building, not
to exceed ten percent in area of the building facade to which it is attached
or 300 square feet, whichever is less.  The measured area is that building
facade above the second story.



         (b)   In addition to the identification signs described
above in subdivision (a), wall signs may be attached to only one wall not to
exceed ten percent of the building facade to which it is attached and must be
located on the first story.  The measured area is that building facade of
the first and second story.



      (5)   Three wall signs.  Wall signs are allowed on up to
three walls only when immediately adjacent to a public street or the parking
lot that serves customers of the site, subject to City Manager approval. 
The wall signs on each wall must individually conform to the area limitations
defined in subdivisions (3) or (4) of this division.



   (B)   Institutional signs.  Institutional uses which do not meet
the criteria stated in § 150.03 of this chapter for area identification
signs, are allowed only one monument sign with reader board per street
frontage.  The sign and reader board must not exceed 60 square feet in area.



   (C)   Minimum setbacks.  Free-standing signs must be set back at
least 25 feet from the front property line and at least ten feet from side
and rear property lines; monument signs must be set back at least 15 feet
from the front property line and at least ten feet from side and rear
property lines.  On corner lots, all monument signs must be set back at
least 15 feet from front and side corner property lines, and all
free-standing signs must be set back at least 25 feet from all front and side
corner property lines.  All signs must be set back a minimum of three feet
from driveways to edge of sign, and a 30 foot clear-view triangle must be
maintained at public street intersections.



   (D)   Maximum height of signs.  Signs described in divisions
(A)(1), (A)(2) and (B) of this section may not exceed 15 feet above grade for
monument signs and 25 feet above grade for free-standing signs.



   (E)   Minimum height of signs.  Free-standing signs must have a
minimum height of seven feet from grade to the bottom of sign.



('72 Code, § 356.30(3))  (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord.
1992-694, passed 5-11-92; Am. Ord. 2000-935, passed 11-13-00; Am. Ord.
2003-1002, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 2014-1186, passed 12-15-14)  Penalty,
see § 10.99



§ 150.28  B-2 NEIGHBORHOOD RETAIL BUSINESS DISTRICT, B-3 GENERAL BUSINESS
DISTRICT, AND B-4 VEHICLE SALES AND SHOWROOM DISTRICT.



   The following sections concern signs in the B-2 Neighborhood Retail
Business District and in the B-3 General Business District, and said signs
are regulated according to the requirements set forth below:



   (A)   In B-2 and B-3 Districts, a business property may erect only
signs described in subdivisions (1) and (3) below, or in subdivisions (1) and
(4) below, or in subdivisions (2) and (3) below, or in subdivisions (2) and
(4) below, or (5) below, unless modified by a planned unit development.



      (1)   Free-standing or monument sign.  One free-standing sign
not to exceed 100 square feet in area, or one monument sign not to exceed 120
square feet in area.



      (2)   Area identification sign.  One free-standing or
monument per development, as described by § 150.03 of this chapter not to
exceed 320 square feet in area.



      (3)   Wall signs.  One and two story, single or multiple
tenant buildings:  Signs attached to two walls immediately adjacent to a
public street or the parking lot which serves customers of the site, not to
exceed ten percent of the building facade to which the signs are attached.



      (4)   Wall signs.  Multiple story buildings (three or more
stories):



         (a)   Identification signs:  One identification sign
per building facade identifying the name and/or address of the building, not
to exceed ten percent in area of the building facade to which it is attached
or 300 square feet, whichever is less.  The measured area is that building
facade above the second story.



         (b)   In addition to the identification signs described
above in subdivision (a), wall signs must be attached to only one wall, not
to exceed ten percent of the building facade to which the signs are attached
and must be located on the first story.  The measured area is that building
facade of the first and second story.



      (5)   Three wall signs.  Wall signs are allowed on up to
three walls only when immediately adjacent to a public street or the parking
lot that serves customers of the site, subject to City Manager approval. 
The wall signs on each wall must individually conform to the area limitations
defined in subdivisions (3) or (4) of this division.



   (B)   Institutional signs.  Institutional uses which do not meet
the criteria stated in § 150.03 of this chapter for area identification
signs are allowed only one monument sign with reader board per street
frontage.  The sign and reader board must not exceed 60 square feet in area.



   (C)   Minimum setbacks.  Free-standing signs must be set back at
least 25 feet from the front property line and at least ten feet from side
and rear property lines; monument signs must be set back at least 15 feet
from the front property line and at least ten feet from side and rear
property lines.  On corner lots, all monument signs must be set back at
least 15 feet from front and side corner property lines, and all
free-standing signs must be set back at least 25 feet from all front and side
corner property lines.  All signs must be set back a minimum of three feet
from driveways to edge of sign, and a 30 foot clear-view triangle must be
maintained at public street intersections.



   (D)   Maximum height of signs.  Signs described in division (A)(1),
(A)(2) and (B) of this section may not exceed 15 feet above grade for
monument signs and 25 feet above grade for free-standing signs.



   (E)   Minimum height of signs.  Free-standing signs must have a
minimum height of seven feet from grade to the bottom of sign.



('72 Code, § 356.30(4))  (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord.
1992-694, passed 5-11-92; Am. Ord. 2000-935, passed 11-13-00; Am. Ord.
2003-1002, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 2014-1186, passed 12-15-14)  Penalty,
see § 10.99



§ 150.29  BP BUSINESS PARK AND I GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.



   The following sections concern signs in the BP Business Park District
and I General Industrial District, and said signs are regulated according to
the requirements set forth below:



   (A)   In BP and I Districts, a business property may erect only
signs described in subdivisions (1) and (3) below, or in subdivisions (1) and
(4) below, or in subdivisions (2) and (3) below, or in subdivisions (2) and
(4) below, or subdivision (5) below unless modified by a planned unit
development.



      (1)   Free-standing or monument sign.  One free-standing
sign, not to exceed 100 square feet in area, or one monument sign not to
exceed 120 square feet.



      (2)   Area identification sign.  One free-standing or
monument sign per development, as described by § 150.03 of this chapter not
to exceed 220 square feet in area.



      (3)   Wall signs.  One and two story buildings, single or
multiple tenant buildings:  Signs attached to two walls, not to exceed ten
percent of the building facades to which the signs are attached.



      (4)   Wall signs.  Multiple story buildings (three or more
stories).



         (a)   Identification signs:  One identification sign
per building facade identifying the name and/or address of the building, not
to exceed ten percent in area of the building facade to which it is attached
or 300 square feet, whichever is less.  The measured area is that building
facade above the second story.



         (b)   In addition to the identification signs described
above in subdivision (a), wall signs must be attached to only one wall not to
exceed ten percent of the building facade to which it is attached and must be
located on the first story.  The measured area is that building facade of
the first and second story.



      (5)   Three wall signs.  Wall signs are allowed on only three
walls only when immediately adjacent to a public street or the parking lot
that serves customers of the site, subject to City Manager approval.  The
wall signs on each wall must individually conform to the area limitations
defined in subdivisions (3) or (4) of this section.



   (B)   Institutional signs.  Institutional uses which do not meet
the criteria stated in § 150.03 of this chapter for area identification
signs are allowed only one monument sign and/or reader board per street
frontage.  The sign and reader board must not exceed 60 square feet in area.



   (C)   Minimum setbacks.  For subdivisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this
section, free-standing signs must be set back 25 feet from the front property
line and ten feet from side and rear property lines; monument signs must be
set back at least 15 feet from the front property lines and ten feet from
side and rear property lines.  For division (B) of this section, signs must
be set back at least 15 feet from the front property line and at least ten
feet from side and rear property lines.  On corner lots, all free-standing
signs must be set back at least 30 feet from all property lines, and all
monument signs must be set back at least 15 feet from all property lines. 
All signs must be set back a minimum of three feet from driveways to edge of
sign, and a 30 foot clear-view triangle must be maintained at public street
intersections.



   (D)   Maximum height of signs.  For signs described in subdivisions
(A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section, signs may not exceed 15 feet above grade
for monument signs and 25 feet above grade for free-standing signs.  For
signs described in division (B) of this section, no sign may exceed 15 feet
above grade.



   (E)   Minimum height of signs.  Free-standing signs must have a
minimum height of seven feet from grade to the bottom of sign.



   (F)   Billboard signs.  Billboard signs are allowed in the I
District by conditional use permit as provided by the city zoning
ordinance.  A billboard sign must be the principal use on the lot on which
it is located.  The lot must meet the minimum lot requirements for the I
District in accordance with the zoning code.  A  billboard must not be
erected within 300 feet of any Residential District.  A billboard must not
be located within a 1,320 foot radius of an existing or approved billboard. 
A billboard must not be located in the T.H. 610 Corridor or Highway Overlay
area as delineated in the T.H. 610 Corridor Plan and the zoning code.



      (1)   Sign area.  Billboard signs must not exceed one square
foot of sign area for each lineal foot of street frontage nor may sign area
exceed 300 square feet on any side.  On corner lots or lots with more than
one street frontage, only one street frontage will be considered in
determining the sign area.  Signs must have no more than two sides.



      (2)   Minimum setbacks.  Billboard signs must be set back at
least 50 feet from front and rear property lines and at least 25 feet from
side property lines.



      (3)   Maximum height of signs.  Billboard signs may not
exceed 25 feet above grade.



      (4)   Minimum height of signs.  Billboard signs must have a
minimum height of 12 feet from grade to the bottom of the sign.



      (5)   Sign illumination.  Billboard sign illumination must
meet the requirements of § 150.03 of this chapter.



('72 Code, § 356.30(5))  (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord.
1992-694, passed 5-11-92; Am. Ord. 1994-766, passed 9-12-94; Am. Ord.
1999-914, passed 11- -99; Am. Ord. 2000-935, passed 11-13-00; Am. Ord.
2010-1117, passed 9-7-10;. Am. Ord. 2014-1186, passed 12-15-14)  Penalty,
see § 10.99



§ 150.30  PCDD PLANNED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT AND PUD PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.



   The following sections concern signs in the PCDD Planned Community
Development District, and the PUD Planned Unit Development District, and said
signs are regulated according to the requirements set forth below:



   (A)   In the PCDD or PUD Districts, a property used for
single-family, two-family, residential townhouse or apartment use may erect
only signs as allowed by § 150.25 and § 150.26 of this chapter, as
established for Residential Districts.



   (B)   In PCDD and PUD Districts, a property used for other than
single-family, two-family, residential townhouse or apartment use may erect
only signs described in subdivisions (1) and (3) below, or in subdivisions
(1) and (4) below, or in subdivisions (2) and (3) below, or in subdivisions
(2) and (4) below, or in subdivision (5) below unless modified by a General
Plan of Development or a planned unit development.



      (1)   Monument sign.  One monument sign, not to exceed 120
square feet in area.



      (2)   Area identification sign.  One free-standing or
monument sign per development, as described by § 150.03 of this chapter not
to exceed 220 square feet in area.



      (3)   Wall signs.  One and two story, single or multiple
tenant buildings:  Signs attached to two walls immediately adjacent to a
public street or the parking lot which serves customers of the site, not to
exceed ten percent of the building facade to which the signs are attached.



      (4)   Wall signs.  Multiple story buildings (three or more
stories):



         (a)   Identification signs:  One identification sign
per building facade identifying the name and/or address of the building, not
to exceed ten percent in area of the building facade to which it is attached
or 300 square feet, whichever is less.  The measured area is that building
facade above the second story.



         (b)   In addition to the identification signs described
above in subdivision (a), wall signs may be attached to only one wall not to
exceed ten percent of the building facade to which the signs are attached and
must be located on the first story.  The measured area is that building
facade of the first and second story.



      (5)   Three wall signs.  Wall signs are allowed on up to
three walls only when immediately adjacent to a public street or the parking
lot that serves customers of the site, subject to City Manager approval. 
The wall signs on each wall must individually conform to the area limitations
defined in subdivisions (3) or (4) of this division.



   (C)   Institutional signs.  Institutional uses which do not meet
the criteria stated in § 150.03 of this chapter for area identification
signs are allowed only one monument sign and/or reader board per street
frontage.  The sign and reader board must not exceed 60 square feet in area.



   (D)   Minimum setbacks.



      (1)   For subdivision (B)(1) of this section, monument signs
must be set back at least 15 feet from the front property line and at least
ten feet from side and rear property lines.  For subdivision (B)(2) of this
section, free-standing signs must be set back at least 30 feet from all
property lines, and monument signs must be set back at least 15 feet from all
property lines.  For division (C) of this section, signs must be set back at
least 15 feet from front property line and at least ten feet from side and
rear property lines.



      (2)   On corner lots, all free-standing signs must be set back
at least 30 feet from all property lines, and all monument signs must be set
back at least 15 feet from all property lines.  All signs must be set back a
minimum of three feet from driveways to edge of sign, and a 30 foot
clear-view triangle must be maintained at public street intersections.



   (E)   Maximum height of signs.  For signs described in subdivision
(B)(1) of this section, no sign may exceed 15 feet above grade.  For signs
described in subdivision (B)(2) of this section, no free-standing sign may
exceed 25 feet above grade and no monument sign may exceed 15 feet above
grade.  For signs described in division (C) of this section, no sign may
exceed 15 feet above grade.



   (F)   Minimum height of signs.  Free-standing signs must have a
minimum height of seven feet from grade to the bottom of sign.



('72 Code, § 356.30(6))  (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord.
1992-694, passed 5-11-92; Am. Ord. 2000-935, passed 11-13-00; Am. Ord.
2003-1002, passed 8-25-03; Am. Ord. 2014-1186, passed 12-15-14)  Penalty,
see § 10.99



§ 150.31  PI PUBLIC INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT.



   The following sections concern signs in the PI Public Institutional
District, and said signs are regulated according to the requirements set
forth below:



   (A)   In PI Districts, a property may erect only signs described in
subdivisions (1) and (3) below, or in subdivisions (1) and (4) below, or in
subdivisions (2) and (3) below, or in subdivisions (2) and (4) below, or
subdivision (5) below unless modified by a conditional use permit.



      (1)   Free-standing or monument sign.  One freestanding sign,
not to exceed 50 square feet in area, or one monument sign not to exceed 120
square feet.



      (2)   Area identification sign.  One free-standing sign or
monument sign per development, as described by § 150.03 of this chapter not
to exceed 320 square feet in area.



      (3)   Wall signs.  One and two story, single or multiple
tenant buildings:  Signs attached to one wall not to exceed ten percent of
the building facade to which the signs are attached.



      (4)   Wall signs.  Multiple story buildings (three or more
stories):



         (a)   Identification signs:  One identification sign
per building facade identifying the name and/or address of the building, not
to exceed ten percent in area of the building facade to which it is attached
or 300 square feet, whichever is less.  The measured area is that building
facade above the second story.



         (b)   In addition to the identification signs described
above in subdivision (a), wall signs may be attached to only one wall, not to
exceed ten percent of the building facade to which the signs are attached and
must be located on the first story.  The measured area is that building
facade of the first and second story.



      (5)   Two wall signs.  Wall signs are allowed on only two
walls.  The wall signs on each wall must individually conform to the area
limitations, defined in subdivisions (3) or (4) of this division.



   (B)   Minimum setbacks.  For subdivisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this
section, all signs must be set back at least 15 feet from the front property
line and at least ten feet from side and rear property lines.  On corner
lots, all signs must be set back at least 15 feet from all property lines. 
All signs must be set back a minimum of three feet from driveways to edge of
sign, and a 30 foot clear-view triangle must be maintained at public street
intersections.



   (C)   Maximum height of signs.  For signs described in subdivision
(A)(1) of this section, no sign may exceed 20 feet above grade.  For signs
described in subdivision (A)(2) of this section, no sign may exceed 25 feet
above grade.



   (D)   Minimum height of signs.  Free-standing signs must have a
minimum height of seven feet from grade to the bottom of sign.



('72 Code, § 356.30(7))  (Ord. 1988-602(A), passed 8-22-88; Am. Ord.
1992-694, passed 5-11-92; Am. Ord. 2000-935, passed 11-13-00; Am. Ord.
2014-1186, passed 12-15-14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.32  HIGHWAY OVERLAY.



   The following provisions concern signs in the Highway Overlay area, and
the signs are regulated according to the requirements set forth below.  In
the Highway Overlay, properties may erect only signs described in divisions
(A),  and (C) below, or in divisions (A) and (D) below, or in divisions (B)
and (C) below, or in divisions (B) and (D) or in division (E) below unless
modified by a Development Plan.



   (A)   Monument sign.  One monument sign, not to exceed 100 square
feet in area.



      (1)   Minimum setbacks.  Monument signs must be setback at
least 15 feet from the property lines adjacent to public rights-of-way, at
least ten feet from side and rear property lines, at least three feet from
driveways to the edge of sign, and must maintain a 30-foot clear-view
triangle at public street intersections.



      (2)   Maximum height of signs. No sign may exceed 15 feet
above grade.



      (3)   Design and materials.   Monument bases must be
constructed of the same materials as the principal building.



   (B)   Area identification sign.  One monument sign per development,
as described by § 150.03, not to exceed 220 square feet in area.



      (1)   Minimum setbacks. Signs must be setback at least 15 feet
from the property lines adjacent to public rights-of-way, at least ten feet
from side and rear property lines, at least three feet from driveways to the
edge of sign, and must maintain a 30-foot clear-view triangle at public
street intersections.



      (2)   Maximum height of signs. No sign may exceed 15 feet
above grade.



      (3)   Design and materials. Monument bases must be constructed
of the same materials as the principal building.



   (C)   Wall signs. Signs attached to only one wall, not to exceed 10%
of the building facade to which the signs are attached.



   (D)   Wall signs. Multiple story buildings (three or more stories).



      (1)   Identification signs - One identification sign per
building facade identifying the name and/or address of the building, not to
exceed 10% in area of the building facade to which it is attached or 300
square feet, whichever is less. The measured area is that building facade
above the second story.



      (2)   In addition to the identification signs described above,
wall signs may be attached to only one wall not to exceed 10% of the building
facade to which the signs are attached and must be located on the first
story. The measured area is that building facade of the first and second
story.



   (E)   Two wall signs. Wall signs are allowed on only two walls. The
wall signs on each wall must individually conform to the area limitations
defined in division (B) above.



(Ord. 1999-914, passed 11- -99)



CHAPTER 151:  SUBDIVISIONS



Section




General Provisions




   151.001   Purpose



   151.002   Definitions



   151.003   Procedural requirements



   151.004   Pre-application procedural requirements



   151.005   Procedure, preliminary plat, fees and deposit



   151.006   Procedure; final plat



   151.007   Procedures for time extensions



   151.008   Conditional use permit special zoning procedures



   151.009   Registered land surveys



   151.010   Conveyance by metes and bounds



   151.011   Structures abutting public streets



   151.012   Resubdividing combined parcels



   151.013   Building permits



   151.014   Subdivision and zoning fees




Preliminary Plat




   151.025   Preliminary plat requirements



   151.026   Supplementary information required



   151.027   Qualifications governing approval of a preliminary plat




Final Plat




   151.040   Final plat requirements



   151.041   Name and location



   151.042   Scale and point



   151.043   Map



   151.044   Surveyor's certificate



   151.045   Signature of owners and dedication



   151.046   Recording form




Design Standards




   151.055   General requirements



   151.056   Streets



   151.057   Alleys



   151.058   Easements



   151.059   Blocks



   151.060   Lots



   151.061   Public sites and open space and park land dedication




Road Naming and House Numbering




   151.070   Road designations



   151.071   House numbering system




Required Improvements




   151.085   Purpose



   151.086   Listed and described



   151.087   Payment for installation



   151.088   Entryway signs; dedication and maintenance



   151.089   Agreement providing for proper installation of improvements



   151.090   Financial guarantee



   151.091   Construction plans



   151.092   Improvements completed prior to the approval of final plat




Variances




   151.100   Variances generally



   151.101   Fees



   151.102   Variance for certain homesteads



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 151.001  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The process of dividing raw land into home sites, or separate
parcels for other uses, is one of the most important factors in the growth of
any community.  Few activities have a more lasting effect upon its
appearance and environment.  Once the land has been subdivided and the
streets, homes and other structures have been constructed, the basic
character of this permanent addition to the community has become firmly
established.  It is then virtually impossible to alter its basic character
without substantial expense.  In most subdivisions, roads and streets must
be maintained and various public services must be provided.  The welfare of
the entire community is thereby affected in many important respects.  It is,
therefore, to the interest of the general public, the developer, and the
future owners that subdivisions be conceived, designed and developed in
accordance with sound rules and proper standards.



   (B)   All subdivisions of land hereafter submitted for approval must
fully comply, in all respects, with the regulations set forth herein.  It is
the purpose of these regulations to:



      (1)   Encourage well planned, efficient, and attractive
subdivisions by establishing reasonable standards for design and construction;



      (2)   Provide for the public health, safety and general
welfare of residents by requiring properly designed streets, park land, and
adequate sanitary sewer, storm sewer and water service;



      (3)   Place the cost of improvements against those benefitting
financially from their construction; and



      (4)   Secure the rights of the public with respect to public
lands and waters.



   (C)   The Council of the City of Brooklyn Park deems these
regulations to be necessary for the preservation of the health, safety and
general welfare of this community.  These regulations have been developed
under the authority contained in M.S. § 462.358, and are supplemented by
appropriate sections of § 150.01, as indicated.



('72 Code, § 345:00)  (Am. Ord. 1984-447(A), passed 4-9-84)



§ 151.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATOR.  The City Manager or designee duly appointed and
charged with enforcement of this chapter.



   ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW COMMITTEE.  A committee made up of
representatives from various city departments, as designated by the City
Manager.



   BLOCK.  An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded
by a street or by streets and the exterior boundary or boundaries of the
subdivision, or a combination of the above with a river or lake.



   BUTT LOTS.  Any lot, or lots, at the end of a block, located between
two corner lots.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.  A compilation of policy statements, goals, text,
standards and maps for guiding the physical, social and economic development,
both public and private, of the municipality and its environs, as defined in
the Minnesota Metropolitan Land Planning Act, M.S. §§ 473.851 to 473.868,
and includes any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any
amendment to such plan or parts thereof.



   EASEMENT.  A grant by an owner of land for the specific use of the
land for a public or quasi-public purpose.



   FINAL PLAT.  The final map, drawing, or chart on which the
subdivider's plan of a subdivision is presented to the City Council for
approval and which, if approved, will be submitted to the County Recorder or
Registrar of Titles.



   LOT.  A parcel or portion of land in a subdivision or plat of land,
separated from other parcels or portions by description as on a subdivision
or record of survey map, for the purpose of sale or lease or separate use
thereof.



   OWNER.  Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity having proprietary interest in
the land being subdivided under this chapter.



   PLANNING COMMISSION.  The Planning Commission of the City of Brooklyn
Park.



   PEDESTRIAN WAY or WALKWAY.  A public right-of-way across or within a
block to provide access for pedestrians.



   PRELIMINARY PLAT.  A tentative map, drawing, or chart of a proposed
subdivision meeting requirements herein enumerated.



   REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT (DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT).  A lot extending between
two streets with vehicular access which may be limited to one street at the
time of subdividing.



   STREETS AND ALLEYS.



      (1)    STREET.  A public way for vehicular traffic whether
designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, collector, collector parkway,
minor collector and minor collector parkway, throughway, road, arterial,
minor arterial, avenue, lane, place, or however otherwise designated.  The
width of a street is measured between right of way lines.



      (2)    COLLECTOR STREET.  A street which carries traffic from
subdivision streets to arterial streets.  It includes the principal access
streets to a residential development and streets for circulation within such
a development.



      (3)    CUL-DE-SAC.  A short, minor street having only one
outlet and a vehicular turnabout.



      (4)    FRONTAGE ROAD.  A minor street which is somewhat
parallel and adjacent to a minor arterial or higher functional classification
and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through
traffic.



      (5)    SUBDIVISION STREET.  A street of limited continuity
used primarily for access to the abutting properties and the local needs of
the neighborhood.



      (6)    PRIVATE STREET.  A street serving as vehicular access
to two or more parcels of land which is not dedicated to the public but is
owned by one or more private parties.



      (7)    ALLEY.  A minor way of providing secondary vehicular
access to the side or rear of two or more properties abutting on a street.



      (8)    MINOR ARTERIAL AND COLLECTORS.  Streets designated on
the comprehensive plan and used primarily by fast moving traffic at heavy
volumes as traffic arteries for intercommunication between and among
neighborhoods and other large areas.  These streets are so designated for
the purposes of applying the subdivision design standards found in § 151.056
of this chapter.



      (9)    COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL STREET.  A street designed for
the primary purpose of serving industrial, multiple residential, or
commercial property.



      (10)    MINOR COLLECTOR.  A street which connects
neighborhoods within subregions and which carries traffic from subdivision
streets to the nearest major streets; however, traffic levels on a minor
collector cannot reasonably be expected to exceed 3,000 ADT due to certain
roadway design elements intended to reduce speeds and discourage use by
through traffic.



   SUBDIVIDER.  Any person commencing proceedings under this chapter to
effect a subdivision of land for that person or for others.



   SUBDIVISION.  The division of an area, parcel or tract of land into
two or more parcels, tracts, lots, or long-term leasehold interests where the
creation of the leasehold interest necessitates the creation of streets,
roads, or alleys, for residential, commercial, industrial, or other use or
any combination thereof, except those divisions when a new street is being
created by a governmental agency which results in a division of a parcel of
land.  The term includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context,
relates to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided or for
adjustments in boundary lines.



('72 Code, § 345:02)  (Am. Ord. 1984-447(A), passed 4-9-84; Am. Ord.
1992-705, passed 9-14-92)



§ 151.003  PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS.



   Before dividing any tract of land into two or more lots or parcels, or
adjusting any boundaries not covered by M.S. § 462.352, Subd. 12, the
procedures set forth in this chapter must be followed.



('72 Code, § 345:04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.004  PRE-APPLICATION PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Prior to the preparation of a preliminary plat, the
subdividers or owners must meet with the Administrator and other appropriate
officials in order to be made fully aware of all applicable ordinances,
regulations and plans in the area to the subdivided.  At this time, or at
subsequent informal meetings, the subdivider must submit a general sketch
plan of the proposed subdivision and drainage plan.  The sketch plan can be
presented in simple form but must show any zoning changes which would be
required, and must show that consideration has been given to the relationship
of the proposed subdivision to existing community facilities that would serve
it, to neighboring subdivisions and development, and to the topography of the
site.  The Administrator may require the subdivider to provide an area-wide
concept platting plan for all neighboring properties if deemed necessary for
coordinated planing.



   (B)   The subdivider is urged to avail the subdivider of the advice
and assistance of the city staff in order to facilitate the approval of the
preliminary plat.  However, such advice should not be construed to predict
final action by the City Council.



('72 Code, § 345:06)



§ 151.005  PROCEDURE, PRELIMINARY PLAT, FEES AND DEPOSIT.



   (A)   (1)   After the pre-application meeting, the subdivider
must file with the Department of Community Development an application
completed in compliance with all city regulations and 20 copies of the
preliminary plat which has been prepared in accordance with the regulations
set forth in this chapter.  At the time of submission of the preliminary
plat, a non-refundable subdivision filing fee and a minimum subdivision cash
escrow as established in the fee resolution, set forth in the Appendix to
this code, must be paid in cash to the City Treasurer.  The fee will be
placed in the general fund and the cash escrow must be held in a special
subdivider's cash escrow account credited to the subdivider.  Costs of city
services, legal expenses and materials provided in reviewing and processing
of the preliminary plat will be charged to the subdivider's cash escrow
account and must be credited to the City of Brooklyn Park.  The fees and
costs to be paid by the subdivider are not contingent upon approval or denial
of the preliminary plat or final plat.



      (2)   The Council must promulgate and adopt a set of rules,
regulations and fees for services rendered by city personnel, and the rules,
regulations and fee schedules are on file with the City Clerk for
inspection.  A copy thereof must be furnished upon request to the
subdivider.  The city must itemize all time, services and materials billed
to any subdivider's cash escrow account.  The subdivider making the
deposit(s) in the subdivider's cash escrow account must upon request, be
furnished a copy of the itemized charges.



      (3)   If, at any time, the balance in the subdivider's cash
escrow account is depleted to less than 5% of the originally required cash
escrow amount, the subdivider must deposit additional funds in the
subdivider's cash escrow account in an amount as determined by the Planning
Director and City Engineer, sufficient to cover all costs to be incurred by
the city in implementing the platting process.  Any balance remaining in the
account upon completion of all platting conditions must be returned to the
depositor by the Finance Department after all claims and charges thereto have
been paid and after approval by City Council.



      (4)   Park dedication in the form of land or cash will be
computed prior to approval of preliminary plat; however any amount of cash in
lieu of dedication of land must be collected prior to the time the final plat
is released for recording.



   (B)   The planning staff must refer copies of the preliminary plat
to the Engineering Department.  An engineering review will be made and a
written report attached prior to forwarding to the Planning Commission.



   (C)   The planning staff must refer copies of the preliminary plat
to the Parks and Recreation Department.  A park and recreation staff review
will be made, as needed, and forwarded to the planning staff prior to
forwarding an overall staff report to the Planning Commission.



   (D)   The planning staff must refer copies of the preliminary plat
to the Planning Commission.  The planning staff will arrange for a public
hearing to be held within 45 days of the filing date.  The required legal
publication must be made and notices must be sent to all property owners of
record within 350 feet of the exterior boundary of the proposed plat.



   (E)   The subdivider or a duly authorized representative must attend
the Planning Commission meetings at which this proposal is scheduled for
consideration.



   (F)   (1)   The Planning Commission and City Council must study
the practicability of the preliminary plat taking into consideration the
requirements of the city.  Particular attention must be given, but not
limited to, the arrangement, location, and width of streets, their relation
to the topography of the land, flood plain regulations, water supply, sewage
disposal, drainage, lot sizes and arrangement, the present and future
development of adjoining lands, and the requirements of the comprehensive
plan, and the zoning ordinance.



      (2)   The Planning Commission must study and must make
recommendations and the City Council must consider the following:  whether
the proposed subdivision is consistent with applicable specific area plans or
the comprehensive plan; whether the design is consistent with applicable
development plans or policies; whether the physical characteristics of the
site, including but not limited to, topography, vegetation, susceptibility to
erosion, siltation, flooding and water storage or retention and flood plain
regulations, are suitable for the type and/or density of development or use
contemplated; the environmental impact of the subdivision design or proposed
improvements; whether the design of the subdivision or the type of
improvement is consistent with easements of record or easements established
by judgment of a court; traffic considerations; and any other aspect
affecting the public health, safety or welfare.  The Planning Commission may
recommend and the City Council may approve reasonable conditions on the plat
to negate any problem areas.



   (G)   At the public hearing all persons interested in the proposed
plat must be heard and the Planning Commission must within 30 days of the
closing of the hearing, recommend approval, modify, or recommend disapproval
of the preliminary plat or waiver of platting and submit to the City Council,
the applicant and the City Manager, their findings and recommendations.  The
City Council must act upon the preliminary plat and send written notification
of their action to the applicant.  Failure of the governing body to act
within 120 days of the filing of an application in complete compliance with
the ordinance is deemed approval of the plat.  The grounds for any refusal
to approve a plat must be set forth by the Council in a resolution and
reported to the applicant in writing.  Should the subdivider desire to amend
the preliminary plat as approved by the Council, the subdivider must submit
the amended plat following the original procedure set forth, except for the
public hearing and fees unless the Planning Commission considers the scope of
the revisions to constitute a new plat, then the hearing and fees are
required.



('72 Code, § 345:08)  (Am. Ord. 1975-215(A), passed 12-8-75; Am. Ord.
1984-447(A), passed 4-9-84; Am. Ord. 1994-756, passed 5-9- 94)



§ 151.006  PROCEDURE; FINAL PLAT.



   (A)   The subdivider, within one year, unless extensions are granted
by the City Council by resolution, after the approval of the preliminary
plat, must file with the Director of Community Development, 15 copies of the
final plat prepared by a land surveyor duly registered in the State of
Minnesota.  Failure of the subdivider to submit the final plat within those
times designated by City Council resolutions will cause the preliminary and
final plats to become null and void.



   (B)   The subdivider must also submit to the City Attorney, at the
same time, an up-to-date certified abstract of title or registered property
abstract and such other evidence as the City Attorney may require showing
title or control of the land by the subdivider.



   (C)   The subdivider must have incorporated all changes or
modifications required by the City Council, but in all other respects the
final plat must conform to the preliminary plat.



   (D)   If the subdivider requests that any special assessments which
have been levied against the property described be divided and allocated to
the respective lots in the proposed plats, the Department of Public Works
must estimate the clerical cost of preparing a revised assessment roll,
filing the same with the County Auditor, and making such division and
allocation, and upon approval by the City Manager of such estimated cost, the
same must be paid by the subdivider to the Finance Department from the
subdivider's escrow account.



   (E)   The required utility layout must be submitted by the
subdivider to the City Engineer for the City Engineer's cost estimate.  A
copy of the City Engineer's report must be submitted to the Director of
Community Development for the preparation of the contract required in §
151.089 of this chapter.



   (F)   The Director of Community Development, upon receipt of the
final plat, must retain one copy of the final plat for the Director's
records, and must:



      (1)   Refer 14 copies of the final plat to the Administrative
Review Committee, who must review the final plat with respect to its
conformance with the approved preliminary plat.



      (2)   Refer the current abstract of title or registered
property abstract to the City Attorney for the Attorney's examination and
report.  The City Attorney's written report must be submitted to the
Director of Community Development within 30 days of its receipt by the
Attorney.



      (3)   Obtain a written report or statement from the Finance
Director certifying the payment by the subdivider of all fees due the city
pursuant to this chapter.



   (G)   The City Council must, by resolution, authorize the Mayor and
City Manager to sign the final plat.



   (H)   If a report from the Director of Community Development
indicates, in the Director of Community Development's judgment, there is a
substantial deviation in the final plat from the approved preliminary plat,
the City Council may determine if the submission represents a new plat.  If
the submission does represent a new plat, the City Council must deny the
final plat and direct the subdivider to resubmit the subdivider's proposal
following preliminary plat requirements.



   (I)   The subdivider must, if the final plat is signed by the Mayor
and City Manager, record the final plat with the County Recorder or the
Registrar of Titles within 180 days of the date of the Council resolutions
approving the final plat, or within 180 days after the plat is considered
approved by reason of the City Council's failure to act within the 120 day
statutory period.  Any plat not filed and recorded in accordance with this
section becomes null and void.



   (J)   Changes, erasures, modifications or revisions must not be made
in any final plat after approval has been given by the City Council and
endorsed in writing on the plat, unless the plat is first resubmitted to the
City Council and that body approves any modifications.  In the event that
any such final plat is recorded without complying with this requirement, the
same is considered null and void and the City Council must institute
proceedings to have the plat stricken from the records of the city.



('72 Code, § 345:10)  (Am. Ord. 1977-248(A), passed 8-22-77; Am. Ord.
1984-447(A), passed 4-9-84; Am. Ord. 1992-705, passed 9-14- 92)



§ 151.007  PROCEDURES FOR TIME EXTENSIONS.



   (A)   (1)   If a time extension is to be requested, for a
preliminary or final plat as previously approved by the City Council, the one
year extension must be requested and must appear on a City Council agenda for
approval within one year of the date of the original Council approval of the
plat or last Council action to extend that approval.  A time extension
request which encounters delays in the review process and through no fault of
the applicant cannot be scheduled for Council action as anticipated may
proceed through the process to final resolution without jeopardy.



      (2)   The provisions of this division do not apply to original
Council approvals or time extensions granted prior to the effective date of
this chapter.  All original Council approvals or time extensions granted
subsequent to the effective date of this chapter are bound by the provisions
of this division.



   (B)   This request must be reviewed by the Planning Commission and a
recommendation forwarded to the City Council addressing such items as
potential conflicts with the comprehensive plan or specific area plans;
potential conflicts with policy changes; changing transportation conditions
and sidewalk policies; or applicable changes to any city, state or federal
ordinances.



   (C)   The city staff may recompute park dedication fees and other
financial guarantees as required by the city code to reflect current cost
estimates.  These revised costs must be included in the time extension
resolution.



   (D)   Any negative escrow amounts must be paid and the escrow amount
must be brought up to current minimum requirements with the request for time
extension.



   (E)   A current property owners list from Hennepin County must be
submitted every two years based upon the original date of Council approval
only in instance where such lists are necessary for the notification of
owners of property not lying within the Brooklyn Park corporate limits but
within the standard notification area.



('72 Code, § 345:11)  (Ord. 1992-705, passed 9-14-92; Am. Ord. 1993-746,
passed 12-13-93)



§ 151.008  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT SPECIAL ZONING PROCEDURES.



   The City Council upon receiving a report from the Planning Commission
may grant a variance in these regulations in case of a subdivision which is
part of a conditional use permit special procedure approved under the
provisions of the zoning ordinance for the City of Brooklyn Park.



('72 Code, § 345:82)  (Am. Ord. 1984-447(A), passed 4-9-84)



§ 151.009  REGISTERED LAND SURVEYS.



   It is the intention of this chapter that all registered land surveys in
the city must be presented to the Planning Commission in the form of a
preliminary plat and in accordance with the standards set forth in this
chapter for preliminary plats.  A registered land survey must be treated as
any other subdivision, and the Planning Commission must approve the
arrangement, sizes, and relationships of proposed tracts and such registered
land surveys and tracts to be used as easements or roads must be dedicated as
in any other plat or division.  Unless such approvals in accordance with the
standards set forth in this chapter have been obtained, building permits will
be withheld for building on tracts which have been so subdivided by
registered land surveys without compliance with the ordinance and Council
approval.  The City Council may refuse to take over tracts, streets, roads
or to improve, repair or maintain any such tracts or areas unless so approved.



('72 Code, § 345:88)



§ 151.010  CONVEYANCE BY METES AND BOUNDS.



   (A)   No conveyance of land, in which the land conveyed is described
by metes and bounds or by reference to a plat made after the effective date
of this chapter which has not been approved as provided herein, and no
conveyance which results in the division of a platted lot will be made or
recorded unless the parcel described in the conveyance and the residue parcel
meet the following standards:



      (1)   Was a separate parcel of record April 1, 1945, or the
date of adoption of subdivision regulations by the city under Minnesota Laws
of 1945, Chapter 287, whichever is the later;



      (2)   Was the subject of a written agreement to convey entered
into prior to such time and was recorded in the office of the County Recorder
or the Registrar of Titles within one year thereafter; or



      (3)   Was a separate parcel of not less than two and one-half
acres in area and 150 feet in width on January 1, 1966; or



      (4)   Was a separate parcel of not less than five acres in
area and 300 feet in width on July 1, 1980; or



      (5)   Is a single parcel of commercial or industrial land of
not less than five acres and having a width of not less than 300 feet and its
conveyance does not result in the division of the parcel into two or more
lots or parcels, any of which is less than five acres in area or 300 feet in
width; or



      (6)   Is a single parcel of residential or agricultural land
of not less than 20 acres and having a width of not less than 500 feet and
its conveyance does not result in the division of the parcel into two or more
lots or parcels, any one of which is less than 20 acres in area or 500 feet
in width.



   (B)   In any case in which compliance with the foregoing
restrictions will create an unnecessary hardship and failure to comply does
not interfere with the purpose of the subdivision regulations, the City
Council may waive such compliance by adoption of a resolution to that effect
pursuant to §§ 151.100 et seq., and other provisions of these subdivision
regulations.  All requests for waivers require a public hearing and must
follow the same procedure as required in public hearings for plats.



('72 Code, § 345:91)  (Am. Ord. 1973-147(A), passed 6-11-73; Am. Ord.
1974-170(A), passed 7-22-74; Am. Ord. 1984-447(A), passed 4- 9-84)



§ 151.011  STRUCTURES ABUTTING PUBLIC STREETS.



   (A)   With respect to parcels of land not subject to the provisions
of M.S. § 462.358, Subd. 4b, and § 151.010 of this chapter, a building or
structure must not be constructed or erected on such parcels, nor must any
building permit be issued for such construction or erection, unless such
parcels abut upon a public street which has been dedicated to and accepted by
the city.  This provision does not apply if the structure is to be used
solely for agricultural purposes and the property is served by a private
street or private easement.



   (B)   This requirement may be waived by the City Council if the
Council makes the following findings:



      (1)   That the proposed structure is located on a properly
designed and approved private street; and



      (2)   The development is not in conflict with the city's
growth management principles.



('72 Code, § 345:92)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.012  RESUBDIVIDING COMBINED PARCELS.



   Any parcel of land, either platted or unplatted, that has been combined
for tax purposes or for other reasons cannot be reseparated without a waiver
of platting or plat approved by the City Council in a manner prescribed in §
151.003.



('72 Code, § 345:93)  (Ord. 1986-528(A), passed 5-27-86)



§ 151.013  BUILDING PERMITS.



   No building permits will be issued by the city for the construction of
any building or structure on any lot in the subdivision as defined herein
which has been approved for platting until all requirements of this chapter
have been fully complied with.  No building permit will be issued for a lot
not having the required right-of-way frontage on a public street in the
zoning district in which it is located.



('72 Code, § 345:94)



§ 151.014  SUBDIVISION AND ZONING FEES.



   Subdivision and zoning fees are established by the fee resolution set
forth as an Appendix to this code.



('72 Code, § 520:00(6))  (Am. Ord. 1981-374(A), passed 12-14-81; Am. Ord.
1986-540(A), passed 8-18-86; Am. Ord. 1990-660(A), passed 10-8-90)



PRELIMINARY PLAT



§ 151.025  PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Survey and design information required.  The preliminary plat
must be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale ranging from 1”:10', 1”:20',
1”:30', 1”:40' or 1”:50' as accepted by the Department of Community
Development or the Planning Commission and must contain the information set
forth in the divisions of this section which follow.



   (B)   Identification and description.



      (1)   The proposed name of the subdivision, which name must
not duplicate or be alike in pronunciation to the name of any plat previously
recorded in the county.



      (2)   The location of the subdivision by section, township,
and range or by other legal description.



      (3)   The name(s) and address(es) and telephone number(s) of
the owner(s), and/or petitioner(s), subdivider, surveyor and/or designer.



      (4)   Graphic scale, north point, date of preparation and
revision dates.



   (C)   Existing conditions.



      (1)   A boundary line drawing of the proposed subdivision,
including measured distances and angles, which must be tied into the nearest
section or quarter section corner by traverse.



      (2)   Existing zoning classifications for land within the
subdivision and on abutting property.



      (3)   Total acreage.



      (4)   Location, width, and name of every existing or
previously platted street or other public way showing present and proposed
width, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks and other public open
spaces, permanent buildings and structures, easements, section lines, flood
plain limits, and corporate lines within the proposed subdivision and to a
distance of 150 feet beyond.



      (5)   If the proposed subdivision is a rearrangement or replat
of any former plat, the lot and block arrangement of the original plat along
with its original name indicated by dotted or dash lines.  Also, any revised
or proposed to be vacated roadways of the original plat must be so indicated.



      (6)   Location and size of existing sewers, water mains,
pipelines, high voltage lines, culverts or other underground facilities
within the tract and to a distance of 150 feet beyond the tract, including
such data as grades, invert elevations and locations of catch basins,
manholes and hydrants.



      (7)   Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided
lands within 150 feet.



   (D)   Subdivision design features.



      (1)   Layout of proposed streets showing right-of-way widths
and proposed street names.  If the proposed street is an extension of an
existing named street that name must be used.  In all other cases the name
of any street previously used within the county must not be used, unless such
use is consistent with the county or community street naming system.



      (2)   Locations and widths of alleys, pedestrian ways,
utilities, easements, and drainage plan.



      (3)   Layout, numbers and preliminary dimensions of lots and
blocks, including the area in square feet of each proposed lot.



      (4)   Areas intended to be dedicated or reserved for public
use including their size in acres or square footage.



      (5)   Areas intended for uses other than residential or public.



      (6)   Minimum front and side street building setback lines as
required in the zoning district in which the subdivision is located.



      (7)   A proposed lot must not be divided by a boundary line
between registered land and abstract property.



('72 Code, § 345:13)



§ 151.026  SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION REQUIRED.



   The information set forth in this section must be filed with the
preliminary plat:



   (A)   A complete topographic map at a scale of 1”:100', 1”:50',
1”:40' or 1”:20' and with contour intervals not greater than two feet
showing water courses, flood plain limits, marshes, rock outcrops and other
significant features, at least 150 feet beyond the boundary of the proposed
plat, at least one print of the preliminary plat must be superimposed on a
copy of the topographic map.  U.S. Geodetic Survey datum must be used for
all topographic mapping.  Fulfillment of this requirement may be requested
by the city staff, Planning Commission or City Council.



   (B)   Soil absorption tests where septic tanks are proposed, and any
other subsoil information requested by the city staff, including soil
bearings and water table.



   (C)   Plans for water supply, sewage disposal, proposed grades,
drainage and flood control including the proposed locations, size and
gradient of proposed sewer lines and water mains and such other supporting
data as may be required by the city staff, Planning Commission, or the City
Council.



   (D)   Center line gradients of proposed streets and alleys.



   (E)   Where the subdivider owns property adjacent to that which is
being proposed for the subdivision, the Planning Commission may require that
the subdivider submit a sketch plan of the rest of the subdivider’s
properties so as to show the relationship of the proposed subdivision to the
future development of the adjacent property.



   (F)   Indicate if the land is registered or abstract property.



   (G)   Indicate other information as requested by the Departments of
Community Development, Public Works or Parks and Recreation such as
sidewalks, walkways, bikeways, berming or landscaping with a schedule of
plantings or anticipated ground level building elevation(s).



   (H)   All plats within the designated Mississippi River Critical
Area as defined by Executive Order No. 79-19 of the Critical Area Act of
1973, M.S. Chapter 116G, must indicate:



      (1)   Existing and proposed grades at two foot contour
intervals.



      (2)   A landscaping plan as requested by the City Planner to
compensate as transitioning, erosion control or improving the living
environment.



      (3)   Submit an erosion and sedimentation control plan as
requested by the City Engineer and the City Planner.



      (4)   Calculate and graphically describe the amounts and
location of cut and fill determined in cubic yards.  Length of storage and
prevention measures for wind and water erosion must also be indicated.



   (I)   Drainage ponds.  Determination shall be made between drainage
ponds designed to hold water on a continuous basis and those designed to hold
water on an infrequent basis. Areas designed for intermittent water storage
shall be landscaped and maintained in accordance with required landscape
provisions. Creation of larger, regional ponds is encouraged.



   (J)   Erosion and sediment control shall be addressed as follows:



      (1)   The development shall conform to the natural limitations
presented by topography and soil so as to create the least potential for soil
erosion.



      (2)   Erosion and siltation control measures shall be
coordinated with the different stages of construction.  Appropriate control
measures shall be installed prior to development when necessary to control
erosion.



      (3)   Land shall be developed in increments of workable size
such that adequate erosion and siltation controls can be provided as
construction progresses.  The smallest practical area of land shall be
exposed at any one period of time.



      (4)   When soil is exposed, the exposure shall be for the
shortest feasible period of time, as specified in the development agreement.



      (5)   Where the topsoil is removed, sufficient topsoil shall
be set aside for respreading over the developed area.  Topsoil shall be
restored or provided to a minimum depth of three inches and shall be of a
quality at least equal to the soil quality prior to development.



      (6)   Natural vegetation shall be protected wherever practical.



      (7)   Runoff shall be diverted to a sedimentation basin before
being allowed to enter the natural drainage system.



      (8)   Development shall comply with and follow the applicable
best management practices for erosion and sedimentation control as described
in the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's  (MPCA) Best Management
Practices Handbook as may be amended.



      (9)   All stormwater facilities are subject to inspection for
conformance to approved plans prior to acceptance by the city.



      (10) Projects initiated or directed by the city shall not be
exempt from these rules.



('72 Code, § 345:16)  (Am. Ord. 1984-447(A), passed 4-9-84; Am. Ord.
2001-961, passed 11-26-01; Am. Ord. 2002-985, passed 11-25-02)



§ 151.027  QUALIFICATIONS GOVERNING APPROVAL OF A PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   (A)   The approval of a preliminary plat by the City Council only
constitutes acceptance of the design as a basis for the preparation of the
final plat by the owners or subdividers.  Subsequent approval by appropriate
officials having jurisdiction will be required of the engineering proposals
pertaining to water supplies, storm drainage, sewage disposal, sidewalks,
grading, gradients and roadway widths, and the surfacing of streets prior to
the approval of the final plat by the city.



   (B)   No plan will be approved for a subdivision which includes any
area subject to periodic flooding or which contains extremely poor drainage
facilities which would make adequate drainage of the streets and lots
impossible, unless the subdivider agrees to make improvements which will, in
the opinion of the City Engineer, make the area completely safe for occupancy
and provide adequate street and lot drainage and is not in conflict with the
city's flood plain regulations.



('72 Code, § 345:20)



FINAL PLAT



§ 151.040  FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS.



   The final plat must be prepared in accordance with M.S. § 505.08,
Subd. 1.  The plat may consist of more than one sheet, numbered
progressively.



('72 Code, § 345:22)



§ 151.041  NAME AND LOCATION.



   The plat must contain the name of the subdivision, lettered in large
print at the top of the plat, together with the location of the subdivision
by section, range, and township and by city and county.



('72 Code, § 345:25)



§ 151.042  SCALE AND POINT.



   The plat must contain a graphic scale and north point.



('72 Code, § 345:28)



§ 151.043  MAP.



   The plat must contain an accurate map of the proposed subdivision at a
scale acceptable to the County Recorder's Office which must show the
information set forth in the divisions of this section which follow and meet
the requirements of M.S. § 505.02:



   (A)   A boundary line survey including the measured distances and
angles and the true distance and bearing between a known point on the
boundary and the nearest official monument which must be accurately described
on the plat.  One permanent monument must be placed on one corner of any
plat of four or more lots.



   (B)   The accurate location of all monuments.



   (C)   Accurate angular and linear dimensions for all lines, angles
and curvatures used to describe the boundaries, streets, alleys, easements,
areas to be reserved for public use, and other important features within the
proposed subdivision.  All linear dimensions must be shown in feet and
hundredths of feet and all angles and bearings must be shown in degrees,
minutes and seconds.  The radius, angle of curvature, point of tangent,
point of curvature and length of arc must be shown for every curve.  No
ditto marks will be permitted in indicating dimensions.



   (D)   All lots and blocks numbered in numerical order.



   (E)   All municipal, township, county or sections lines within the
proposed subdivision.



   (F)   Identification and accurate boundaries of any areas to be
dedicated or reserved for public use or for the exclusive use of property
owners within the subdivision.



   (G)   The names of all streets and alleys.



   (H)   If the subdivision is a replatting or rearrangement of a legal
subdivision, the original platting shown by dotted lines.



   (I)   Low land and water areas.



   (J)   A letter, certified by an engineer or surveyor, attesting to
lot square footage.



   (K)   A 1:500 scale and a 1:200 scale mylar of each final plat must
be submitted to the Director of Community Development prior to release of the
final plat for recording.



('72 Code, § 345:31)  (Am. Ord. 1984-447(A), passed 4-9-84; Am. Ord.
1988-596(A), passed 7-11-88)



§ 151.044  SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE.



   The plat must contain a notarized certification by a registered land
surveyor that the plat represents a survey made by that surveyor and that the
monuments shown therein exist as located and that all dimensions are correct,
as required by M.S. § 505.03, Subd. 1.



('72 Code, § 345:34)



§ 151.045  SIGNATURE OF OWNERS AND DEDICATION.



   The plat must contain a notarized certification by owner or owners and
by any mortgage holder of record of the adoption of the plat and the
dedication of streets and other public areas as required by M.S. § 505.03,
Subd. 1.



('72 Code, § 345:37)



§ 151.046  RECORDING FORM.



   The plat must contain a form for recording the approval of the City
Council as follows:




   Approved by the City of Brooklyn Park, Minnesota, this       day of
                    ,





   20    .





   Signed                                




      Mayor




   Attest                                




      City Manager



('72 Code, § 345:40)



DESIGN STANDARDS



§ 151.055  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The Planning Commission and the City Council, in their review
of the preliminary plat, will take into consideration the requirements of the
community and the best use of the land being subdivided.



   (B)   The subdivision must conform to the adopted zoning ordinance
and must be in substantial conformance to the goals and policies set forth in
the comprehensive plan.



   (C)   The arrangement, character, extent, width, and location of all
streets must be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets,
to reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographic conditions, to runoff of
storm water, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate
relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
Wherever possible and necessary, the arrangement of streets in new
subdivisions must provide for the continuation of existing streets in
adjoining areas.  Where adjoining unsubdivided areas may be subdivided, the
arrangement of streets in a new subdivision must make provision for the
proper projection of streets into adjoining areas by carrying the new streets
to the boundaries of the new subdivision at appropriate locations.



   (D)   No street dedications will be accepted which require a
crossing of a railroad, collector street, minor arterial, or intermediate
arterial unless sufficient land is dedicated to provide for approaches
sufficient for grade crossing or safe intersections.



   (E)   Mailbox design. The subdivider shall submit design details and
plans for mailboxes on all new residential plats.  Mailboxes shall be
similar in design and be architecturally consistent with homes in the
subdivision.



('72 Code, § 345:43)  (Am. Ord. 2001-961, passed 11-26-01)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 151.056  STREETS.



   (A)   Widths.  Street right-of-way widths must be as shown on the
comprehensive plan and where not shown therein, must be not less than as
follows:



      (1)   Principal Arterial:  variable.



      (2)   "A" or "B" Minor Arterial:  100 feet.



      (3)   Class I Collector:  80 feet.



      (4)   Class II Collector:  70 feet (may be adjusted upwards
as necessary at intersection with arterial).



      (5)   Local street:  60 feet.



      (6)   Commercial and/or industrial street:  80 feet.



   (B)   Intersections.  Insofar as practical streets must intersect
at right angles. The angle formed by the intersection of two streets must be
not less than 60 degrees.  Intersections having more than four corners are
prohibited.  Intersections must not be closer than 150 feet as measured from
centerline to centerline.



   (C)   Deflections.  When connecting street lines deflect from each
other at any point by more than ten degrees, they must be connected by a
curve with a radius of not less than 100 feet, except in those cases
specifically approved by the City Council.



   (D)   Gradients.  All center line gradients must be at least 0.5
percent and must not exceed the following:



      (1)   Arterial streets and collector streets:  four percent;



      (2)   Subdivision streets and frontage roads:  six percent.



   (E)   Vertical curves.  Different connecting street gradients must
be connected with vertical curves.  Minimum length in feet of these curves
must be 30 times the algebraic difference in the percent of grade of the two
adjacent slopes.



   (F)   Street jogs.  Street jogs with center line offsets of less
than 150 feet are prohibited as measured from centerline to centerline.



   (G)   Subdivision streets.  Subdivision streets must be laid out so
that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.



   (H)   Cul-de-sacs.  The maximum length of a street terminating in a
cul-de-sac must be 600 feet, measured from the center line of the street or
origin to the center of the cul-de-sac and must have a radius of 60 feet.



   (I)   Access to collectors or arterials.  In the case where a
proposed plat is adjacent to a collector arterial street, the applicant is
advised not to direct vehicle or pedestrian access from individual lots to
such thoroughfares.  Where possible, the subdivider must attempt to provide
access to all lots via subdivision streets.



   (J)   Platting of small tracts.  In the platting of small tracts of
land fronting on arterials where there is no convenient access to existing
entrances and where access from such plat would be closer than one-quarter
mile from an existing access point, every effort must be made in such plats
for the connection of roads to neighboring land.  As the neighboring land is
platted and developed, and access becomes possible at a preferred location,
direct access will be prohibited.



   (K)   Half streets.  Half streets are prohibited except where it
will be practical to require the dedication of the other half when the
adjoining property is subdivided, in which case the dedication of a half
street may be permitted.  The probable length of time elapsing before
dedication of the remainder will be considered in this direction.



   (L)   Private streets.  Private streets are not permitted and
public improvements will not be approved for any private street unless
approved by the City Council as part of a conditional use permit for an
overall development plan.



   (M)    Hardship to owners of adjoining property.  The street
arrangements must not be such as to cause hardship of adjoining property in
platting their own land and providing convenient access to it.



   (N)   Dedication of streets.  Except for private streets as
designated in § 151.056, all proposed streets shown on the plat must be
offered for dedication as public streets.



   (O)   Medians.  Landscaped medians shall be required for Class I
and II collector streets and cul-de-sac islands, as determined by the City
Council, and constructed in accordance with standards established by the City
Engineer.



('72 Code, § 345:46)  (Am. Ord. 1984-447, passed 4-9-84; Am. Ord. 1992-705,
passed 9-14-92; Am. Ord. 2001-961, passed 11-26-01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.057  ALLEYS.



   (A)   Locational requirements.  Except in the case of a shopping
center, planned as a unit, with off-street parking and loading space, either
a public or private alley must be provided in a block where commercially
zoned property abuts a major thoroughfare or a major street.  Alleys in
residential areas other than those zoned for multiple use will not be
permitted except by special permission of the City Council.



   (B)   Widths.  Alleys, where permitted by the City Council, must be
at least 20 feet in width in residential areas and at least 30 feet wide in
commercial areas, with adequate provisions for snow storage.  Such snow
storage locations must be approved by the City Council.



   (C)   Grades.  All center line gradients in alleys must be at least
0.5 percent and must not exceed eight percent.



('72 Code, § 345:49)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.058  EASEMENTS.



   (A)   Provided for utilities.  Easements to a width as determined
by the City Engineer, or at least 15 feet wide centered on rear or other lot
lines must be provided for utilities where necessary.  They must have
continuity of alignment from block to block and at the deflection points
easements for a pole line anchor must be provided where necessary.



   (B)   Drainage.  Easements must be provided along each side of the
center line of any water course or drainage channel whether or not shown in
the comprehensive plan, to a width sufficient to provide proper maintenance
and protection and to provide for storm water runoff and installation and
maintenance of storm sewers.  Where necessary, drainage easements
corresponding with lot lines must be provided.  Such easements for drainage
purposes must not be less than five feet in width, each side of the lot
line.  Except where an overall drainage and utility development plan for
subdivisions have been approved by the City Engineer, all lots must be graded
in such a manner to avoid additional drainage encroachment onto adjacent
properties.  This restriction applies during, as well as after, construction
is completed.



   (C)   Dedication.  All easements must be dedicated for the required
uses by appropriate language on the plat, as required by M.S. § 505.03,
Subd. 1.



('72 Code, § 345:52)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.059  BLOCKS.



   (A)   Length.  The maximum length of a block is1,500 feet and the
minimum length is 400 feet.  Blocks over 900 feet long may require
pedestrian ways at least ten feet wide at their approximate center.  The use
of additional pedestrian ways to schools, parks and other destinations may be
required.



   (B)   Arrangements.  A block must be so designed as to provide two
tiers of lots unless it adjoins a railroad, collector or arterial street
system, or other types of barriers in the form of schools, parks, major
developments, corporate limits or other major uses, where it may have a
single tier of lots.



('72 Code, § 345:55)



§ 151.060  LOTS.



   (A)   Location.  All lots must abut for their full frontage on a
publicly dedicated street.



   (B)   Size.  The lot dimensions must be such as to comply with the
minimum lot areas specified in the zoning ordinance.  Lot square footages
must be designated on the preliminary plat.  A letter must accompany the
final plat, certified by an engineer or surveyor, stating that all lot sizes
meet plat requirements.



   (C)   Transition lots.  When platting is adjacent to incompatible
land uses, except parks, depth of lots must be increased to allow for space,
berming or other landscaping techniques to buffer each land use.



   (D)   Side lot lines.  Side lines of lots must be substantially at
right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines.



   (E)   Water courses.  Lots abutting upon a water course,
drainageways, channel, or stream must have sufficient depth and width to
provide a minimum area of land not subject to flooding equal to the minimum
lot dimensions specified in the zoning ordinance for the district in which
the lots are located.



   (F)   Drainage.  Lots must be graded so as to provide drainage away
from building locations.  All landscaping features, such as retaining walls,
and filling or grading, within drainage and utility easements must be
reviewed and approved by the City Engineer and the City Planner.



   (G)   Natural features.  In the subdividing of land, due regard
must be shown for all natural features, such as tree growth, water courses,
historic spots, or similar conditions, and plans must be adjusted to preserve
those which will add attractiveness and stability to the proposed development.



   (H)   Lot remnants.  All remnants of lots below minimum size left
over after subdividing of a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots
rather than allowed to remain as unusable or non-conforming parcels.



   (I)   Adequate setbacks.  All plats with lots or tracts abutting on
collector or arterial streets must have adequate width and depth to provide
for the minimum setbacks to build in accordance with all city codes.



   (J)   Minimum rear lot line.  Where practical, all lots should have
a minimum of 30 feet in width at the rear lot line.



   (K)   Double frontage lots.  Double frontage (lots with frontage on
two parallel streets) or reverse frontage lots are not permitted except where
lots back against a collector or arterial street.  Such lots must have
additional depth to allow for screening and/or planting along the back lot
line in accordance with the Zoning Code, Environmental Quality.  Vehicular
access may be restricted as a condition of the plat.



   (L)   Cul-de-sac lots.  If the front line of any lot is a curve or
partly a curve with a radius of 175 feet, the frontage for purposes of
minimum requirements, will be measured at the building line.  In addition
thereto, the front footage of the front lot line will be 60 feet or as
modified under special procedure provisions as established by the zoning
ordinance.



('72 Code, § 345:58)  (Am. Ord. 1978-266(A), passed 6-12-78; Am. Ord.
1984-447(A), passed 4-9-84; Am. Ord. 1996-801, passed 3-25- 96)  Penalty,
see § 10.99



§ 151.061  PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACE AND PARK LAND DEDICATION.



   (A)   Public sites and open spaces.  Where a proposed park,
playground, or other public site shown on the adopted comprehensive plan or
official map is embraced in part or in whole by a boundary of a proposed
subdivision, and such public sites are not dedicated to the city, such public
ground must be shown as reserved land on the preliminary plat to allow the
city the opportunity to consider and take action toward acquisition of such
public ground or park by purchase or other means prior to approval of the
final plat.



   (B)   Park land dedication.



      (1)   In every plat, replat or subdivision of land allowing
development for residential, commercial, industrial, or other uses or
combination thereof, or where a waiver is granted, a reasonable portion of
such land and/or cash must be set aside and dedicated by the tract owner or
owners to the general public as open space for park and playground purposes,
public open space for park and playground purposes, public open space or
public ponds, except where adjustment to lot lines do not create additional
lots.



      (2)   A minimum of ten percent of the buildable land to be
used for residential, multiple-family residential, or uses other than
commercial business or industrial purposes, is deemed a reasonable portion.
BUILDABLE LAND means the gross acreage of all property in the proposed plat
or subdivision excluding wetlands designated by federal or state agencies and
those classified by the Wetland Conservation Act. The land must be suitable
for public use as parks and playgrounds or for one of the aforedescribed
purposes and the city is not required to accept land which will not be usable
for parks and playground or which would require extensive expenditures on the
part of the public to make them usable.  The city has the option to require
cash contribution in lieu of setting aside dedicated land or in requiring a
part of the land as a parkland dedication and the balance of the land value
in cash.  Any such cash contribution will be a set amount determined
annually based on a minimum of ten percent of the total fair market land
value of the land within such plat, replat, waiver or subdivision, for
residential and multiple-family residential uses.  The amount is then
established by equating the fair market value to a per unit fee based on the
net density.  In establishing the amount of land to be dedicated or
preserved or the amount of the cash contribution, the city will give due
consideration to the open space, recreational, or common areas and facilities
proposed by the applicant to be open to the public.



      (3)   Any park dedication money so paid to the city must be
placed in a special fund. The money shall be used only for:



         (a)   The acquisition of land for parks and playgrounds;



         (b)    Development of existing park and playground sites
or facilities;



         (c)   Redevelopment or rehabilitation of existing park
and playground sites or facilities; or



         (d)   Debt retirement in connection with land previously
acquired for parks and playgrounds.



      (4)   The city must require a minimum cash park dedication for
commercial or industrial plats or waivers of 5% of fair market land value. 
However, where the City Council deems it in the public interest (i.e.
comprehensive plan or flood plain ordinance), it may require a minimum land
dedication of five percent of the commercial or industrial land to be
subdivided in lieu of a cash dedication. The lands must be indicated on the
city's comprehensive plan or amendments, or must be designated on specific
area plans for flood plain preservation, parks, trails, public open space or
any combination thereof.



      (5)   Any lands which obtain a waiver of the subdivision
requirements are subject to these regulations for the land being subdivided.



      (6)   Park dedication determinations (cash or land) are made
by the city at the time of presentation of preliminary plats. If land is the
required contribution, the property must be deeded to the city at the time of
final plat approval.  If cash in lieu of land is required, the amount will
be determined upon the amounts set forth in this chapter in place at the time
of application for final plat and paid as a part of the approval of the final
plat.



      (7)   For purposes of this section, FAIR MARKET LAND VALUE is
defined as the market value of the land within such plat, replat, or
subdivision as of the date the preliminary plat, replat, or subdivision is
presented to the City Council for approval.  The City Assessor must
establish values in the same manner as the Assessor determines the market
value of the land for tax purposes, excluding, in determining such value, all
value added to such land by improvements other than utilities, streets, and
other public improvements serving such land, but including in such
determination the highest and best use for which the land can be used under
the existing zoning districts.



      (8)   The city must annually review the here and after stated
fees and determine that they are consistent with current “fair market land
values.”  The required park dedication fees must be established after
review of current values by the City Assessor, who must advise the City
Council of current values for the different zoning classifications.



      (9)   Land areas dedicated as park land must be based on the
comprehensive plan, the Mississippi River Critical Area Plan, or subsequent
localized planning studies.



      (10)   Upon the advice of the City Assessor, the park
dedication fees are as established by the fee resolution set forth as an
Appendix to this code.



      (11)   Park land dedication or a cash contribution is not
required on an existing residential parcel that is being subdivided if park
land dedication on the parcel has previously been satisfied or if a house
will remain on the parcel after it has been subdivided.  Park land
dedication or a cash contribution will be required for any new lots created
by the subdivision.



('72 Code, § 345:59)  (Ord. 1977-233(A), passed 1-10-77; Am. Ord. 1992-705,
passed 9-14-92; Am. Ord. 1996-801, passed 3-25-96; Am. Ord. 1998-887, passed
8-10-98; am. Ord. 1999-905, passed 10-11-99; Am. Ord. 2001-961, passed
11-26-01; Am. Ord. 2005-1040, passed 6-6-05; Am. Ord. 2006-1061, passed
7-24-06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



ROAD NAMING AND HOUSE NUMBERING



§ 151.070  ROAD DESIGNATIONS.



   (A)   The use of avenue, parkway, trail, drive, boulevard, way,
court, terrace and circle suffixes must be used in identifying location and
direction of roads.



   (B)   Roads must be designated as follows:



      (1)   Roads that run north and south are alphabetical avenues
or terraces.



      (2)   Roads that run east and west are numerical avenues,
trails or ways.



      (3)   Roads that both originate and terminate on the same
street, avenue or boulevard, are circles.



      (4)   Cul-de-sacs (dead ends) are named courts.



      (5)   A road must have only one name for its entire length.



      (6)   Two roads must not be named alike, that is, have the
same name or have similar sounding names.



      (7)   The name of a road may change only if the road changes
direction 45 degrees or more at the point of deviation.



      (8)   All private roads must be labeled lanes and must
maintain numerical and alphabetical sequence.



      (9)   Meandering roads must be labeled boulevard, drive or
parkway.



      (10)    If the proposed street is an extension of an existing
named street that name must be used.  In all other cases the name of any
street previously used within the county must not be used, unless such use is
consistent with the county or community street naming system.



      (11)    The above named requirements may be modified in cases
where the Fire and/or Police Departments recommend modifications to
facilitate their providing for the safety of occupants of the subdivided
lands.  In some areas, changing the name of a street would confuse rather
than assist the Fire and Police Departments.



('72 Code, § 345:61(1))



§ 151.071  HOUSE NUMBERING SYSTEM.



   The standard method of assigning house numbers to each side of the
street is as follows:



   (A)   On the east and west avenue, the even numbers to be assigned
to the north side of the avenue and the odd numbers assigned to the south
side of the avenue.



   (B)   On the north and south avenue, the even numbers to be assigned
to the east side of the avenue and the odd numbers assigned to the west side
of the avenue.



   (C)   On avenues with a deviation of more than 45 degrees from the
north-south base line, the even numbers to be assigned to the north side of
the avenue and the odd numbers assigned to the south side of the avenue.



   (D)   On avenues with a deviation of 45 degrees or less from the
north side base line, the even numbers to be assigned to the east side of the
avenue and the odd number to be assigned to the west side of the avenue.



   (E)   Circle streets are assigned numbers in staggered sequence to
the number sequence of the drive, avenue or parkway on which it originates
and terminates.



   (F)   Dead end roads are assigned numbers as if the road continued
through, beginning with the smallest number of sequence at the road origin.



   (G)   Courts are assigned numbers conforming to the numerical
sequence of the drive, avenue or parkway on which it originates.



   (H)   On a street that deviates 45 degrees or more (measured at the
point of deviation) the number sequence will change accordingly.



   (I)   One-family dwellings and duplexes: one number will be assigned
to each residential unit determined by the location of the principal entrance.



   (J)   Multiple-family dwellings: a number will be assigned to the
entire structure with individual numbers or letters assigned to each dwelling
unit starting with the number “1.”  Multiple dwelling units consisting
of two or more floors must designate each floor starting from the bottom up
in a sequential order.



   (K)   Hotels and motels: a number will be assigned to the front
entrance of the hotel and motel with individual numbers of letters assigned
to each unit starting with the number “1.”



   (L)   Business structures:  a number will be assigned to each
entrance, but only one number per building establishment for each street
frontage.



   (M)    Split lots:  a structure located on two or more lots will be
assigned a number determined by the location of the fronting entrance
measured from the preceding grid line.



   (N)   Blocks:  a structure located on the entire length or width of
a grid block will be assigned a number determined by the location of the
fronting entrance.



   (O)   Corner lots:  a structure located on a corner lot will be
assigned a number determined by the principal entrance.  If the structure is
so located that it would be considered fronting on either street, then it
would be assigned a number determined by the north-south number sequence.



   (P)   Each principal building or structure must display address
numbers.  Address numbers must be a minimum of four inches in height. 
Address numbers must be placed on the structure with an unobstructed view
from the street.  Numbers must be illuminated, reflectorized or of a
contrasting color to the background.  Background must maintain a minimum six
inch perimeter around numbers.



('72 Code, § 345:61(2))  (Am. Ord. 1974-176(A), passed 12-9-74; Am. Ord.
1977-243(A), passed 4-11-77; Am. Ord. 1979-303(A), passed 11-13-79)



REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS



§ 151.085  PURPOSE.



   M.S. § 462.358, Subd. 2A, authorizes the city to condition approval of
the subdivision of property on the construction and installation of certain
utilities.  The intent of this section is to specifically set out the
required improvements which promote and protect the public health, safety and
general welfare.  The city reserves the right to require additional
improvements if deemed necessary by circumstances and conditions unique to
these particular lands.  No subdivision of land is allowed unless storm
sewer, sanitary sewer and a municipal water supply are constructed to serve
the area being divided unless some other ordinance or statute specifically
authorizes said division.



('72 Code, § 345:64)  (Am. Ord. 1984-447(A), passed 4-9-84)



§ 151.086  LISTED AND DESCRIBED.



   Prior to the approval of a final plat by the City Council, the
subdivider must have agreed in the manner set forth below to install, in
conformity with utility construction plans approved by the City Engineer and
in conformity with all applicable standards and ordinances of the City of
Brooklyn Park, the improvements on the site, as described in this section as
follows:



   (A)   Monuments.  Monuments of a permanent character as required by
M.S. § 505.02, must be placed at each corner or angle on the outside
boundary of the subdivision and pipes or steel rods must be placed at each
corner of each lot and each intersection of street center lines.



   (B)   Streets and alleys.  The full width of the right-of-way of
each street and alley dedicated in the plat must be graded and improved. 
All streets and alleys must have an adequate sub-base and must be improved
with an all-weather permanent surface in accordance with the design standards
specified by the Minnesota Department of Transportation Specifications for
Highway Construction on file in the office of the City Engineer.  Boulevard
areas must be sodded including those areas under state and county
jurisdiction.



   (C)   Curb and gutter.  A concrete curb and gutter must be
installed on both sides of each street dedicated in the plat.



   (D)   Water supply.



      (1)   Water mains must be provided to serve the subdivision by
extension of an existing community system.  Service connections must be
stubbed into the property line and all necessary fire hydrants must also be
provided.  Extensions of the public water supply system must be designed so
as to provide public water in accordance with the standards of the City of
Brooklyn Park.



      (2)   In areas being platted for rural estate development with
large lots, as specified in the zoning ordinance, individual wells must be
provided on each lot, properly placed in relationship to the individual
sewage disposal facilities on the same and adjoining lots.  Well location
plans must be submitted for approval to the Building Department.



   (E)   Sewage disposal.



      (1)   Sanitary sewer mains and service connections must be
installed to serve all the lots in the subdivision and must be connected to
the public system.



      (2)   In areas being platted for rural estate development with
large lots, as specified in the zoning ordinance, individual on-site sewage
disposal facilities must be provided for each lot, properly located with
reference to the wells on the same and adjoining lots, and the disposal
facilities on adjacent lots.  The subdivider must have made and submit the
results of tests to ascertain subsurface soil, rock and ground water
conditions in such a subdivision.  Plans for individual on-site facilities
must be submitted for the approval of the City Engineer and the Building
Department and must comply with all requirements of the Minnesota Department
of Health.



   (F)   Drainage.  The grade and drainage requirements for each plat
must be established by the City Engineer at the expense of the applicant. 
Every plat presented for final signature must be accompanied by a certificate
of the City Engineer that the grade and drainage requirements have been
met.  In an area not having municipal storm sewer trunk service, the
applicant is responsible, before platting, to provide for a storm water
disposal plan, without damage to properties outside the platted area, and the
storm water disposal plan must be submitted to the City Engineer who must
report to the Council on the feasibility of the plan presented.  No plat
will be approved before an adequate storm water disposal plan is presented to
and approved by the City Engineer and City Council.  The use of dry wells
for the purpose of storm water disposal is prohibited.



   (G)   Landscaping.



      (1)   Two trees, balled and burlapped, must be planted or
exist within the front yard setback of each newly created single family lot
and must be at least two and one-half inch caliper as measured in accordance
with the most current edition of American Standard for Nursery Stock.  Two
trees, balled and burlapped, of one and one-half inch caliper may be
substituted for one of the required two and one-half inch trees.  Trees must
not be planted within public rights-of-way except by specific City Council
approval.



      (2)   The city contains a number of cottonwood trees which are
weed trees and which have a tuft of cotton hairs on the seed.  These tufts
of cotton hairs become airborne and float to other properties, fouling up air
conditioning units and other mechanical devices which need to breathe, and
are a general nuisance.  Cottonwood trees or members of the cottonwood tree
family which have these tufts of cotton hairs on their seeds must not planted
in the subdivision or in the city, and the subdivider is encouraged to remove
any such trees which are located within the subdivision.



   (H)   Traffic control and street signs.  Traffic control signs
pursuant to M.S. § 169.06 and street signs of standard design approved by
the City of Brooklyn Park must be installed at each street intersection or at
such other locations within the subdivision as designated by the Director of
Public Works.



   (I)   Shorelines.  Where a subdivision includes any portion of the
shoreline of a meandered stream, or river, no less than 5 percent of the
portion of the shoreline lying within a subdivision may be dedicated for use
by the public along with sufficient land to allow access to a publicly
dedicated street.  This land may be a part of, or equal to, the percent of
land or cash requirement per acre required for dedication as public land
under § 151.071 of this chapter.



   (J)   Public utilities.  All utility lines for franchised utility
services must be placed underground and may be placed in the street
right-of-way or adjacent easements.  However, first consideration for the
placement of all franchised utilities will be within easements along rear lot
lines.  Allowances are made for appurtenances and associated equipment such
as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter
cabinets.  All above-ground equipment associated with the provision of
franchised utility services within newly created subdivisions must be
screened from ground level view when such equipment is adjacent to and/or
visible from a public right-of- way.  Live plant material, which at maturity
will provide the necessary screening, must be used for this purpose.



   (K)   Street lights.  Street lights must be installed per city
specifications at all intersections and at other locations as required by the
City Engineer. The city strongly encourages the use of decorative lighting
fixtures.



   (L)   Sidewalks.  All plats with lots or tracts abutting on
principal arterials, "A" or "B" minor arterials, Class I and II collectors,
or commercial and/or industrial streets must have concrete sidewalks
installed on both sides of the dedicated street right-of-way in accordance
with city specifications.  Sidewalks will be required on one side of the
right-of-way of local streets where it is necessary to provide linkages to
proposed or existing trail systems or sidewalks, resulting in a continuous
pedestrian network within and between subdivisions.  However, sidewalks will
not be required on residential cul-de-sac streets which do not exceed 600
feet in length.



   (M)    Driveways.  In all subdivisions the subdivider must provide
concrete or bituminous driveways in accordance with the following standards:



      (1)   There must be installed a concrete or bituminous
driveway extending from the back of the curb or from the edge of the service
street to the garage floor or garage floor apron for each lane or lanes of
vehicular access to the street.  If a building permit is issued and no
garage is to be constructed, the concrete or bituminous driveway must be
completed to the depth of the front yard setback as established in the zoning
code of the city.



      (2)   No curb or driveway opening into any public street may
be made unless the aforesaid construction of concrete or bituminous apron is
installed in accordance with the preceding subdivision.



      (3)   All concrete or bituminous driveways must be constructed
in accordance with the city specifications and reference therein to the
Minnesota Department of Transportation Specifications for Highway
Construction.  The plans and specifications are on file in the office of the
City Engineer.



   (N)   Walkways-pedestrian ways.  Walkways must be incorporated into
subdivisions for the purpose of enhancing pedestrian travel through and
between subdivisions, to provide linkages to residential sidewalk systems and
to enhance the quality of life through their value as residential and
recreational amenities.  Walkway locations must be determined by the City
Council in accordance with these guidelines.  Installation of a walkway
should be completed by the developer prior to the sale of the abutting
properties and designated on the approved plat as a walkway easement. 
Specifications for location and construction are as follows:



      (1)   Public walkway to a park or school must be provided at a
separation distance of no greater than 1,000 feet from another existing or
proposed walkway or sidewalk access.  Exact distance is at the discretion of
the City Council.



      (2)   Walkways must be constructed of bituminous or concrete
material in accordance with city specifications.



      (3)   Fencing or shrubs will be considered at the discretion
of the City Council.



      (4)   The unsurfaced area within the walkway easement must be
sodded.



      (5)   The minimum corridor width for all trails and walkways
must be at least 30 feet.



      (6)   Walkways must be maintained by the city in cooperation
with the adjacent property owner unless otherwise agreed to as part of an
approved conditional use permit development.



   (O)   Sodding of single family lots.  All lots for new single
family homes must be sodded from the public curb to the rear property line
except as follows:



      (1)   In the R-1 District.



      (2)   Existing native plant communities.  Existing native
plant communities and ecosystems maintained in the natural state do not
require sod.  Native plant communities may be reestablished as a part of
site development.



      (3)   Contiguous, undeveloped areas which have been disturbed
during construction and are equal to or larger than one-third of the total
size area must be seeded and maintained as a minimum.  Disturbed areas less
than one-third of the total area must be sodded and maintained.  Within
these undeveloped areas the following must be sodded:  berms, swales,
drainage ponds with slopes greater than four to one; and on corner lots all
green areas in the yard abutting the public right-of-way from the front
street curb to the rear property line and from the side street curb to the
existing building setback.



      (4)   All open areas of the site not sodded or used as gardens
must be planted with an approved ground cover.  Ground cover must be planted
in such a manner as to present a finished appearance and reasonably complete
coverage within 12 months after planting with proper erosion control during
plant establishment.  Exceptions include areas designated as wetland,
existing wooded areas or undisturbed areas containing natural vegetation, all
of which must be maintained free of foreign and noxious materials as defined
in Chapter 97 of this code.



      (5)   Landscape rock and mulch may be substituted for sod in
shrub and flower planting beds and building maintenance strips.



('72 Code, § 345:64)  (Am. Ord. 1984-447(A), passed 4-9-84; Am. Ord.
1986-501(A), passed ; Am. Ord. 1992-705, passed 9-14-92; Am. Ord. 2001-961,
passed 11-26-01)



§ 151.087  PAYMENT FOR INSTALLATION.



   The required improvements to be furnished and installed by the
subdivider, which are listed and described above, are to be furnished and
installed at the sole expense of the subdivider and at no expense to the city
provided, however, that in the case of an improvement the cost of which
would, by general policy of the city, be assessed only in part to the
improved property and the remaining cost paid out of general tax levy, the
City Council may make provision for payment of a portion of the cost by the
city.  If any improvement installed within the subdivision will be of
substantial benefit to lands beyond the boundaries of the subdivision, the
City Council may make provision for causing a portion of the cost of the
improvement representing the benefit to such lands to be assessed against the
same and in such case the subdivider will be required only to pay for such
portions of the whole cost of the improvements as will represent the benefit
to the property within the subdivision.



('72 Code, § 345:67)



§ 151.088  ENTRYWAY SIGNS; DEDICATION AND MAINTENANCE.



   For every plat or subdivision of land in which there is to be placed a
permanent entryway identification sign, a homeowners association or similar
body shall be established to assume sole responsibility for the construction
and maintenance of such sign(s). Estimated costs for sign construction shall
be incorporated into the calculation of on-site development bonds.



('72 Code, § 345:68)  (Ord. 1992-705, passed 9-14-92; Am. Ord. 2001-961,
passed 11-26-01)



§ 151.089  AGREEMENT PROVIDING FOR PROPER INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Prior to installation of any required improvements, the
subdivider must enter into a development contract prepared by the city and
must submit the sureties required by § 151.090 of this chapter.



   (B)   The development contract shall require the subdivider to
furnish and construct the improvements at the sole cost of the subdivider and
in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the City
Council.  The development contract shall provide for sufficient funds to be
escrowed to cover the cost of construction. The City Engineer may require the
developer to have their contractor or subcontractor coordinate the work to be
done under the contract and also coordinate any other work being done or
contracted by the city in the vicinity. 



   (C)   In accordance with the terms of the contract, the subdivider
must provide sureties to the city as set forth in § 151.090 of this
chapter.  A reduction to the sureties prior to the recording of the final
plat may be granted to the subdivider, at the subdividers request, based on
completion of part or all of the off-site improvements which have been
accepted and approved by the city.  If any work begins prior to final
platting, one-third of the required grading estimate must be posted as a cash
bond prior to commencement of any improvements.  The time for completion of
work must be determined by the City Council upon recommendation of the City
Engineer after consultation with the subdivider and must be reasonable in
relation to the work to be done, the season of the year, and proper
correlation with construction activity in the subdivision.



   (D)   No reduction in the cash escrow as required by § 151.090 will
be made until all items covered in the subdivider's contract have been
accepted by the city.



   (E)   Once the necessary improvements have been completed and
approved by the city, the developer shall provide to the city a one year 100%
warranty maintenance bond.  Said bond shall run from date of acceptance by
the city of all construction items.



('72 Code, § 345:70)  (Am. Ord. 1994-756, passed 5-9-94; Am. Ord.
2008-1092, passed 8-25-08)



§ 151.090  FINANCIAL GUARANTEE.



   The development contract provided by § 151.089 of this chapter must
require the subdivider to provide sureties to the city by a cash deposit,
certified check, irrevocable letter of credit, or a performance bond as
follows:



   (A)   Required sureties.



      (1)   Off-site surety. 



         (a)   A surety must be provided to the city in a sum
equal to 150% the total cost of the improvements as estimated by the City
Engineer. Of the total amount, 5% or $2,000, whichever is the greater, must
be posted as a cash bond escrow to be held in a non-interest bearing account,
and 95% of the total shall be posted as cash, an irrevocable letter of
credit, a subdivision bond or a performance bond.  This financial security
must be automatically renewed and shall not expire until released by the
city.  These guarantees must be filed with the city prior to release of the
final plat for recording. 



         (b)   Items covered by these guarantees must include,
but not be limited to, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, bituminous
streets with concrete curb and gutter, street lights, and sidewalks.  These
financial guarantees are for all of the improvements to be furnished and
installed by the subdivider, pursuant to the development contract, and which
have not been completed prior to filing of the final plat. 



         (c)   The city is entitled to reimburse itself out of
the cash bond escrow for any costs and expense incurred by the city for
completion of the work in case of default by the subdivider. Upon completion
of the work and termination of any liabilities to the city by the subdivider
under the contract, the balance remaining of the cash bond escrow must be
refunded to the subdivider.



      (2)   On-site surety.



         (a)   A surety to the city must be provided by the
subdivider in a sum equal to 100% of the amounts established for on-site
bonding by the Department of Community Development.  Five percent of the
total estimates must be posted as a cash bond escrow to be held in a non-
interest bearing account, and 95% of the total shall be posted as cash, an
irrevocable letter of credit, a subdivision bond or a performance bond. 
This financial security must be automatically renewed and shall not expire
until released by the city. This surety must be filed with the city prior to
release of the final plat for recording.



         (b)   Items covered by this surety must include, but not
be limited to, landscaping as required by resolution, mailboxes, utility
repair, adjustment and lot grading, as well as costs for any entryway sign. 
These financial guarantees are for all of the improvements to be furnished
and installed by the subdivider, pursuant to the development contract, and
which have not been completed prior to filing of the final plat.



         (c)   The city is entitled to reimburse itself out of
the cash bond escrow for any cost and expense incurred by the city for
completion of the work in case of default by the subdivider. Upon completion
of the work and termination of any liabilities to the city by the subdivider
under the contract, the balance remaining of the cash bond escrow must be
refunded to the subdivider.



   (B)   Engineering/administrative escrow.



      (1)   A special engineering/administrative escrow must be paid
in cash to the city, held in a non-interest bearing special subdivider's cash
escrow account, and credited to the subdivider.  The
engineering/administrative escrow must be equal to at least 6½% of the
amount of the subdivider’s project improvements as estimated by the City
Engineer, but not less than $1,000.



      (2)   Costs of city services, expenses and materials provided
in reviewing and processing of the final plat including but not limited to
staff time, legal expenses incurred in plat approval, office and field
checking, setting grade and drainage requirements, general supervision,
staking, inspection, purchase and installation of street identification and
traffic control signs, drafting as-built drawings, and all other city staff
services performed in the processing of the improvements and plats, and
administrative and legal expenses in examining title to the property being
developed must be charged to the engineering/administrative escrow account
and must be credited to the City of Brooklyn Park.



      (3)   The Council must promulgate and adopt a set of rules,
regulations and fees for services rendered by city personnel, and the rules,
regulations and fee schedules must be on file with the City Clerk for
inspection.  A copy thereof must be furnished upon request to the
subdivider.  The city must itemize all time, services and materials billed
to any subdivider's cash escrow account.  The subdivider making the
deposit(s) in the subdivider's cash escrow account must, upon request, be
furnished a copy of the itemized charges.



      (4)   If, at any time, the balance in the
engineering/administrative escrow account is depleted to less than 5% of the
originally required cash escrow amount, the subdivider must deposit
additional funds in the account in an amount as determined by the City
Manager, sufficient to cover all costs to be incurred by the city in
processing the final plat.



      (5)   If all, or a part, of a development has been completed,
inspected and accepted, all cash escrow monies, for that portion accepted by
the city, may be reduced by the City Council and full or partial payment be
returned to the subdivider.  Any balance remaining in the account upon
completion of all platting conditions must be returned to the depositor by
the Finance Department after all claims and charges thereto have been paid
and after approval by City Council.



('72 Code, § 345:73)  (Am. Ord. 1985-480(A), passed 3-18-85; Am. Ord.
1991-671(A), passed 2-11-91; Am. Ord. 1994-756, passed 5-9-94; Am. Ord.
2001-961, passed 11-26-01; Am. Ord. 2008-1092, passed 8-25-08)



§ 151.091  CONSTRUCTION PLANS.



   (A)   Construction plans for the required improvements conforming in
all respects to the standards of the City Engineer and the ordinances of the
City of Brooklyn Park must be prepared at the subdivider's expense by a
professional engineer who is registered in the State of Minnesota and said
plans must contain the seal of the profession engineer.



   (B)   Such plans together with the quantity of construction items
must be submitted to the City Engineer for the City Engineer’s approval and
estimate of total cost of the required improvements; upon approval they will
become a part of the contract required in § 151.089.  Reproducible plans
approved by the City Engineer plus two prints must all be furnished to the
city to be filed by the City Engineer as a record in the Engineering
Department.  At the inspection, all required improvements on the site that
are to be installed under the provisions of this chapter must be inspected
during the course of construction by the City Engineer at the subdivider's
expense, and acceptance must be subject to the City Engineer's certificate of
compliance with the contract.



('72 Code, § 345:76)



§ 151.092  IMPROVEMENTS COMPLETED PRIOR TO THE APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT.



   Improvements within a subdivision which have been completed prior to
application for approval of the final plat or execution of the contract for
installation of the required improvements, will be accepted as equivalent
improvements in compliance with the requirements of § 151.086 only if the
City Engineer certifies  that the existing improvements conform to
applicable city standards.



('72 Code, § 345:79)



VARIANCES



§ 151.100  VARIANCES GENERALLY.



   (A)   The City Council may grant a variance from the regulations
contained in this chapter following a finding that all of the following
conditions exist:



      (1)   There are unique circumstances or conditions affecting
the property, such that the strict application of the provisions of this
chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the
applicant’s land.



      (2)   The variance is necessary for the preservation and
enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner.



      (3)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to
the public welfare or injurious to the other property in the territory in
which the property is situated and will not have an adverse effect upon
traffic or traffic safety.



   (B)   In making this finding, the City Council must consider the
nature of the proposed use of the land and existing use of the land in the
vicinity, the number of persons who reside or work in the area, and the
probable effect of the proposed variance upon traffic conditions in the
vicinity.



   (C)   In granting variances as herein provided, the Council must
prescribe conditions that it deems desirable or necessary to protect the
public interest.  In making a determination, the Council must find that:



      (1)   The proposed project will constitute a desirable and
stable community development.



      (2)   The proposed project will be in harmony with adjacent
areas.



   (D)   The application for any variance must be made in writing and
addressed to the Planning Commission and the City Council and must be
submitted to the Department of Community Development.  The application must
include the specific variances requested, the location of those variances and
how it varies from the provisions of the chapter.  The written application
must be submitted to the Planning Commission for their advice and
recommendation and the Planning Commission must report on the provisions set
forth above.  The Planning Commission must submit their recommendations to
the City Council within 60 days after receiving the written application and
required exhibits from the Department of Community Development.



('72 Code, § 345:85)  (Am. Ord. 1984-447(A), passed 4-9-84)



§ 151.101  FEES.



   Applications for variances, subdivisions, or waivers from the
subdivision regulations must be accompanied by a fee as established by the
City Council and § 151.014 of this chapter.



('72 Code, § 345:86)  (Ord. 1972-123(A), passed 8-28-72)



§ 151.102  VARIANCE FOR CERTAIN HOMESTEADS.



   (A)   Purpose.  The city has been a leader in the development of
planning controls in the metropolitan area.  The city was developed and has
continued to develop with agricultural lands and large parcels of land
located north of 85th Avenue North.  The city recognizes that certain
parcels and lands were divided and developed prior to the adoption of modern
subdivision and zoning ordinances and that certain residents are burdened
with parcels of land too large for a normal homestead but too small to create
a viable or economic agricultural unit.  This section regulates parcels of
land less than 20 acres.  It is determined that parcels of land which meet
the following criteria are eligible for a one time variance pursuant to
procedures set forth in § 151.100:



      (1)   Are larger than five acres in size.



      (2)   Have a homestead constructed prior to January 1, 1974.



      (3)   Can be divided with a residue parcel at least five acres
in size.  The residue parcel as herein referred to and described must not be
the parcel upon which the homestead is located.



      (4)   The parcel with the homestead structure must meet the
zoning requirements of 13,500 square foot lot with 100 feet of street
frontage and setback requirements for the district in which it is located.



      (5)   No more than one non-conforming use may be created.



      (6)   Homestead as used herein refers to a structure used as a
dwelling and not to the tax status of the parcel.



   (B)   Variances and non-conforming use.  Variances granted for the
aforedescribed purpose will result in the creation of one non-conforming
parcel containing a structure built prior to January 1, 1974 which meets the
aforementioned requirements.  The parcel is not considered as non-conforming
in non-urban areas but rather than be required to meet all the requirements
of the district in which it is located.  No more than one variance will be
granted for the purposes set forth in this section.



('72 Code, § 345:87)  (Ord. 1977-254(A), passed 12-12-77)



CHAPTER 152:  ZONING CODE



Editors note:



   Resolution 2003-27, passed 1-27-03, corrected minor wording to the
codified version of the zoning code.



Section




ADMINISTRATION





General Provisions




   152.001   Title



   152.002   Purpose



   152.003   Relationship to the Comprehensive Plan



   152.004   Zoning map



   152.005   Application



   152.006   Interpretation



   152.007   Authority



   152.008   Definitions



Administration and Enforcement



   152.020   Purpose



   152.021   City Manager



   152.022   Enforcement and penalties



   152.023   Development contracts, financial guarantees, and cash
escrows



Applications and Procedures



   152.030   Purpose



   152.031   General procedures



   152.032   Administrative permits



   152.033   Site plan review



   152.034   Variance



   152.035   Conditional Use Permit



   152.036   Zoning ordinance text and map amendments



   152.037   Zoning overlays



   152.038   Applications for development in Planned Community
Development District



   152.039   Required information for applications



Non-Conformities



   152.050   Purpose



   152.051   Creation of non-conformities by public action



   152.052   Non-conforming land use



   152.053   Non-conforming lot of record



   152.054   Non-conforming structures



   152.055   Non-conforming site improvements



GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS



Private Structures and Uses On or In Easements and Public Rights-of-Way



   152.070   Easements



   152.071   Public rights-of-way



Relocating Structures



   152.080   Purpose



   152.081   Site plan review required



   152.082   Requirements for relocating structures



Tower Performance Standards



   152.090   Purpose



   152.091   Existing antennas and towers



   152.092   General requirements



   152.093   Towers and antennas in residential areas



   152.094   Additional submittal requirements



   152.095   Evaluation and monitoring



   152.096   Variances



Lighting



   152.110   Purpose



   152.111   Performance standards



   152.112   Glare



   152.113   Compliance



   152.114   Exception



Pedestrian Circulation (Sidewalks)



   152.130   Purpose



   152.131   Required locations



   152.132   Cross circulation requirements



Off-Street Parking, Drive Aisle Standards, Garage and Driveway Regulations



   152.140   Purpose



   152.141   Applicability



   152.142   Required quantity



   152.143   Garages required



   152.144   Driveways



   152.145   Off-street parking area design requirements



   152.146   Transportation demand management



   152.147   Off-street loading docks and staging areas



Additional Parking Standards



   152.148   Additional parking standards for commercial and industrial
uses



Enclosures



   152.150   Trash and waste enclosures



Requirements for Licensed Daycare Facilities



   152.160   Purpose



   152.161   License required



   152.162   Compliance



   152.163   Regulations for residential daycares



   152.164   Regulations for non-residential daycares



Performance Standards for Religious Institutions and Public and Private
Schools



   152.180   Purpose



   152.181   Religious institutions



   152.182   Public and private schools



Sustainability Provisions



   152.184   Community garden standards



   152.185   Alternative energy systems



   152.186   Wind energy conversion systems (WECS) standards



   152.187   Solar energy standards



   152.188   Ground source heat pump system standards



Drainage and Ponding



   152.190   Purpose



   152.191   Drainage



   152.192   Ponds



Interim Uses



   152.193   Purpose



   152.194   Procedure



   152.195   General requirements



   152.196   Termination



RESIDENTIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS



Establishment of Residential Districts



   152.200   Purpose



   152.201   R-1 Urban Reserve District



   152.202   R-2 Detached Single-Family Estate District



   152.203   R-2A Detached Single-Family Residential District



   152.204   R-2B Detached Single-Family Residential District



   152.205   R-3 Detached Single-Family Residential District



   152.206   R-3A Detached Single-Family Residential District



   152.207   R-4 Detached Single- and Attached Two-Family Residential
District



   152.208   R-4A Townhouse District



   152.209   R-5 Multiple Family Residential District



   152.210   R-6 Multiple Family Residential District



   152.211   R-7 Multiple Family Residential District



   152.212   R-4B Detached Single Family District



Required Lot Area and Dimensional Requirements for Residential Districts



   152.220   Purpose



   152.221   Standards



   152.222   Setbacks



   152.223   Clear view triangles



   152.224   Compliance with Floodplain Overlay and Critical Area
Overlay



   152.225   Maximum height



   152.226   Lowest floor elevation



Permitted, Conditional, and Temporary Uses in Residential Districts



   152.240   Purpose



   152.241   Proposed developments subject to Site Plan Review
requirements



   152.242   Permitted and conditional uses



   152.243   Additional regulations for permitted uses



   152.244   Conditional uses



   152.245   Temporary uses



Residential Accessory Uses and Structures



   152.260   Purpose



   152.261   Accessory uses



   152.262   Additional standards for accessory uses



   152.263   Accessory structures



   152.264   Temporary family health care dwellings



Residential Landscaping Standards



   152.270   Purpose



   152.271   Landscape plan required



   152.272   Installation of landscape materials



   152.273   Minimum required open space



   152.274   Minimum tree and shrub quantities



   152.275   Screening



   152.276   Non-residential uses in residential zoning districts



Residential Architectural Standards



   152.290   Purpose



   152.291   General requirements



   152.292   Use specific requirements



   152.293   Maintenance



   152.294   Minimum design and site requirements for medium and high
density residential districts



BUSINESS DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS



Establishment of Business Districts



   152.300   Purpose



   152.301   B-1 Office Park District



   152.302   B-2 Neighborhood Retail Business District



   152.303   B-3 General Business District



   152.304   B-4 Vehicle Sales and Showroom District



   152.305   BP Business Park District



   152.306   I General Industrial District



Required Lot Area and Dimensional Requirements for Business Districts



   152.320   Purpose



   152.321   Standards



   152.322   Setbacks



   152.323   Clear view triangles



   152.324   Bulk restrictions



   152.325   Height limitations



Permitted, Conditional, and Temporary Uses in Business Districts



   152.340   Purpose



   152.341   Proposed developments subject to site plan review
requirements



   152.342   Permitted and conditional uses



   152.343   Additional regulations for permitted uses



   152.344   Additional regulations for conditional uses



   152.345   Temporary uses and events



Business District Accessory Uses and Structures



   152.360   Purpose



   152.361   Accessory uses



   152.362   Additional standards for accessory uses



   152.363   Accessory structures



Landscaping and Screening Standards for Business Districts



   152.370   Purpose



   152.371   Landscape plan required



   152.372   Installation of landscape materials



   152.373   Landscaping standards



   152.374   Landscaping guidelines



   152.375   Screening



   152.376   Crime prevention through environmental design



   152.377   (Reserved)



   152.378   Irrigation system required



   152.379   Conformance with approved plan



Architectural Standards in Business Districts



   152.390   Purpose



   152.391   General requirements



   152.392   Specific requirements



   152.393   Exterior surface finishes



Planned Community Development District (PCDD)



   152.410   Purpose



   152.411   Establishment



   152.412   Site plan review



   152.413   Application components



   152.414   Procedures



   152.415   Uses



   152.416   Open space



   152.417   Performance standards



Public Institution District (PI)



   152.430   Purpose



   152.431   Establishment



   152.432   Site Plan Review



   152.433   Permitted uses



   152.434   Conditional uses



   152.435   Performance standards



   152.436   Accessory uses



Conservancy District (CD)



   152.450   Purpose



   152.451   Establishment



   152.452   Interpretation of district boundaries



   152.453   Permitted uses



   152.454   Conditional uses



Town Center Zoning District



   152.460   Purpose



   152.461   Permitted uses



   152.462   Conditional uses



   152.463   Design standards



   152.464   Submittal requirements and review procedures



   152.465   Modication or amendments



   152.466   General requirements



   152.467   Revocation of development plans



Planned Unit Development Zone District (PUD)



   152.470   Purpose



   152.471   Establishment



   152.472   Submittal requirements



   152.473   Procedures



   152.474   Expiration of approval



   152.475   Development Plan standards



Village Zoning District



   152.480   Purpose



   152.481   Uses



   152.482   Performance Standards



   152.483   Submittal requirements



   152.484   Modification of amendments



   152.485   General requirements



   152.486   Revocation of development plans



SPECIAL ZONING OVERLAYS



Special Overlay Districts



   152.490   Purpose



   152.491   Flood Hazard Overlay



   152.492   Mississippi River Critical Area Overlay (CA)



   152.493   Highway Overlay (H)



   152.494   Planned Development (PD) Overlay



Flood Hazard Area Overlay



   152.510   Purpose



   152.511   General provisions



   152.512   Amendments and administration



   152.513   Floodway, Flood Fringe, and general flood plain
performance standards and uses



   152.514   Standards for all flood plain districts



   152.515   Procedures for submission of technical data for boundary
determination



   152.516   Procedures for submission of technical data for all
development within a flood hazard overlay



   152.517   Subdivision review criteria



   152.518   Conditions for a variance to the Flood Hazard Overlay
performance standards



   152.519   Approval of Site Plan Review, Conditional Use Permits
and/or grading permits



   152.520   Non-conformities



   152.521   Record of first floor elevation



   152.522   Enforcement and penalties



Mississippi River Critical Area



   152.530   Mississippi River corridor development standards



Highway Overlay



   152.540   Purpose



   152.541   Applicability



   152.542   Submittal requirements and review procedures



   152.543   Term of approval



   152.544   Site performance standards



   152.545   Building performance standards



   152.546   Other requirements



   152.547   Allowable uses



Planned Development (PD) Overlay



   152.560   Purpose



   152.561   Uses



   152.562   Submittal requirements



   152.563   Procedures



   152.564   General requirements



   152.565   Modifications or amendments



   152.566   Revocation of the Development Plan



Additional Provisions



   152.570   Noise pollution control




Transit Oriented Development (TOD) Zoning




   152.601   Purpose



   152.602   TOD Districts



   152.603   Uses



   152.604   Building and Site Standards



   152.605   Development Standards



   152.606   TOD-C Transit Oriented Development Center District



   152.607   TOD-C.T Transit Oriented Development Center Transition
District



   152.608   TOD-E Transit Oriented Employment District



   152.609   TOD-E.T Transit Oriented Employment Transition District



   152.610   TOD-G Transit Oriented Greenfield District - High, Medium
and Low Intensities and Greenfield Neighborhood Structure and Public Realm
Standards



ADMINISTRATION



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 152.001  TITLE.



   Chapter 152 may be known, cited and referred to as the “Brooklyn Park
Zoning Code” except as referred to herein, where it may be known as “this
chapter.”



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.002  PURPOSE.



   The intent of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, and
general welfare of Brooklyn Park and its people through the establishment of
minimum regulations governing the development and use of property within the
city.  Such regulations are established to:



   (A)   Implement the Comprehensive Plan;



   (B)   Promote orderly development and redevelopment;



   (C)   Provide adequate light, air and convenience of access to
property;



   (D)   Prevent congestion in the public right-of-way;



   (E)   Prevent overcrowding of land and undue concentration of
structures and population by regulating land, building, setbacks, and density
of development;



   (F)   Provide for the compatibility of different land uses, and
protect from incompatible uses;



   (G)   Provide for the administration of this chapter and any
amendments;



   (H)   Prescribe penalties for violation of such regulations;



   (I)   Define powers and duties of the City Staff, the Planning
Commission, and the City Council in relation to this chapter.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.003  RELATIONSHIP TO THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.



   It is the policy of the city that the enforcement, amendment, and
administration of this chapter be accomplished consistent with the policies
and guidelines contained in the City Comprehensive Plan, as developed and
amended from time to time.  The City Council recognizes the City
Comprehensive Plan as the official policy for the regulation of land use and
development in accordance with the policies and purpose of this chapter.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.004  ZONING MAP.



   (A)   This chapter divides the city into use districts and establish
regulations in regard to location, erection, construction, re-construction,
alteration, and use of structures and land.  The location and boundaries of
the districts established by this text are set forth on the Zoning Map or the
Zoning Overlay Map entitled “City of Brooklyn Park Zoning Map” and the
“City of Brooklyn Park Zoning Overlay Map,” and referred to as the
“Zoning Map” and the “Zoning Overlay Map.”  Both maps must be on
file with the City Manager.  The Zoning Map and the Zoning Overlay Map and
all the notations, references and other information shown on them must have
the same force and effect as if fully set forth in this chapter and made a
part of this chapter by reference.



   (B)   The district boundary lines on the Zoning Map are intended to
follow street right-of-way lines, the center line of streets, or lot lines
unless a boundary line is otherwise indicated on the map.  In the case of
unsubdivided property or in any case where street or lot lines are not used
as boundaries, the district boundary lines may be determined by use of
dimensions or the scale appearing on the map.   



   (C)   All Flood Hazard Overlay boundary decisions will be based on
elevations on the regional (100-year) flood profile and other available
technical data.  Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries
may be given a reasonable opportunity to present their case to the Board of
Appeals and Adjustments and to submit technical evidence as defined in §§
152.030 through 152.039.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.005  APPLICATION.



   (A)   No building, structure or land may be erected, used, relocated
or altered except in conformance with this chapter.



   (B)   The provisions of this chapter must be the minimum
requirements. Where the conditions imposed by any other section of City Code
are either more restrictive than comparable conditions in this chapter, the
provision, rule or regulation which imposes the more restrictive condition,
standard, or requirement must prevail. 



   (C)   Any existing use, structure, lot, or development which was
legally established but is not in conformance with the provisions of this
chapter may be regarded as non-conforming and may continue in existence as
provided for in §§ 152.050 through 152.055.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.006  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Construction of language:



      (1)   The present tense includes the past and future tenses
and the future the present.



      (2)   The singular number includes the plural and the plural
the singular.



      (3)   The word “must” is mandatory and the word “may”
is permissive.



      (4)   If a word or term defined in this chapter appears in the
text, its meaning may be construed as set forth in the definition of the word
or term.



      (5)   All measured distances expressed in feet must be to the
nearest tenth of a foot.



   (B)   Except as otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter,
the following may apply to a use not provided for within a zoning district.



      (1)   If in any zoning district a use is neither specifically
permitted nor allowed, the use may be considered prohibited.



      (2)   The City Council or the Planning Commission, on their
own initiative or upon request, may utilize City Staff to conduct a study to
determine if a particular use complies with the Comprehensive Plan, what
zoning district would be most appropriate, and what standards and conditions
may apply to its use.



      (3)   The City Council may initiate an amendment to this
chapter according to procedures established in §§ 152.030 through 152.039
to provide for the particular use under consideration.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.007  AUTHORITY.



   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the
Municipal Planning Act, M.S. §§ 462.351 to 462.364, as amended from time to
time.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.008  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.  If a
word or term defined in this chapter appears in the text of this chapter, its
meaning may be construed as set forth below.



   ABUTTING.  See ADJACENT.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.  A structure subordinate to, incidental to,
and/or serving the principal structure on the same lot.  Examples of
accessory structures include garages (attached or detached), greenhouses,
fences, gazebos, ice-fishing shacks, storage sheds, etc.



   ACCESSORY USE. A use subordinate to, incidental to, and/or serving the
principal use on the same lot.



   ADJACENT.  When referring to adjacent lots or land, adjacent means a
lot that shares all or part of a common lot line with another lot.  For the
purposes of this definition, adjacent also includes lots or land separated
only by a railroad; utility right-of-way; public street classified as a
low-density minor arterial, collector or local street; or a trail corridor
less than 50 feet wide.



   ANIMAL UNIT.  The following animals constitute one animal unit
equivalency: one cow, horse,  donkey, llama, or burro, or three sheep or
emus.  Any animal not listed except domestic animals may be considered one
animal unit equivalency.  Animals are further defined and regulated in other
sections of the City Code.



   ANIMAL, DOMESTIC.  A domestic animal is a common house pet which can
be contained within a principal structure throughout the entire year,
provided that containment can be accomplished without special modification to
the structure requiring a building permit from the city.



   ANIMAL, FARM.  Animals not typically sheltered within the principal
structure throughout the entire year.  This includes, but is not limited to,
cattle, pigs, sheep, goats, horses and other animals commonly accepted as
farm animals in the State of Minnesota.



   ANTENNA.  Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting
or transmitting communication signals.  This includes, but is not limited
to, directional antennas, such as panels and microwave and satellite dishes,
and omni-directional antennas, such as whip antennas.



   APPLICANT.  The owner, their agent, or representative having interest
in land where an application for city review of any permit, use or
development is required by this chapter.



   APPLICATION.  The form and accompanying documentation required by this
chapter or by city policy for city review purposes.



   APPROVED PERVIOUS SURFACE. Includes pavers, specialty concrete or the
like.  It does not include dirt, gravel or crushed rock surfaces.



   ARTERIAL.  A type of road that is characterized by limited access and
a design capacity to move relatively large volumes of traffic in an expedient
manner.  Arterials are divided into principal arterials and minor arterials
based on their access, the traffic volume they carry and the areas they
serve.  Examples of principal arterials include freeways or interstate
highways such as Interstate 94 and Trunk Highways 169 and 252.  Examples of
minor arterials include 85th Avenue, Brooklyn Boulevard, County Road 81, and
Noble Avenue.  The roadway classification system is further defined and
illustrated in the City’s Transportation Plan.



   ASSEMBLY, BANQUET, CONVENTION HALLS, or CONFERENCE CENTER.  A facility
available for private rental for private events such as weddings,
conferences, or meetings.  This definition does not include rental for uses
that are open to the public such as night clubs or general parties.



   ASSISTED LIVING HOUSING.  Housing designed for persons who need
assistance with their daily living needs including special support services
such as meal preparation, housekeeping, limited medical care, and
transportation.



   AUCTION LICENSED AUTO DEALER.  May sell used motor vehicles belonging
to others.



   BASEMENT. That portion of a building having a minimum of half its floor
to ceiling height below the front grade at the front of the dwelling for at
least 50% of the foundation footprint.  Each room or area in a basement must
be at least seven and one half feet from floor to ceiling. 



   BASEMENT (as applied to flood hazard overlay only).  Any area of a
structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor or base subgrade (below
ground level) on all four sides, regardless of the depth of excavation below
ground level.



   BB or bb.  An abbreviation meaning balled and burlapped and used to
describe the root treatment of certain plant materials.



   BEEKEEPING.  The occupation of owning and breeding of honey bees in
colonies, commonly in hives, to produce honey and other products to pollinate
plants or to produce bees for sale to other beekeepers.



   BERM.  A landscaped mound of earth used to separate incompatible uses,
screen offsite views of development, mitigate noise impacts and create
aesthetic interest.







 



Figure 152.008.01 Berm



   BIG BOX RETAILER.  A retail establishment having a gross floor area of
50,000 square feet or greater that offers a variety of general merchandise or
specialty products. Typical characteristics may include a free-standing
rectangular-shaped building with high ceilings and standardized facades that
have no windows or few windows. Big box stores are intended to draw customers
on a community scale.



   BLACK DIRT (as used for top soil).  Organic soils added on top of
existing soil that are darker in color and richer in organic materials
compared to the existing.



   BLUFF.  Slopes 12% or greater leading from the river’s edge up to an
area where the slope is less than 12% and the elevation coincides with that
of the larger surrounding area.  The top of the bluff must be measured from
this final leveling off point.  Narrow bands of level area that are in the
middle of an otherwise continuous slope greater than 12% do not qualify as
the top of the bluff.



   BOARDING OR ROOMING HOUSE.  A dwelling unit, or portion of a dwelling
unit, in which for compensation, lodging and meals are provided to no more
than six persons who do not function as a single housekeeping unit.



   BODY ART.  Physical body adornment using, but not limited to, the
following techniques: body piercing, tattooing, branding, body modification
and cosmetic tattooing, as regulated by M.S. Chapter 146B and Chapter 123 of
this code.  This definition does not include practices that are considered
part of a medical procedure performed by a state board certified medical or
dental personnel, such as, but not limited to, implants under the skin. 
Such medical procedures may not be performed in a body art establishment. 
This definition does not include piercing of the outer perimeter of lobe of
the ear using pre-sterilized single use stud and clasp ear piercing system.



   BREWERY.  A facility that manufactures or produces malt liquor as
defined in M.S. § 340A.101, Subd. 16.



   BROKER LICENSED AUTO DEALER.  May arrange for the sale or lease of new
or used  motor vehicles.



   BUILDING.  Any structure having a roof supported by columns, walls or
other means of support for the shelter or enclosure of persons or property,
and when said structure is divided by party walls without openings, each
portion of such building so separated may be deemed a separate building.  In
sections of this ordinance where minimum sized buildings are required, areas
which are part of basements, open porches, canopies, awnings, breeze- ways,
covered patios, and other similar features are not included in calculating
the required building size.



   BUILDING AREA.  The space remaining on a lot or parcel after the
required setbacks and other requirements of this chapter have been applied.







 



Figure 152.008.02 Building Area



   BUILDING HEIGHT.  The distance measured from the average proposed
ground elevation adjoining the building at the front building line to the top
of the cornice of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, to a point
on the roof directly above the highest wall of a shed roof, to the uppermost
point on a round or other arch-type roof, or to the average distance of the
highest gable on a pitched or hip roof.



   BUFFER.  The use of land, topography, water bodies and vegetation to
separate and mitigate the impacts of land uses upon another property.



   CARE CENTER/CONVALESCENT HOME.  Housing for dependent persons
including personal nursing care, meal preparation in a common dining hall,
hygiene services, laundry, etc.



   CALIPER.  The diameter of a tree trunk measured six inches above the
ground for trees less than four inches in diameter and 12 inches above the
ground for trees more than four inches in diameter.







 



Figure 152.008.04 Caliper Size



   CITY CODE.  The 1972 Ordinance Code of the City of Brooklyn Park, as
amended from time to time.  Also referred to as the Code of Ordinances. 
This zoning ordinance is a part of the City Code.



   CLEAR VIEW TRIANGLE.  An area around the convergence of two streets or
a street and an access driveway where visibility is not impeded.



At the intersection of two streets. The clear view triangle is an area that
begins at the intersection of the projected curb lines of two intersecting
streets and is measured back along both streets the distance specified in
§§  152.220 through 152.226 and §§ 152.320 through 152.325 and marked
with a point.  Those points are then connected with a straight line.



At the intersection of an access driveway and a street.  The clear view
triangle is an area that begins at the intersection of the projected curb
line of the access driveway and the private street or public right-of-way and
is measured back along both the street and the access driveway the distance
specified in §§ 152.220 through 152.226 and §§ 152.320 through 152.325
and marked with a point.  Those points are then connected with a straight
line.







 



Figure 152.008.05 Clear View Triangle



   CLUB. 



      (1)   An incorporated organization organized under the laws of
the state for civic, fraternal, social, or business purposes, for
intellectual improvement, or for the promotion of sports, or a
congressionally chartered veterans' organization, which:



         (a)   Has more than 30 members;



         (b)   Has owned or rented a building or space in a
building for more than one year that is suitable and adequate for the
accommodation of its members;



         (c)   Is directed by a board of directors, executive
committee, or other similar body chosen by the members at a meeting held for
that purpose.



      (2)   No member, officer, agent, or employee shall receive any
profit from the distribution or sale of beverages to the members of the club,
or their guests, beyond a reasonable salary or wages fixed and voted each
year by the governing body.



   CLUB, SOCIAL.  An establishment not included in the definition of CLUB
that is open to the public or by private membership where the purpose of the
establishment is to provide a place for social interaction between patrons. 



   COCKTAIL ROOM.  A facility on or adjacent to the premises of a
microdistillery where the on-sale consumption of distilled spirits produced
by the distiller is permitted pursuant to M.S. § 340A.22.



   COLLECTOR STREETS.  A type of road that functions to provide
connections between neighborhoods and from neighborhoods to areas with
concentrations of businesses.  They typically have lower traffic volumes and
speeds than arterials, but higher volumes and speeds than local roads. 
Collectors are divided into those roads that are designed to distribute
traffic from major generators or from minor collectors to arterial roads
(major collectors) and those roads that are designed to distribute traffic
from major collectors or arterials to local streets (minor collectors). 
Examples of major collectors include Candlewood Drive, Regent Avenue, and
West River Road.  Examples of minor collectors are Pearson Parkway, Lad
Parkway, and Northland Drive.  The roadway classification system is further
defined and illustrated in the City's Transportation Plan.



   COMMERCIAL INDOOR RECREATIONAL FACILITIES.  Private recreational
facilities operated for profit and open to members and/or the general public
including health centers, tennis and racquetball clubs, indoor swimming
pools, video arcades (amusement centers), indoor batting cages, pool halls,
and the like.



   COMMERCIAL LAND USE.  A land use activity designated within the
Comprehensive Plan that the owner, lessee or licensee of the property carries
out for financial gain and involves the sale of goods or services.



   COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR RECREATIONAL FACILITIES.  Private recreational
facilities operated for profit and open to members and/or the general public
including golf courses and driving ranges, miniature golf, riding stables,
skating rinks, outdoor swimming pools, archery or trapshooting ranges,
batting cages, softball, baseball, volleyball, soccer, or football
facilities, and the like.



   COMMERCIAL VEHICLES. A vehicle that meets one or more of the following:



      (1)   A dump truck, step van, construction vehicle or
equipment (bobcats, backhoes and the like), semi-tractor, semitrailer, or
trailer, tank truck, tow truck, tractor, bus, cargo truck,  or any vehicle
that has a registered gross weight of more than 12,000 pounds, except the
following: 



         (a)   A vehicle that is used for private, personal, or
recreational use; is not defined as a commercial vehicle in division (1)
above; and is not altered with commercial equipment, such as a 1-ton pickup
truck.



         (b)   A properly licensed recreational vehicle or
recreational equipment with sole and consistent use for private recreational
purposes.



      (2)   A vehicle that has commercial equipment added to the
vehicle such as a snow plow or other externally attached equipment, except
recreational vehicles or recreational equipment used only for private,
recreational and residential use.



      (3)   A limousine or taxi.



      (4)   A trailer loaded with a commercial vehicle(s) or
commercial equipment.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.  The most recent edition of the document entitled,
“The Brooklyn Park Comprehensive Plan” and associated maps adopted by the
City Council and as amended from time to time.



   COMMUNITY GARDEN.  An area of land that is managed and maintained by a
group of individuals to grow and harvest food crops and/or non-food
ornamental crops such as flowers for personal or group use, consumption or
donation.



   CONCRETE PRECAST PANELS.  A facade material composed of concrete
sheets, also commonly referred to as tip-up-tilt-up or poured-in-place
panels, etc.  For purposes of this chapter, concrete precast panels are
divided into the following:



      (1)   Architecturally textured panels.  Smooth concrete
precast panels, steel form panels, exposed imprint panels (with exposed
aggregate), ribbed, grooved, random relief, or the like, with additional
colors, removed patterns, and/or graphics like bands, patterns, and geometric
designs that are used to add distinctiveness to building facade.



      (2)   Industrial grade panels.  Panels with the following
textures or those deemed similar: raked, corduroy, broomed, or panels exposed
aggregate (except exposed imprint panels).



   CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.  A permit issued by the City Council to the
applicant according to the procedures of this chapter that includes the
representations made by the applicant regarding the characteristics and
operation of the conditional use and conditions imposed by the City Council.



   CRITICAL FACILITIES.  Facilities necessary to a community's public
health and safety, those that store or produce highly volatile, toxic or
water-reactive materials, and those that house occupants who may be
insufficiently mobile to avoid loss of life or injury.  Examples of critical
facilities include hospitals, correctional facilities, schools, daycare
facilities, nursing homes, fire and police stations, wastewater treatment
facilities, public electric utilities, water plants, fuel storage facilities,
and waste handling and storage facilities.



   CURRENCY EXCHANGE. Any business, except a bank, trust company, savings
bank, savings association, credit union, or industrial loan and thrift
company, engaged in the business of cashing checks, drafts, money orders, or
travelers’ checks for a fee.  CURRENCY EXCHANGE does not include a
business that provides these services incidental to the person’s primary
business if the charge for cashing a check or draft does not exceed $1 or one
percent of the value of the check or draft, whichever is greater.



   DAYCARE FACILITIES.  A facility required to be licensed by the state,
county or city that provides one or more persons with care, training,
supervision, habilitation, rehabilitation or developmental guidance on a
regular basis, for periods of less than 24 hours per day, in a place other
than the person’s own dwelling unit.  Licensed day care facilities include
but are not limited to: family day care homes, group family daycare homes,
daycare centers, day nurseries, nursery schools, developmental achievement
centers, day treatment programs, adult day care centers, and day services as
defined by Minnesota State statute.  Residential day care facilities whose
primary purpose is to treat juveniles who have violated criminal statutes
relating to sex offenses or have been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of
conduct in violation of criminal statues relating to sex offenses may not be
considered a licensed residential day care facility.



   DENSITY.  The number of dwelling units per acre as regulated by this
chapter and the Comprehensive Plan.  Density is calculated by dividing the
gross acreage of a property excluding wetlands designated by federal and
state agencies and those classified by the Wetland Conservation Act, by the
number of dwelling units existing or proposed for the property.



   DETACHED TOWNHOUSE.  A detached townhouse is a freestanding single
family dwelling, built on a single lot, in a neighborhood with a cohesive
exterior design, whose grounds and building exteriors are maintained by an
association.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any man made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations of
storage or equipment or materials.



   DEVELOPMENT CONTRACT.  A legal instrument that defines the
representations and obligations of an applicant and the city for the
development of property.



   DEVELOPMENT PLAN.  A document or set of drawings required by the city
that depicts elements that contribute to a cohesive planned area or
neighborhood.



   DISTILLERY.  A facility that manufactures or produces distilled
spirits as defined in M.S. § 340A.101, Subd. 9.



   DISTRIBUTION CENTER.   An establishment engaged in the receipt,
storage, and distribution of goods, products, cargo, and materials, including
transshipment by boat, rail, air, or motor vehicle.



   DWELLING UNIT.  One or more rooms, designed or intended for occupancy
within a building by one family or housekeeping unit with sanitary, culinary
and sleeping facilities separate from those of other units and intended for
the exclusive use of a single- family or housekeeping  unit.



   DWELLING, ATTACHED TWO-FAMILY.  A building designed for occupancy by
two families or housekeeping units with  a physical separation between the
two dwelling units.



   DWELLING, DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY.  A building surrounded by open space
containing one dwelling unit that is not attached to any other dwelling by
any means.



   DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY.  A building designed or intended for
occupancy by three or more families or housekeeping units, with separate
dwelling units either designed one over another and connected by interior or
exterior hallways and/or common entries or as townhouse dwellings.



   DWELLING, SENIOR INDEPENDENT LIVING.  A residential complex or
development that is age restricted to people 55 and older without any on-site
or staffed nursing or other types of assistance.



   DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE.  A single structure consisting of not more than
six dwelling units each, with no other dwelling or portion of other dwelling
directly above or below, with each dwelling unit connected to the other
dwelling by a common separation with no opening, except for one unit
townhouse structures.







 



Figure 152.008.06 Detached Dwellings







 



Figure 152.008.07 Attached Two-Family







 



Figure 152.008.08 Townhouses







 



Figure 152.008.09 Multiple Family Dwelling



   EASEMENT.  A grant of one or more of the property rights by the owner,
to or for the use by the public, another person, or entity.



   ENTERTAINMENT, LIVE.  Disc jockeys, live music, comedy performances,
theatrical performances, and the like.  This definition does not include
mixed martial arts or boxing. 



   EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT. A method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so that flood plain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.



   EVAPOTRANSPIRATION.  Water lost to the atmosphere from the ground
surface, evaporation from the capillary fringe of the groundwater table, and
the transpiration of groundwater by plants whose roots tap the capillary
fringe of the groundwater table.



   FAMILY.  An individual or two or more persons each related by blood,
marriage, or adoptions, including foster children, living together as a
single housekeeping unit; or no more than four unrelated persons maintaining
a common household and using and maintaining common cooking and kitchen
facilities as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding or rooming
house, or licensed day care facility.



   FARM.  A parcel of land having five acres or more which is under
cultivation or a parcel ten acres or more which is fenced and used as
pasture, or a parcel ten acres or more of any combination.  No farm may
exceed one animal unit per acre in aggregate.



   FARM FENCE.  A fence as defined by M.S. § 344.02, Subd. 1(a) - (d).
An open type fence of posts and wire is not considered to be a structure
under §§ 152.510 through 152.522. Fences that have the potential to
obstruct flood flows, such as chain link fences and rigid walls, are
regulated as structures under §§ 152.510 through 152.522 .



   FARMERS' MARKET.  Outdoor sales of fruits, vegetables, meats, honey,
flowers, plants, homemade bakery goods, cheeses, soaps, and other similar
products.



   FARMING AND CULTIVATION OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS.  Agricultural and
horticultural uses that are not enclosed or covered by a structure. 



   FINISHED SQUARE FOOTAGE (MINIMUM).  The above grade areas of a house
that are planned to be completed under the original building permit,
excluding garages or other attached accessory buildings, open porches,
breezeways, three season rooms, covered patios and the like. All unfinished
areas of residential dwellings must be so noted on residential building plans
submitted for permit.  “Finished” interior areas of residential
buildings must comply with the UBC requirements for finished habitable space
and have one or more of the listed materials used on each of the following:



      (1)   Floors - wood; carpet; tile; rock; brick; linoleum; and
similar decorative materials.



      (2)   Ceilings - sheet rock with paint, texturing, or a
similar decorative trim; suspended ceiling systems; tile; heavy timber
construction; wood paneling; and similar decorative materials



      (3)   Walls - sheet rock with paint, wallpaper, or a similar
decorative trim; wood or rock paneling; mirrors; heavy timber construction,
brick; and similar decorative materials.



   FLOOD.  A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream, lake,
or wetland that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.



   FLOOD FREQUENCY. The frequency for which it is expected that a specific
flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.



   FLOOD FRINGE (OR FLOODWAY FRINGE).  All the land in a flood plain not
lying within a delineated flood way.  Land within a floodway fringe is
subject to inundation by relatively low velocity flows and shallow water
depths.  The flood fringe includes at a minimum, the areas designated as
zone AE on the Flood Insurance Rate Map outside of the floodway, except as
modified on the Zoning Overlay Map.



   FLOOD HAZARD AREA.  The flood plain consisting of the flood way, the
flood fringe, and/or the general flood plain  area.







 



Figure 152.008.10 Flood Hazard Area



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP ("FIRM").  An official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas
and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been
made available digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).



   FLOOD PLAIN, GENERAL.  A 100 year flood plain area shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map where flood way and flood fringe boundaries and/or 100
year flood elevations have not been determined.  These areas include areas
designated as Zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate Map and zone AE areas where
a floodway is not shown.



   FLOOD PRONE AREA. Any land susceptible to being inundated by water from
any source (see FLOOD).



   FLOODPROOFING. A combination of structural provisions, changes, or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for
the reduction or elimination of flood damages.



   FLOODWAY.  The channel of a natural stream or river and portions of
the flood plain adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry
and discharge the flood water or flood flow of any natural stream or river. 
The floodway, at a minimum, includes the floodway areas shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map and as depicted on the Zoning Overlay Map.



   FLOOR AREA, GROSS.  The sum of all the gross horizontal areas of the
floor(s) of a building or structure from the exterior face of exterior walls,
or from the centerline of a wall separating two buildings, but excluding any
space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six feet.







 



Figure 152.008.11 Gross Floor Area



   FLOOR AREA, NET.  The total of all floor areas of a building,
excluding stairwells and elevator shafts, equipment rooms, unenclosed
porches, interior vehicular parking or loading; and all floors below the
first or ground floor, except when used or intended to be used for human
habitation or service to the public.



   FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR).  The gross floor area of all buildings or
structures on a lot divided by the area of that lot.  Extensive
environmentally constrained areas may cause the FAR to be adjusted
accordingly.



   FORESTRY, PRIVATE. Trees planted or growing on privately owned property.



   FORESTRY, PUBLIC. Trees planted or growing on public easements (public
right-of-way and public use), parks and public buildings grounds.



   FOUNDATION FOOTPRINT.  The area of the largest level of a dwelling
unit at or near grade as determined by the outside dimensions of a building,
excluding attached garages or other attached accessory buildings, decks,
patios, three-season porches, etc.



   FOUR-SEASON PORCHES.  A roofed and enclosed porch, deck, or similar
space that is heated or air-conditioned.



   FULL SERVICE GROCERY STORE.  Retail store at least 60,000 square feet
in size, selling a complete assortment of food, food preparation and wrapping
materials and household cleaning items.  May also include the following
products and services: ATMs, automobile supplies, bakeries, books and
magazines, coffee shop, dry cleaning, floral arrangements, greeting cards,
limited service banks, photo centers, pharmacies, and video rental areas. 
Some facilities may be open 24 hours a day.



   GARAGE.  An accessory structure that is primarily used for the parking
and storage of vehicles, and storage of goods and equipment owned by the same
property owner or resident or the principle structure.



   GARAGE SALE.  The sale of used personal goods from a private residence
or religious institution. 



   GAS/FUEL TANKS (ABOVE GROUND).  A tank used to store fuel used for
energy purposes in buildings and structures.  This definition does not
include portable propane cylinders used with barbeque grills, or the like.



   GLARE.  The effect produced by the intensity and direction of any
artificial illumination sufficient to cause annoyance, discomfort, or
temporary loss or impairment of vision.



   GREYWATER.  Wastewater, containing no fecal matter (human feces), that
is generated from domestic activities such as laundry, dishwashing, and
bathing and which can be recycled on-site for uses such as landscape
irrigation and constructed wetlands. 



   GREEN ROOFTOPS. Veneers of living vegetation installed atop of
buildings that act to manage stormwater by mimicking a variety of hydrologic
processes normally associated with open space.



   GROUND COVER.  Perennial plants that are not classified as noxious
weeds as defined elsewhere in the City Code, other than turf grass, normally
reaching an average maximum height of not more than 24 inches at maturity.



   HARDSURFACE COVERAGE.  The amount of a lot covered by building,
pavement, concrete or other impervious material.



   HEAT ISLAND REDUCTION. Use of vegetative cover to minimize heat islands
on hard cover areas and to reduce impact on microclimate and human and
wildlife habitat.



   HOME OCCUPATION.  Any occupation carried out by the occupant of a
residential dwelling unit that occurs within the principal or accessory
building on the property and does not change the nature of the primary use of
the property.



   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE.  Any surface that prevents absorption of water
into the ground.  Examples of impervious surfaces include, but are not
limited to, cement, asphalt, and paving brick.



   INDOOR SALES OF AUTOMOBILES.  All sales and display take place within
a building.



   INTERIM USE.  A use of property that is consistent with the city's
comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance, which may exist temporarily until a
particular date or until an occurrence of a particular event deemed by the
City Council.



   INTERIM USE PERMIT.  A permit issued in accordance with procedures
specified in this section, as a flexible device to enable the City Council to
assign time limits and conditions to a proposed use after consideration of
current or future adjacent uses and their functions.



   INTERSECTION (OF TWO STREETS).  The point of intersection is the
location where the extended curb lines of two streets meet.



   IRRIGATION SYSTEM.  A permanent, underground watering system designed
to transport and distribute water to landscaped areas of property.



   LANDSCAPING.  Any combination of living plants, (such as grass,
perennials, shrubs, vines, hedges, or trees) and non-living material, (such
as rocks, pebbles, mulch, decorative walls, fences, or decorative paving
materials) used to enhance the appearance and use of the natural and built
environment.



   LANDSCAPING, ARID. That combination of living plants, (such as grass,
perennials, shrubs, vines, hedges, or trees) and non-living material, (such
as rocks, pebbles, mulch, decorative walls,  fences, or decorative paving
materials) used to enhance the appearance and use of the natural and built
environment that is designed for needing no additional irrigation above
natural rainfall.



   LICENSED RESIDENTIAL FACILITY (GROUP HOME).  A facility required to be
licensed by the state or county that provides one or more persons with 24
hour per day substitute care, food, lodging, training, education,
supervision, habilitation, rehabilitation or treatment that cannot be
furnished in the person’s own home.  Licensed residential facilities
(Group Homes) are limited to those facilities licensed and/or regulated by
the Department of Human Services and the Department of Health.  This does
not include licensed facilities whose primary purpose is to treat juveniles
who have violated criminal statutes relating to sex offenses or facilities
licensed by the Department of Corrections.



   LIVE/WORK UNITS. A residential unit designed and utilized as a shared
living environment and as the resident's primary workspace such as an artist
studio. Work conducted within the unit does not include employees or regular
customer visits.



   LOADING DOCK.  A platform adjacent to a building at which trucks load
or unload cargo.



   LOCAL STREETS.  A type of road that functions to provide access to
adjacent properties and from properties to collectors and/or arterials. 
Speeds and traffic volumes are typically lower than collectors or
arterials.  The roadway classification system is further defined and
illustrated in the City’s Transportation Plan.



   LOT or PARCEL.  A portion of land occupied or used, or intended for
occupancy or use, for a purpose permitted or conditionally permitted in this
chapter and of sufficient size to provide the yards and area required by this
chapter.



   LOT AREA.  The total area within the lot lines of a lot or parcel,
excluding any street rights-of- way given by fee dedication.



   LOT CORNER.  A lot situated at the junction of, and adjacent to two or
more intersecting streets.



   LOT DEPTH.  The average distance between the front lot line and the
rear lot line of a lot or parcel.



   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE.  A lot which is adjacent to two substantially
parallel streets, and is not a corner lot.



   LOT, FRONT.   A lot line abutting the right of way of a public street
or property or easement line of a private street. On a corner lot, the
shortest of the sides abutting the public street shall be the front. If the
dimensions of a corner lot are within 10% of being equal, the front lot line
shall be that street designated by the owner. Once it has been established,
with the address assigned and the principal entrance determined, the front
shall not be reversed.



   LOT LINE.  A line of record bounding a lot that divides one lot from
another lot, a public right-of-way, or private street.







 



Figure 152.008.12 Lot Lines



   LOT, REAR.   The boundary of a lot that is opposite the front lot
line. If the rear lot line is less than ten feet in length, or if the lot
forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line ten feet in
length within the lot, connecting the side lot lines and parallel to the
front lot line.



   LOT WIDTH.  The distance between the side lot lines as measured along
the required front-yard setback.



   LOWEST FLOOR.  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 Code of Federal
Regulations, Part 60.3.



   LUMINAIRE.  A complete lighting unit extending from a support
structure consisting of a light source and all necessary mechanical,
electrical and decorative parts. The light source, shield and other
components do not extend below the cutoff angle for the luminaire. A
luminaire does not include a pole or other support.



   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. 
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include the term RECREATIONAL VEHICLE .



   MICRODISTILLERY.  A distillery that manufactures or produces distilled
spirits not exceeding 40,000 proof gallons in a calendar year.



   MISSISSIPPI RIVER CRITICAL AREA.  The Mississippi River and adjacent
lands in the Twin Cities region were designated a Critical Area by the State
of Minnesota under the Critical Areas Act. Executive Order No. 79-19
established the Mississippi River Critical Area.



   MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT.  The development of a designated area of land
with two or more different land uses.



   MOBILE FOOD UNIT. A self-contained food service operation, located in a
readily movable motorized wheeled or towed vehicle, used to store, prepare,
display or serve food intended for individual portion service that is readily
movable without disassembling, or as defined in M.S. § 157.15, Subd 9.



   MODEL HOME.  A home which is similar to others in a new residential
development and is temporarily open to regular public inspections for the
purpose of selling other homes in the development.



   MODIFIED SPLIT ENTRY. A dwelling unit with a front entrance that is
midway between the lower level and the upper level. This type of home has a
lower level separated by more than three risers or 24 inches of height
difference below the front entry elevation and will not be counted towards
the minimum square footage requirements of the home.



   MODIFIED TWO STORY.  A dwelling unit which has some part of the
building that is a minimum of a full two stories in height at, or above the
front entry elevation.  Not all parts of the home will be a full two stories
(or more) in height.  There may be a lower level separated by no more than
three risers or 24 inches of height difference above or below the front entry
elevation that may be counted towards the minimum square footage of the home.



   MOTOR HOME.  A vehicle that provides temporary living quarters and is
self propelled or capable of being towed on public roads.  Temporary living
quarters within this definition mean:



      (1)   The vehicle is not used as a residence on private
property in this city.



      (2)   The vehicle is used for temporary living quarters by the
owner or occupant while engaged in recreational or vacation activities away
from the property.



      (3)   The vehicle is not a junk vehicle defined elsewhere in
the City Code.



   NATIVE SPECIES. Plants that are indigenous to a particular region.
Plants are considered native if they were present at the time of the public
land survey (1847-1907) that was conducted before and during the early stages
of European settlement.



   NATURAL AREA.  A designated area within a Neighborhood Development
Plan where limited human activity is planned and uses are of an undeveloped
nature.  Examples of natural areas include but are not limited to parks,
gardens, recreational uses, trails, nature areas, and open space.



   NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL.  Limited commercial areas that provide
compact centers for retail sales and services to adjacent neighborhoods.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION.  Structures, including additions and improvements,
and placement of manufactured homes, for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of §§ 152.510 through 152.522.



   NON-CONFORMITIES.  Any land use, site, structure, building, lot of
record, or sign legally established prior to the effective date of this
chapter or subsequent amendment to it which would not be permitted by or is
not in full compliance with the regulations of this chapter.



   NON-PASSENGER VEHICLE OR EQUIPMENT.  A recreational vehicle or
equipment that is not self-propelled or cannot receive a vehicle license. 
This definition does not include junk vehicles as defined elsewhere in the
City Code.



   NURSING HOME. A state licensed facility used to provide care for aged
or infirm persons who require nursing and personal care and related services
in accordance with state regulations. A nursing home may be a residential
healthcare facility, an intermediate care facility, or a long term care
facility.



   OBSTRUCTION.  Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building,
wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across,
or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory flood plain that
may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in
itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water.



   OFFICE.  Services that are predominantly administrative, professional
and/or clerical in nature and conducted within a building or part of a
building.



   ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD PLAIN.  Lands that are inundated by a regional
flood.



   OPEN SPACE.  An area of land that does not contain any buildings
except those constructed for recreational or gardening purposes, and is
intended for environmental, scenic, or recreational purposes.



   ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL.  The boundary of water basins,
watercourses, public waters, and public waters wetlands, and:



      (1)   The OHWL is an elevation delineating the highest water
level that has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave
evidence upon the landscape, commonly the point where the natural vegetation
changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial;



      (2)   For watercourses, the OHWL is the elevation of the top
of the bank of the channel; and,



      (3)   For reservoirs and flowages, the OHWL is the operating
elevation of the normal summer pool.



   ORNAMENTAL TREE.  A self-supporting woody plant or species normally
growing to a mature height of at least ten feet but no more than 20 feet.



   OUTDOOR SALES AND DISPLAY.  An outdoor area designated for sales and
display of product carried by the primary business.



   OUTDOOR STORAGE.  Storage of any property not fully enclosed in a
building.



   OUTLOT.   An unbuildable lot that must be replatted into a lot of
record before a building permit can be issued to the property.



   OVERSTORY TREE.  A self-supporting woody plant or species normally
growing to a mature height of at least 20 feet.



   PARK, ACTIVE.  A park with structures or designated areas for formal
recreation activities.  Examples of active park areas include but are not
limited to golf courses, ballfields, and playgrounds.



   PARK, PASSIVE.  A park or designated area where limited human activity
is planned and uses are of an undeveloped nature.  Examples of passive park
areas include but are not limited to largely undeveloped parks, gardens,
trails, nature areas, and open space.



   PARK, PRIVATE.  A recreation area, either passive or active, owned and
operated by a private group, most commonly a homeowner’s association or
multiple dwelling tenants.



   PARK, PUBLIC.  A recreation area, either passive or active, owned or
operated by the City of Brooklyn Park, county, state or other governmental
unit.



   PARK AND RIDE FACILITY.  A parking area used for passenger vehicle
storage by persons who travel by mass transit facilities or share rides to
other locations.



   PARKING AREA.  A designated portion of a lot used for the temporary
storage of motor vehicles on a surface improved by pavement.  This
definition does not include private residential driveways.



   PARKING SPACE.  A storage area for a vehicle that has means of access
to a public or private street and has an impermeable surface.



   PAWNSHOP.  A business that lends money on deposit or pledge of
personal property, or other valuable thing on condition of selling the same
back again at a stipulated price, or that lends money secured by chattel
mortgage on personal property, taking possession of the property or any part
so mortgaged.



   PERVIOUS PAVEMENT. A paving system that allows water to infiltrate
through the pavement in order to accurately reflect the predevelopment
hydrologic cycle and includes, but is not limited to, porous concrete, porous
asphalt, porous pavers, open jointed paving blocks, and open cell paving
blocks.



   PUBLIC & UTILITY FACILITIES.  Government and utility facilities and
structures, i.e. maintenance buildings, water towers, pumping and lift
stations, electrical substations, government buildings, mass transit
facilities, and minor cable TV facilities.



   PUBLIC UTILITY.  Persons, corporations, or governments supplying gas,
electric, transportation, water, sewer, or land line telephone service to the
general public.  For the purpose of this chapter, commercial wireless
telecommunication service facilities may not be considered public utility
uses, and are defined separately.



   RAIN GARDENS/BIORETENTION SYSTEMS. Shallow landscaped depressions
commonly located in parking lot islands or adjacent to land cover areas that
receive stormwater and filter the runoff or allow it to infiltrate in the
soil bed.



   RAMBLER.  A single-family dwelling with the main living area all on
one level measured at or slightly above the front entry elevation.



   REACH.  A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal
segment of a stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction.
In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive
bridge crossings would most typically constitute a reach.



   RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT.  Recreational equipment which does not meet
the definition for a vehicle in the City Code, including, but not limited to,
boats, pull-behind trailers or campers, ice fishing structures, personal
watercraft, and other similar uses that do not necessarily remain on the
property during the entire calender year.  This term does not include
semi-tractor trailers or other trailers over 15 feet, junk vehicles as
defined elsewhere in the City Code, detached snow plowing equipment, or swing
sets, trampolines, and other private outdoor recreational equipment.



   RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT, PRIVATE OUTDOOR. Private swimming pools, tennis
courts, trampolines, swing sets, other large play equipment, and other
similar equipment provided that it is designed for outdoor use and used
solely for the private enjoyment of the resident.rivate swimming pools, lawn
furniture, tennis courts, trampolines, swing sets, other large play
equipment, and other similar equipment provided that it is designed for
outdoor use and used solely for the private enjoyment of the resident.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Non-commercial vehicles used for private
recreational purposes, including motor homes, campers, dirt bikes,
motor-cross cycles, snowmobiles, go-carts, vehicles that are not registered
for operation on public rights-of-way, and similar vehicles.  This may not
include junk vehicles as defined elsewhere in the City Code.



   REGIONAL FLOOD.  A flood which is representative of large floods known
to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what
can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100
year recurrence interval.  Regional flood is synonymous with the term
“base flood” used in the Flood Insurance Study.



   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.  An elevation no lower than two
feet above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood
elevation caused by encroachments on the flood plain that result from
designation of a floodway.



   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION.  A building or campus in which worship,
ceremonies, rituals, and education pertaining to a particular system of
beliefs are held.  Convents, rectories, and the like, may be considered as
part of a religious institution campus if located on the same parcel.



   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.



   RESTAURANT, BREWPUB.  An establishment that serves food and hold an
intoxicating liquor license and produces in whole or in part beer and/or malt
liquor on the premise.



   RESTAURANT, CLASS I. An establishment that serves food and is eligible
for a 3,2 non- intoxicating beer and wine license without a cover charge.



   RESTAURANT, CLASS II. An establishment that serves food and is eligible
for an intoxicating liquor license without a cover charge.



   RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD. An establishment whose principal business is the
sale of food and/or beverages in a ready to consume state for consumption:



      (1)   Within the restaurant building;



      (2)   Within a motor vehicle parked on the premises; or



      (3)   Off the premises as carryout orders, and whose principal
method of operation includes the following characteristics: food and/or
beverages are usually served in paper, plastic or other disposable containers.



   RESTAURANT, TAPROOM.  An establishment that serves beer or malt liquor
in accordance with M.S. § 340A.301, Subd. 6b, as amended from time to time.



   RETAIL BUSINESS.  An establishment engaged in selling goods or
merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and
rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by
a street, sidewalk, trail corridor of at least 50 feet, snow storage,
highway, railroad, transmission cable, pipeline, landscaping and utility
structures.



   SEAMLESS METAL PANELS.  Smooth, prefinished, architectural metal
panels without seams or joints that protrude from the surface.  This term
excludes textured metal, standing seam, pole or “Butler building” metals,
any kind of corrugated panel, or metal siding that is residential in
appearance or quality.



   SEASONAL (TEMPORARY) GARDEN CENTER.  A retail use for the sale of
primarily plants and other related garden materials such as flower pots,
seeds, garden tools, and landscape rock and mulch.



   SEASONAL (TEMPORARY) GREENHOUSE.  A temporary structure, commonly with
glass or durable plastic walls and roof, designed for the cultivation or
exhibition of plants under controlled conditions during the spring and summer
seasons.



   SCHOOL.  A public or private elementary, middle, secondary, post
secondary, or vocation school having a course of instruction approved by the
Minnesota Board of Education.



   SCREENING.  A method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting
or nearby structure or use from another by fencing, walls, berms, or densely
planted vegetation.



   SEASONAL (TEMPORARY) GARDEN CENTER.   A retail use for the sale of
primarily plants and other related garden materials such as flower pots,
seeds, garden tools, and landscape rock and mulch.



   SEASONAL (TEMPORARY) GREENHOUSE. A temporary structure, commonly with
glass or durable plastic walls and roof, designed for the cultivation or
exhibition of plants under controlled conditions during the spring and summer
seasons.



   SENIOR MULTIPLE FAMILY DWELLINGS.  Those multiple family dwellings
marketed to and predominately occupied by persons 70 years of age or older.



   SERVICE BUSINESS.  An establishment primarily engaged in providing
assistance, as opposed to products, to individuals, business, industry,
government, and other enterprises, including hotels and other lodging places;
personal, business, repair, and amusement services; health, legal
engineering, and other professional services; educational services;
membership organizations; and other miscellaneous services and sales of such
goods incidental to the service.



   SETBACK.  The required minimum space between property lines and
buildings, structures, accessory uses, or other features as specifically set
forth in this chapter.



      (1)   Front.  The area extending the full width of the lot
between the public right-of-way from which the dwelling is addressed and a
distance specified by the applicable district.



      (2)   Rear.  The area between the rear lot line and the rear
setback line.



      (3)   Side.  The area between the side lot line and the side
setback line, bounded by the front yard and rear yard.







 



Figure 152.008.13 Setbacks



   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.  Any one of a number of establishments
which offers goods and/or services for sale or rent of a sexual or
titillating nature as its primary business and which excludes minors by
virtue of age. This may include, but is not limited to bookstores, car
washes, entertainment centers, modeling studios, motion picture theaters,
cabaret/nightclubs, video rental, etc. 



   SHORELINE.  An area 40 feet wide as measured above the ordinary high
water level on both sides of the Mississippi River.



   SIGN.  All structures, either stationary or movable, containing
writing, announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration,
insignia, or illumination used to advertise or promote the interest of any
person when the same is displayed outside.  Signs are further defined and
regulated in Chapter 150 of the City Code.



   SITE PLAN.  A document or group of documents containing text, drawings
to scale, maps, photographs, and other materials intended to present existing
and proposed conditions of property development, including topography,
vegetation, wetlands, ingress/egress, parking, grading, drainage, utilities,
landscaping, buildings, signs, lighting, and other information as may be
reasonably required.



   SLOPE.  The change in elevation on the land.  For the purposes of the
Critical Area Overlay District, land with a slope of 12% or greater is
regulated.  A 12% slope means that for every eight feet of horizontal
distance, the elevation changes by at least one foot.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA.  A term used for flood insurance purposes
synonymous with ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD PLAIN.



   SPLIT LEVEL.  A single-family dwelling unit that is almost entirely a
full one-and-a-half stories in height at or above the front entry elevation.



   STAGING AREA. An unobstructed paved surface area provided and
maintained for the temporary parking, unloading, and maneuvering of
commercial vehicles incidental and related to the principal permitted use of
the property.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION.  Includes substantial improvement, and means
the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, placement or other improvement that occurred before the permit's
expiration date. The actual start is either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers, foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.



   STEALTH DESIGN.  State-of-the-art design techniques used to blend the
object into the surrounding environment and to minimize the visual impact as
much as reasonably possible.  Examples of stealth design techniques include,
but are not limited to architecturally screening roof-mounted antennas and
accessory equipment; integrating telecommunications facilities into
architectural elements; nestling telecommunications facilities into the
surrounding landscape so that the topography or vegetation reduces their
view; using the location that would result in the least amount of visibility
to the public, minimizing the size and appearance of the telecommunications
facilities; and designing telecommunications towers to appear other than as
towers, such as light poles, power poles, flag poles, and trees.



   STORAGE.   For the purpose of this chapter storage shall have the
meaning of storing, locating, or parking.  Storage does not include current
property maintenance activities occurring on the property.  STORAGE does not
include temporary parking or vehicles in a staging area.



   STORY.  That portion of a building included between the upper surface
of any floor and the upper surface of the next floor above, except that the
topmost story must be that portion of the building included between the upper
surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.  If the finished
floor level directly above a basement, as defined in this chapter, is more
than six feet above grade for more than 50% of the total perimeter or is more
than 12 feet above grade at any point, and then the basement counts as a
story.







 



Figure 152.008.14 Story



   STREET.  A thoroughfare, either owned publically or privately, and
accompanying boulevard located between right-of-way or property lines used or
intended to be used for passage or travel by vehicles, pedestrians,
bicyclists, and related maintenance activities.  Streets may be local,
collector, or arterials as defined by the Comprehensive Plan.



   STREET TREES. Public forestry that are in public right-of-way on the
boulevard or street median.



   STRUCTURE.  A material or combination of materials that form a
construction for use, occupancy, or ornamentation whether installed on,
above, or below the surface of land or water.



   STRUCTURE, PRINCIPLE. The main structure on a parcel of land designed
to house the principle use.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure where
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would
equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Within any consecutive 365-day period, any
reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair),
repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before
the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures,
which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:



      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct
existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.



      (2)   Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that
the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure. For the purpose of this chapter, historic structure shall
be as defined in Code of Federal Regulations, Part 59.1.



   TAPROOM.  A facility on or adjacent to the premises of a brewery where
the on-sale consumption of malt liquor produced by the brewer is permitted
pursuant to M.S. § 340A.301, Subd. 6b.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.  Includes antennas, accessory
equipment, and telecommunications towers.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER OR COMMERCIAL TOWER.  A free-standing,
self-supporting lattice, guyed, or monopole structure constructed from grade
intended to support antennas, except towers used for amateur radio operations.



   TEMPORARY PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINERS.  An enclosed portable storage
container placed on a residential property for temporary use.



   THREE SEASON PORCH.  A roofed and enclosed porch, deck, or similar
space with windows that is not heated.



   TOWER.  Any ground or roof mounted pole, spire, structure, or
combination taller than 15 feet, including supporting lines, cables, wires,
braces, and masts, intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna,
meteorological device, or similar apparatus above grade.



   TRAILER.   A vehicle that is an open-bed style trailer, enclosed
trailer, or trailer as defined in M.S. § 169.01, as amended from time to
time, or any machine or equipment designed to travel along the ground by use
of wheels, treads, runners or slides, and transport persons or property or
pull machinery.  A trailer by this definition does not include a
semi-tractor trailer, commercial vehicle as defined in this chapter, or a
trailer with a registered gross weight over 12,000 pounds.



   TRANSIENT MERCHANT.  A person who temporarily sets up business out of
a vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter, or empty store
front for the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or
attempting to sell, and delivering, goods, wares, products, merchandise or
other personal property and who does not remain or intend to remain in any
one location for more than 14 consecutive days. The term TRANSIENT MERCHANT
does not apply to MOBILE FOOD UNIT, as defined in §§ 114.03 and 152.008.



   TRANSPORTATION PLAN.  A chapter or element of the Comprehensive Plan,
as amended from time to time, that describes the existing and planned
transportation related facilities and policies of the city.



   TRUCK OR MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL.  A loading dock facility allowing
truck freight operators to redistribute loads of their truck fleets at an
intermediate transfer point.  These facilities are primarily used for
staging loads and possess very little, if any, indoor storage area.



   TWO STORY.  A single-family dwelling unit which is almost entirely a
full two stories in height at or above the front entry elevation.



   UNDUE HARDSHIP.  Undue hardship, as used in connection with the
granting of a variance, means that the property in question cannot be put to
a reasonable use if used under conditions allowed by the controls defined in
this chapter, the plight of the landowner is due to circumstances unique to
the property not created by the landowner, and the variance, if granted, will
not alter the essential character of the locality.  Economic considerations
alone may not constitute an undue hardship if reasonable use for the property
exists under the terms of the chapter. Undue hardship also includes, but is
not limited to, inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems
and ability to construct earth sheltered homes when in harmony with this
chapter.



   USE.  The purpose or activity for which a property or structure is
designed, arranged, or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or
maintained.



   USE, CONDITIONAL.  A use that may be allowed in a particular zoning
district only upon demonstration that the use and its operation will be
compatible with the surrounding area and will comply with all standards of
this chapter. The city may impose additional conditions above those specified
in this chapter in specific instances to protect the public health, safety or
welfare and to ensure compatibility with the surrounding area.



   USE, PERMITTED.  Any use that is allowed by this chapter and subject
to the restrictions of the zoning district and this chapter.



   USE, PRINCIPLE.  The main use of land or buildings as distinguished
from accessory uses.



   VEHICLE.   Any vehicle, motor vehicle, semitrailer, or trailer as
those terms are defined in M.S. § 169.01, as it may also be amended from
time to time, including pioneer, classic collector and street rod vehicles. 
It also includes, without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle
and tractor.



   WETLAND.  Poorly drained, environmentally sensitive lands as
designated by M.S. § 103G.221 et seq. known as the Wetland Conservation Act,
or any other state or federal agency.



   WHOLESALE LICENSE AUTO DEALER.  May sell vehicles to licensed dealers
only with no outdoor display or any storage on site.



   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SERVICE PROVIDER.  Licensed commercial wireless
telecommunication services including cellular, personal communication
services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized
mobilized radio (ESMR), paging, and similar services that are marketed to the
general public.



   XERISCAPING. A landscaping method that uses plants that have low water
requirements, allowing them to withstand extended periods of drought without
irrigation.



   YARD. An open space unobstructed from the ground upward with the
exception of landscape materials and minor fixtures of a non-structural
nature commonly found in a yard.  For the purpose of this chapter, front
yard, side yard and rear yard shall have the following meanings:



      (1)   Yard, Front.  The area between the front lot line and a
line drawn along the front face or faces of the principal structure on the
property and extended to the side property lines.  Where a lawful existing
garage is located closer to the front lot line than the principal structure,
the front yard is the area between the front lot line and a line drawn along
the front face or faces of the principal structure to the perpendicular line
following the accessory structure to the front face of the accessory
structure and extended to the side property line.  For properties where the
front yard definition is not applicable, the city will determine the front
yard area.  (Figures 1 - 5)



      (2)   Yard, Rear.  The area between the rear lot line and the
closest portion of the principal structure and abutting the side and front
yard.  (Figures 1 - 5)



      (3)   Yard, Side.  The area extending from the front yard to
the rear yard along a side lot line measured perpendicularly from the side
lot line to the closest point of a structure.  (Figures 1 - 5)







 







 







 







 







 



   ZERO LOT LINE.  A setback where one or more of building’s sides
rests directly on a lot line and shares a common wall with one or more
buildings.



   ZONING DISTRICT, UNDERLYING.  The official district supporting and
further regulated by a zoning overlay district.



   ZONING MAP.  The official map that is part of this chapter and
delineates the geographic boundaries of zoning districts.



   ZONING ORDINANCE AMENDMENT.  A text change to this chapter or a map
change to the official zoning or zoning overlay map that the City Council has
authorized.



   ZONING OVERLAY MAP.   The official map that is part of this chapter
and delineates the geographic boundaries of zoning overlay districts.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2001-952, passed 5-14-01; Am. Ord. 2003-989, passed
2-10-03; Am. Ord. 2003-1008, passed 11-3-03; Am. Ord. 2004-1012, passed
5-3-04; Am. Ord. 2004-1028, passed 12-13- 04; Am. Ord. 2004-1029, passed
12-13-04; Am. Ord. 2005-1032, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 2005-1033, passed
2-7-05; Am. Ord. 2005-1046, passed 8-1-05; Am. Ord. 2005-1049, passed
9-26-05; Am. Ord. 2005-1051, passed 11-7-05; Am. Ord. 2006-1058, passed
6-5-06; Am. Ord. 2008-1085, passed 3-24-08; Am. Ord. 2010-1113, passed
4-5-10; Am. Ord. 2010-1122, passed 12-20-10; Am. Ord. 2012-1133, passed
3-5-12; Am. Ord. 2012-1139, passed 4-16-12; Am. Ord. 2012-1143, passed
5-21-12; Am. Ord. 2014-1177, passed 7-7-14; Am. Ord. 2014-1182, passed
10-6-14; Am. Ord. 2015-1191, passed 5-18-15; Am. Ord. 2016-1209, passed
10-10-16; Am. Ord. 2016-2011, passed 11-14-16)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 152.020  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter establishes the administration and enforcement powers
of this chapter.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.021  CITY MANAGER.



   The City Manager may designate such additional persons as necessary to
administer and enforce this chapter.  In addition to the duties defined
elsewhere in City Code, the duties of the City Manager include:



   (A)   Oversee the creation and maintenance of permanent and current
records of this chapter, including, but not limited to, all maps, amendments,
conditional uses, variances, appeals, applications, permits and other records
required by law.



   (B)   Oversee the receiving and forwarding of all applications,
including but not limited to, zoning amendments, conditional uses, variances,
and appeals.



   (C)   Interpret the application and provisions of this chapter,
which may be appealed to the Planning Commission pursuant to the procedures
in §§ 152.030 through 152.039.



   (D)   Serves as a liaison to the Planning Commission and is
responsible for the preparation of application for zoning related matters,
preparation and submission of public hearing notices to the official
newspaper, preparation of reports and other information for Planning
Commission and City Council meetings and enforces all zoning regulations,
provisions and conditions pertaining to the approval of applications by the
Planning Commission and City Council.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.022  ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   Enforcement:  The City Manager may in the name of the City of
Brooklyn Park take any appropriate actions or proceedings to enforce this
chapter.  These actions may include, but are not limited to:



      (1)   Conduct periodic inspections of buildings, structures,
and use of land to determine compliance with terms of this chapter.



      (2)   Notify, in writing, any person responsible for violating
a provision of this chapter, indicating the nature of the violation and
ordering the action necessary to correct it and a time frame for compliance.



      (3)   Order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings,
or structures; order removal of illegal buildings, structures, additions or
alteration; order discontinuance of illegal work being done; or take any
other legal action as may be necessary to insure compliance with or to
prevent violation of its provisions, including cooperation with the City
Attorney in the prosecution of complaints.



      (4)   The City Manager may also have the authority to issue
stop work orders of any and all site improvement activities when and where a
violation of the provisions of this chapter has been documented.



   (B)   Penalties.  The City Manager may institute in the name of the
City of Brooklyn Park any appropriate legal actions or proceedings against a
violator of this chapter.  Any person who violates, fails to comply with or
assists, directs or permits the violation of any provision of this chapter or
who knowingly makes or submits any false statement or document in connection
with any application or procedure required by this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor.  Any person who violates, fails to comply with or assists,
directs or permits the violation of any performance standard of this chapter
must reimburse the city or its agent for the actual cost of the tests,
measurements or other procedures necessary to demonstrate such violation. 



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.023  DEVELOPMENT CONTRACTS, FINANCIAL GUARANTEES, AND CASH ESCROWS.



   (A)   In order to guarantee completion of all public off-site and
private on-site improvements, including but not limited to: earthwork,
erosion control, site utilities, curb, gutter, walks, paving, striping,
landscaping, irrigation, sign monuments and site lighting, as shown on the
approved site plan or conditions imposed as part of any application granted
under this chapter, applicants must provide a financial guarantee and a
development contract before the issuance of a building permit.



   (B)   The development contract must be prepared by the city.  The
agreement shall define the required work, reflect the terms and guarantee the
performance of the work by the applicant.



   (C)   Any financial guarantee required by the Development Contract
guarantees conformance and compliance with the conditions of the application
approval and the ordinances of the city.  If the conditions are not met, the
financial guarantees may be forfeited to the city to cure the default or
reimburse the city the cost of enforcement measures.



   (D)   The amount of the financial guarantee must be established by
the city, based upon an itemized estimate of the cost of all required work as
documented by the applicant.



      (1)   An irrevocable letter of credit or similar financial
security as approved by the City Attorney, must be posted with the city in
the amount of 95% of the approved estimated cost.  This financial security
must be automatically renewed and shall not expire until released by the city.



      (2)   The remaining 5% of the approved estimated costs must be
posted with the city in cash to be held in a non-interest bearing city
account.



   (E)   An engineering/administrative escrow must be paid and held in
a non-interest bearing city escrow account, to be used to cover costs of city
services, expenses and materials provided in reviewing and processing the
application. This includes, but is not limited to staff time, legal expenses
incurred in the application approval, office and field checking, and similar
expenses.



      (1)   For projects that include public off-site improvements,
the engineering/administrative escrow must be 6½% of the estimated costs of
the project, but not less than $1,000.  For projects with only on-site
private improvements, the cash escrow account shall be 3% of the estimated
project cost but not less than $1,000.



      (2)   If at any time the balance of the
engineering/administrative escrow account is depleted to less than 5% of the
originally required cash escrow amount, the applicant must deposit additional
funds in the account sufficient to cover all costs to be incurred by the city.



   (F)   Upon completion and city acceptance of the project, any
remaining financial securities must be returned to the depositor by the
Finance Department after all claims and charges have been paid and following
approval by City Council.



      (1)   If part of a project has been completed, inspected and
accepted by the city, the financial securities posted may be reduced by the
city and partial payment be returned to the applicant.



      (2)   Landscaping improvements may not be deemed complete
until the city has verified survivability of all required plantings through
two winter seasons, which is defined for the purpose of this chapter as
October 31 through May 31.



   (G)   The city may hold the financial guarantee until the project is
completed and approved by the city.



      (1)   The financial guarantee can only be released by the City
Council.



      (2)   Periodically, the amount of the financial guarantee may
be reduced by the City Council based on the projects progress, as determined
by the city.



      (3)   Reduction and release actions will only be initiated
after proper request from the applicant.



   (H)   Failure to comply with the conditions of the application
approval, the development contract, or a city ordinance may result in
forfeiture of the financial guarantee to the extent necessary to achieve the
project’s total compliance with the approved site plan.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2008-1092, passed 8-25-08)



APPLICATIONS AND PROCEDURES.



§ 152.030  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter is established to define the procedures and processes
for applications for development, redevelopment, and changes in use of
property in Brooklyn Park.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.031  GENERAL PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Applications.  The City Manager determines if the required
information is complete.  If the information is determined to be incomplete,
such that a thorough review of the application is not possible, the item may
not be placed on the Planning Commission or City Council agenda for
consideration until the required information is submitted.  The applicant
will be notified within ten days following the receipt of the application
describing the information that is missing.



   (B)   Notification.  All applications for development proposals
requiring a public hearing must be advertised to allow informed participation
by all interested parties and conform with the applicable state statute. 
The City Manager may maintain copies of the city policy concerning
notification. 



   (C)   Applications requiring public hearings.  The following
applications for development proposals require public hearings:



      (1)   Approval of Site Plan.



      (2)   Variance.



      (3)   Conditional Use Permits and amendments.



      (4)   Conditional Use Permit revocation.



      (5)   Zoning Text and Map Amendments (Rezonings).



      (6)   Preliminary Development Plan for the Planned Unit
Development District.



      (7)   Concept Plan for the Special Zoning Overlays.



      (8)   Development Plan for Planned Community Development
District, the Planned Unit Development District, or Special Zoning Overlays.



   (D)   Planning Commission and City Council action.



      (1)   The Planning Commission may recommend such actions or
conditions relating to the application as it deems necessary to carry out the
intent and purpose of this chapter and the Comprehensive Plan.



      (2)   The City Council may adopt, modify or reject any
recommendation of the Planning Commission.



      (3)   At any time before final action is taken on an
application, the applicant may request a continuance of action by the
Planning Commission and City Council, or withdraw the application by
submitting a letter to the City Manager stating the applicant’s desire to
do so.  Any portion of fees spent in the processing of the application may
be retained by the city.  The City Manager may establish a time limit on any
continuation.



   (E)   Appeals. This division is established to allow those aggrieved
by the decision of the City Manager to attempt to remedy the grievance by
appealing the decision to the City Council.  Any unresolved dispute as to an
administrative interpretation of City Code, ordinance, or policy requirements
may be appealed to the Planning Commission in its role as the Board of
Adjustments and Appeals subject to §§ 31.15 through 31.19 of the City
Code.  The appeal must be submitted in writing to the City Manager on or
before the next application filing deadline for a Planning Commission meeting.



   (F)   Re-submitting denied applications.  No application which has
been denied wholly or in part may be resubmitted for at least one year from
the date of its denial, unless substantial changes have been made which
warrant reconsideration, as determined by the City Manager.



   (G)   Expiration of action.  Unless otherwise specified by the City
Council, the approved applications for projects become null and void by
December 31 of the year following the date of its approval, unless the
property owner or applicant has begun construction of any building,
structure, addition or alteration, or use as evidenced by the issuance of a
building permit or grading permit in compliance with the approved plan.  The
property owner or applicant has the right to submit an application for a time
extension in accordance with this chapter.



   (H)   Request for time extensions.



      (1)   A request for a time extension may be considered by the
City Manager.  Time extensions must be submitted to the City Manager prior
to the expiration of a final action by the City Council.  If an action has
officially expired, no time extension may be granted.  If the time extension
request is delayed in the review process and, through no fault of the
applicant, cannot be reviewed by the City Manager as anticipated, the request
may proceed through the process to final resolution without jeopardy.  The
applicant may request a maximum of one time extension.  Time extensions are
valid for a maximum of one year from the original expiration date.



      (2)   The request may be reviewed with consideration of the
following:



         (a)   The Comprehensive Plan or any other city plan.



         (b)   City policy changes.



         (c)   Transportation conditions.



         (d)   Applicable changes to any city, county, state or
federal statutes, rules, requirements, or ordinances.



         (e)   Park dedication fees and other financial
guarantees may be redetermined as required by the current City Code to the
date of approval of the extension.



         (f)   Any negative escrow accounts from previous reviews
must be paid and the escrow account must be updated to current minimum
requirements prior to the City Manager’s consideration of the extension.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2001-952, passed 5-14-01)



§ 152.032  ADMINISTRATIVE PERMITS.



   (A)   Purpose.  This section establishes regulations and procedures
for the consideration of activities allowed by administrative permit, and of
matters requiring the approval of the City Manager with the goal of
protecting the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city.



   (B)   Procedure.



      (1)   Application for an administrative permit must be filed
by the property owner or designated agent with the City Manager on forms to
be provided by the city.



      (2)   The applications for permits or amendments to permits
must be accompanied by a non- refundable fee established elsewhere in the
City Code.



      (3)   The City Manager may review the application and related
materials for compliance with all applicable requirements of the City Code.



      (4)   The City Manager may consider possible adverse effects
of the proposed events or activities.  Evaluation includes (but is not
limited to) consideration of the following factors:



         (a)   Compliance with and effect upon the Comprehensive
Plan.



         (b)   The establishment, maintenance, or operation of
the use, event or activity will promote and enhance the general public
welfare and will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety,
morals or comfort.



         (c)   The use, event, or activity will not be injurious
to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the
purposes already permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property
values within the neighborhood.



         (d)   The establishment of the use, event or activity
will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of
surrounding property for uses permitted in the district.



         (e)   Adequate public facilities and services are
available or can be reasonably provided to accommodate the use, event or
activity which is proposed.



         (f)   The use, event or activity may, in all other
respects, conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it
is located, as outlined in the applicable sections of this chapter.



         (g)   The use, event or activity and site conform to the
performance standards as outlined in the applicable provisions of this
chapter.



      (5)   The City Manager must make a determination on approval
or denial of the administrative permit within 30 days from the date of
submission of a complete application.



      (6)   A written permit may be issued to the applicant when a
determination of compliance has been made.  Specific conditions to assure
compliance with applicable evaluation criteria, codes, ordinances, and the
standards of this chapter must be attached to the permit.



      (7)   Determination of the applications non-compliance with
applicable codes, ordinances, and the standards in this division may be
communicated to the applicant in writing and the application for the permit
may be considered denied; unless, within ten days of the date of such notice,
the applicant submits revised plans and/or information with which the City
Manager is able to determine compliance.



      (8)   Unresolved disputes as to administrative application of
the requirements of this division may be subject to appeal as defined in this
chapter.



      (9)   An administrative permit may be revoked by the City
Manager or by an officer of the Brooklyn Park Police Department if it is
determined that the applicant has violated any conditions of the
administrative permit, any applicable provisions of the City Code or any
applicable provisions of state or federal law.



   (C)   Performance standards.  All uses, events, or activities
allowed by administrative permit must conform to the applicable standards
outlined in the performance standards for the district in which such use,
event, or activity is proposed.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.033  SITE PLAN REVIEW.



   (A)   Purpose.  This section establishes Site Plan Review
procedures and provides regulations pertaining to the enforcement of site
design standards consistent with the requirements of this chapter. These
procedures are established to promote high quality development to ensure the
long term stability of residential neighborhoods and enhance the built and
natural environment within the city as new development and redevelopment
activities occur.  The specific goals of the city are:



      (1)   To ensure the application of quality design principles
within new and redevelopment projects.



      (2)   To ensure the active participation and review of site
plans by the affected public.



      (3)   To mitigate to the extent possible, the impact of one
development upon another.



      (4)   To ensure new developments to contain elements of
internal and external cohesiveness to promote good neighborhood atmosphere.



   (B)   Exemptions to Site Plan Review.  The following are exempt
from the Site Plan Review process:



      (1)   Agricultural structures in the R-1 Urban Reserve
District provided they comply with all sections of the City Code.



      (2)   Accessory structures in residential developments under
120 square feet and 18 feet in height or the height of the principal
structure, whichever is less, provided they comply with §§ 152.260 through
152.263.



   (C)   Approval required.



      (1)   Without first obtaining site plan approval it is
unlawful to do any of the following:



         (a)   Construct a building.



         (b)   Move a building or structure to any lot within the
city.



         (c)   Expand or change the use of a building or parcel
of land or modify a building, accessory structure or site or land feature in
any manner that results in a different intensity of use, including the
requirement for additional parking.



         (d)   Grade or take any action to prepare a site for
development, except in conformance with the requirements for a grading
permit, an approved neighborhood development plan or an approved Conditional
Use Permit.



         (e)   Remove earth, soils, gravel or other natural
material from or place the same on a site, except in conformance with the
requirements for a building or grading permit or an approved neighborhood
development plan or an approved Conditional Use Permit.



      (2)   Procedures.  The procedures for application and public
hearings for City Council approved Site Plan Review are outlined in §
152.031 of this subchapter.



      (3)   Plan modification.  A modification to the plans
previously approved through the City Council approved Site Plan Review
process, which do not qualify for an administrative Site Plan Review, must
follow the City Council approved Site Plan Review procedure.



      (4)   Conditions.  The City Council may impose conditions
that affect the intent of this chapter to the approval of a Site Plan
Review.  No building or grading permit can be issued except in compliance
with the approved site plan and the conditions of approval.



   (D)   Administrative Site Plan Review.



      (1)   Approval criteria.  Site and building plans for
projects may be approved by the City Manager in lieu of City Council approval
if they meet the following criteria, except as otherwise expressly provided
in this chapter:



         (a)   Residential properties with one dwelling unit per
parcel, including those residential properties within the Planned Community
Development District, the Planned Unit Development District or a Special
Zoning Overly that have already been approved through another procedure and
are in compliance with the approved plan.



         (b)   Sites, buildings and uses that are permitted in
the zoning district and do not require any variances from this chapter or any
other city code, with the exception of the following:



            1.   Nonresidential uses in a residential district.



            2.   Uses with drive-through service.



            3.   Nonresidential structures in a nonresidential
zoning district that are not adjacent to any property zoned or guided for
residential development other than property in the Urban Reserve District
(R-1).



            4.   Uses in the Public Institution District (PI).



            5.   Religious institutions, either free-standing
or within a multi-tenant building.



            6.   Projects that received a Conditional Use
Permit, site plan approval, or are located in a PUD or PCDD district, or a
Special Zoning Overlay, and are an expansion of no more than 10% of the floor
area of an existing building, and/or affect no more than 10% of the site. 
They may include, but are not limited to, changing parking and circulation
routes, changes in buffering or landscaping against abutting adjacent
residential, etc.  The site and building plans must also be in compliance
with the previously approved permit, its conditions and plan requirements.



            7.   Public and private elementary and secondary
schools, including charter schools.



      (2)   Procedure.



         (a)   Administrative Site Plan Review may be combined
with the established building permit process when applicable.  The City
Manager may impose conditions on the approval to implement the intent of this
chapter.



         (b)   Administrative approval, including all applicable
conditions and requirements may be made either in writing separately or
attached to the submitted plans. The applicant must fulfill all applicable
conditions of the approval prior to the issuance of any permits.



   (E)   Evaluation criteria.  The city must evaluate the effects of
the proposed site plans.  This review may be based upon, but not be limited
to, the following criteria:



      (1)   Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan, the City Code,
and this chapter.



      (2)   Enhancement of the site to create a meaningful and
harmonious development.



      (3)   Creation of a functional and harmonious design for
structures and site features, with special attention to the following
principals:



         (a)   A functional relationship of the building(s) on
the site to its intended use(s);  accessory site improvements, public street
and sidewalks, and adjacent uses and structures.



         (b)   The provision of a desirable environment through
building and site design for occupants, visitors and the general community.



         (c)   A balance of open space and landscaping with site
intensity, building height and parking requirements.



         (d)   The utilization of building materials, textures,
colors, and construction details as an expression of design concept and
quality.



         (e)   The functional internal design of vehicular and
pedestrian circulation, location of access points to public streets, design
of parking areas incorporating landscape elements, and separation of
pedestrian and vehicular circulation movements.



         (f)   The use of landscape design and materials to
augment significant native species existing on the site, create an
aesthetically pleasing environment, and a sense of character between site
elements.



         (g)   The design of site elements to adequately provide
for drainage resulting from development, mitigation of off-site impacts from
the development, mitigation of impacts from adjacent property such as noise,
poor air quality, and unsightliness.



      (4)   The height, scale and massing of new buildings and
structures should complement  similar buildings within the same zoning
district in which the application is made.



   (F)   Conformance to the Approved Site Plan Review.  All
developments must remain in continual conformance with the approved Site Plan
Review until or unless amended in compliance with this chapter.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2003-997, passed 5-12-03; Am. Ord. 2003-997, passed
5-12-03; Am. Ord. 2007-1070, passed 3-26-07)



§ 152.034  VARIANCE.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of a variance is to provide for
deviations from the requirements of this chapter including restrictions
placed on non-conformities.  Variances shall only be permitted when they are
in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this chapter and when the
variances are consistent with the comprehensive plan.  Variances may be
granted when the applicant for the variance establishes that there are
practical difficulties in complying with the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Review Standards.  PRACTICAL DIFFICULTIES, as used in
connection with the granting of a variance, means:



      (1)   The property owner proposes to use the property in a
reasonable manner not permitted by the zoning ordinance.



      (2)   The plight of the landowner is due to circumstances
unique to the property and not created by the landowner.



      (3)   Granting of the variance will not alter the essential
character of the area or neighborhood where the property is located.



      (4)   Economic considerations alone do not constitute
practical difficulties.



      (5)   There is inadequate access to direct sunlight for a
solar energy system.



   (C)   Procedure.  The procedures for application and public hearing
of a variance request is described in § 152.031.



   (D)   Conditions.  The Board of Appeals and Adjustments or the City
Council may impose conditions in the granting of variances.  A condition
must be directly related to and must bear a rough proportionality to the
impact created by the variance. No building permit may be issued except in
compliance with the conditions of the variance.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2011-1131, passed 10-24-11)



§ 152.035  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of a Conditional Use Permit is to allow
the city discretion in permitting certain uses in particular zoning districts
that may be compatible with uses in the district or perceived public needs
under certain circumstances.  The use must comply with all standards of this
chapter and any additional conditions imposed for specific instances to
protect the public health, safety or welfare.



   (B)   Qualifications.  Only the specific uses classified as
conditional in the zoning district where the property is located may qualify
for a Conditional Use Permit.



   (C)   Procedures.  The procedures for application and public
hearing of a Conditional Use Permit are described in § 152.031.



   (D)   Review Standards.  The request may address the following
factors, although the City Council, the Planning Commission, and city staff
has the authority to request additional information from the applicant
concerning operational factors pertaining to the proposed use or to retain
experts with the consent and at the expense of the applicant concerning
operational factors, when necessary to establish performance conditions to
effect the intent of this chapter.



      (1)   Comprehensive Plan. Compliance with the Comprehensive
Plan, public facilities and capital improvement plans, and all sections of
the City Code.



      (2)   Traffic. The generation and characteristics of the
traffic associated with the use and its impact on the traffic volumes of and
safety associated with driveway location on adjacent roads, sidewalks and
trail connections.



      (3)   Parking. The characteristics of the parking area of the
use, including the number and design of parking spaces, landscaping, traffic
circulation, drainage, and lighting. The city may require additional parking
above that required in §§ 152.140 through 152.146.



      (4)   City services.  The provision of adequate public
facilities and services to the site where the use is proposed and the ability
of the existing infrastructure to absorb the additional demand for city
services.



      (5)   Screening and landscaping. The ability to screen and
buffer incompatible off-site impacts of the proposed use on adjacent property
and the surrounding neighborhood.  The city may require additional
landscaping or screening above that required in the specific zoning district.



      (6)   Architectural standards. The degree that the site or
building associated with the proposed use meets or exceed the architectural
design and landscaping standards for the district in which it is located. 
The city may require additional architectural standards above those required
in the specific zoning district.



      (7)   Other sections of the city code.  The applicant may be
required to submit additional information demonstrating that the development
is able to comply with any other applicable section of this chapter or the
city code.



   (E)   Conditions.  The Planning Commission may recommend and the
City Council may impose conditions to the approval of a Conditional Use
Permit.  No building or grading permit can be issued except in compliance
with the conditions of the Conditional Use Permit.



   (F)   Duration.  The Conditional Use Permit remains with the
property as long as the property and use are in compliance with the
conditions attached to the permit by the City Council.  A Conditional Use
Permit expires if the use has been discontinued for more than 364 consecutive
days from the date that the use ceased or the business owner fails to meet
the certification requirement of the Conditional Use Permit. The revocation
of the Conditional Use Permit may be recorded with the county by the city.



   (G)   Certification.  Upon request by the City Manager, the holder
of a Conditional Use Permit certifies that the use, building, and site are in
conformance with the Conditional Use Permit and city codes, in conjunction
with §§ 152.050 through 152.055. The City Manager may maintain copies of
the city policy concerning certification. 



   (H)   Revocation.  If the holder of the permit fails to comply with
any of the terms imposed by the Conditional Use Permit, the city may impose
penalties or discipline for noncompliance, which may include revocation of
the permit, in accordance with the following terms:



      (1)   Procedure.  The imposition of any penalty may be
preceded by (the notices contained in subdivisions (a) and (c) hereof may be
combined):



         (a)   Written notice of the holder’s alleged violation.



         (b)   The opportunity to cure the violation during a
period not to exceed 30 days following receipt of the written notice.



         (c)   A hearing before the City Council at least 15 days
after sending written notice of the hearing.  The hearing provides the
holder with an opportunity to show cause why the permit should not be subject
to discipline.



      (2)   Exigent circumstances.  If the city finds that exigent
circumstances exist requiring immediate permit revocation, the city may
revoke the permit and provides a post revocation hearing before the City
Council not more than 15 days after holder’s receipt of written notice of
the hearing.  Following such hearing, the City Council may sustain or
rescind the revocation, or may impose such other and further discipline as it
deems appropriate.



      (3)   Record.  Any decision to impose a penalty or other
discipline must be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained
in a written record.



   (I)   Amendment.  Holders of a Conditional Use Permit may propose
amendments to the approved permit at any time, subject to the procedures of
§ 152.031, except where administrative Site Plan Review may be granted as
outlined in § 152.033. No significant changes in the circumstances or scope
of the use may be undertaken without the approval of those amendments by the
city.  Significant changes include, but are not limited to, hours of
operation, number of employees, expansion of buildings, structures and/or
premises, different and/or additional signage, and operation modifications
resulting in increased external activities and traffic, and the like.  The
City Manager must determine what constitutes significant change.  The City
Council may approve significant changes and modifications to Conditional Use
Permits, including the application of new or revised conditions.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.036  ZONING ORDINANCE TEXT AND MAP AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Purpose.  This section specifies the procedures for
amendments to the text of this chapter or the associated official zoning map.



   (B)   Initiation.  An amendment to the text of this chapter or
change in the boundaries or designations in the official zoning map may be
initiated by a simple majority of the City Council or Planning Commission. 
Any person owning property within the city, or their designated agent, may
initiate an application to amend the district boundaries or designation on
the official zoning map for property in which they have a real estate
interest.



   (C)   Procedures.  The procedures for application and public
hearing of zoning amendment applications are described in § 152.031.



   (D)   Effective date.  Any amendment to this chapter adopted by the
City Council may be effective 30 calendar days after its publication or at
such later date as may be specified in the amendment.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.037  ZONING OVERLAYS.



   (A)   Purpose.  Special zoning overlays are intended to implement
development in accordance with the special circumstances affecting a property
or an area. 



   (B)   Procedures.  The procedures for application and public
hearing of special zoning overlays are described in § 152.031 and as
modified in §§ 152.490 through 152.494. Exceptions to these procedures and
performance standards may be described in the specific overlay requirements.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.038  APPLICATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT IN PLANNED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of this district is to encourage,
preserve and improve the public health, safety and general welfare that is in
compliance with the general intent of the Comprehensive Plan or any
applicable area plans. 



   (B)   Procedures. 



      (1)   In addition to the other application materials, the
applicant provides a general plan of development, consisting, at a minimum,
of the components specified in the district provisions and those required for
a Conditional Use Permit in compliance with § 152.035. The city has the
right to approve, negotiate, or refuse items in the application.



      (2)   Amendments and revocation must follow the procedures for
Site Plan Review and revocations as outlined in § 152.033.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.039  REQUIRED INFORMATION FOR APPLICATIONS.



   The City Manager must maintain copies of city policy concerning the
information required for all applications.



(Ord. 2000-936)



NON-CONFORMITIES



§ 152.050  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this subchapter to provide for the regulation of
non-conformities relating to land use, lots of record, structure and site
improvements to accomplish the following:



   (A)   Recognize the existence of uses, dimensional and intensity
characteristics of structures, properties, and site features that were lawful
when established before the effective date of this chapter but which no
longer meet all ordinance requirements;



   (B)   Discourage the enlargement, expansion, intensification or
extension of any non-conformity or any increase in the impact of a
non-conformity on adjacent properties; and,



   (C)   Encourage the elimination of non-conforming uses or reduction
of their impact on adjacent properties.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.051  CREATION OF NON-CONFORMITIES BY PUBLIC ACTION.



   Where there exists as of the date of adoption of this chapter a
conforming land use, lot of record, sign or development and a subsequent
taking by a governmental body occurs under eminent domain or negotiated sale
which renders such land use, lot of record, structure, or site improvement in
violation of one or more provisions of this chapter, such land use, lot of
record, sign, or structure becomes a legal non-conformity and may be used
thereafter only in accordance with the provisions of this section.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.052  NON-CONFORMING LAND USE.



   Non-conforming land uses may continue at the size, intensity, and in
the manner of operation existing upon the date it became non-conforming, for
as long as it can comply with the following:



   (A)   There may be no expansion, enlargement, intensification,
replacement, structural change, alteration, or relocation of any use or any
site element of any non-conforming land use except to make it conforming.



   (B)   A non-conforming use may not be changed to another
non-conforming use. 



   (C)   When any non-conforming use has been changed to a conforming
use, it may not later be changed to a non-conforming use. 



   (D)   A non-conforming use may be changed to lessen the
non-conformity.  Once lessened, the use may not be changed to increase the
non-conformity.



   (E)   No non-conforming use may be re-established if discontinued
for a period of 364 continuous days calculated from the date of
discontinuance.  Following the expiration of this time period, only those
uses classified as permitted or conditional, if approved by the City Council,
may be allowed by this chapter.



   (F)   Any non-conforming use that requires a license, permit or
other evidence of city approval, initially issued lawfully prior to the
non-conformity, may be conducted in accordance with the terms of the city’s
approval, provided that the use has not been abandoned for a period of more
than 364 continuous days.  The license, permit or other evidence of city
approval ceases at the time the non-conformity ceases to exist.



   (G)   Removal or destruction of a structure or improvement housing a
non-conforming land use to the extent of more than 50% of its estimated
market value, excluding land value and as determined by the City Assessor,
may terminate the right to continue any non-conforming land use.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.053  NON-CONFORMING LOT OF RECORD.



   (A)   Any lot which was legally created but became non-conforming
due to changes in area or dimensional requirements as a result of the
adoption of this chapter may be subject to the following:



      (1)   May be combined for tax purposes with a contiguous
parcel or parcels, but may not be re-subdivided into a non-conforming lot,
even if the division is consistent with the original lot configurations.



      (2)   If an owner has an interest in more than one lot of
record contiguous to other lots of record, all such lots must be combined to
meet the requirements of this section or the provisions of the zoning
district in which the property is located, whichever is more restrictive. 
If sufficient contiguous property is held in one ownership to comply, with
the provision of the zoning district where the property is located, the
zoning district provisions will apply.  In no circumstances will there be
approval of any proposal for multiple lot developments based upon lots of
record, and not conforming with the provisions of the existing zoning
district.



      (3)   A vacant lot may be used for a single-family detached
dwelling (if permitted by the district regulations), if the lot area or width
measurements meet at least 75% of the requirements for both the lot area and
width requirements.



      (4)   Additions to principal or accessory buildings or
structures located on non-conforming lots may be permitted provided that any
such addition will meet all minimum setback requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located.



      (5)   If the lot is non-conforming due to public action after
the lot was created or has no buildable area outside the floodplain or
critical area overlay setbacks, then no variance may be required for the
reconstruction of a single-family dwelling on a non-conforming lot that is
damaged to the extent of 50% or more of its market value (excluding land
value), so long as the replacement dwelling has a footprint, building height
and floor area size equal to that of the destroyed dwelling.



   (B)   All reconstruction in the Flood Hazard Overlay must be in
compliance with Minnesota Rules parts 6120.5000 - 6120.6200.  The only
acceptable method of elevating the lowest floor, including the basement (as
defined for the Flood Hazard Overlay), is with the placement of earthen
materials (fill).  Other methods require a variance.



   (C)   Reconstruction commences within one year of the date of the
destruction of the original building and reasonable progress must be made in
completing the project for this division to be applicable.  A building
permit must be obtained prior to construction of the new dwelling and the new
structure must be constructed in compliance with all other City Codes
regulations.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.054  NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES.



   Expansion of an existing structure, reconstruction of a partially
destroyed structure, construction of a new structure, or other
intensification of a site may be subject to site and building plan approval
in compliance with §§ 152.030 through 152.039 of this chapter.



   (A)   Non-conforming principal structures may not be enlarged or
altered in a way that increases their non-conformity unless in compliance
with the following:



      (1)   Expansion or alteration of buildings found to be
non-conforming only by reason of height, setback or lot area may be permitted
provided the structural non-conformity is not increased and the expansion
complies with the performance standards of this chapter.



      (2)   Legal non-conforming single-family and two-family
dwellings may be expanded or altered to improve the livability provided the
non-conformity of the structure is not increased.



      (3)   The expansion or alteration must follow the requirements
of §§ 152.030 through 152.039.



   (B)   A non-conforming structure which has deteriorated or is
damaged to the extent of 50% or more of its market value (excluding land
value), as determined by the City Manager, may be replaced or reconstructed
only in compliance with this chapter. Any non-conforming structure which is
damaged to an extent of less than 50% of its value excluding land, as
determined by the City Manager, may be restored to its former foundation
footprint, structure height, and floor area if reconstruction begins within
six months of the date of documented damage.



   (C)   Any proposed structure lawfully granted a building permit
prior to the effective date of this chapter, which will become non-conforming
under a provision of this chapter, may be permitted to continue to completion
provided construction is started within six months of the effective date of
this chapter and is completed within one year.  Once lawfully constructed,
the structure becomes a legal non-conforming structure.



   (D)   If a non-conforming structure is moved for any distance, it
loses any legal non-conforming status.



   (E)   Normal building repair and maintenance necessary to keep a
non-conforming structure in sound condition may be permitted.



   (F)   Alterations may be made to a building containing lawful
non-conforming residential units when they will improve the livability and do
not increase the number of units or the bulk of the building.



   (G)   Structures in the designated floodway may be considered
non-conforming uses.



   (H)   All non-conforming structures which are made non-conforming by
this chapter may be discontinued in accordance with the following schedule:



      (1)   One year from the adoption of this chapter, all trash
and waste storage structures not in compliance with City Code.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.055  NON-CONFORMING SITE IMPROVEMENTS.



   If non-conforming uses, structures, or buildings suffer damage to at
least 50% of the value of the structure excluding land, as determined by the
City Assessor, or the property owner applies for a building addition or an
accessory structure amounting to 25% of the value of the principal structure,
the site must be brought into conformance with the requirements of this
chapter. At no time will a building or grading permit be issued if the
proposed construction will increase any non- conformity on the site. 



   (A)   Upon any change in occupancy, non-conforming paved parking
areas may continue to be used without improvement if the number of parking
spaces supplied remains adequate according to the regulations in this
chapter, and the paved surface has not, in the city’s judgment,
deteriorated so as to be beyond repair.  If the parking lot can not be
repaired for the new occupancy, then the parking lot surface must be replaced
or otherwise brought into compliance with this chapter.



   (B)   A building permit may be issued for a portion of a multiple
occupancy building without bringing the existing site improvements for the
entire property into compliance with this chapter so long as no
non-conformity is increased.  If a multiple occupancy building becomes
completely vacant, its site improvements must be brought into compliance with
this chapter prior to any future occupancy.



   (C)   When expansion of existing sites occurs, the newly constructed
portion of the site improvements must fully comply with all of the
requirements of this chapter, unless the expansion portion of the property
contains physical limitations that make full compliance unfeasible, then site
plan review shall be required to determine the level of compliance required
as approved by the Planning Commission and City Council.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2012-1133, passed 3-5-12)



GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS



PRIVATE STRUCTURES AND USES ON OR IN EASEMENTS AND PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY



§ 152.070  EASEMENTS.



   No private buildings, structures or uses may be located in or on any
easements, except fences as defined in §§ 152.260 through 152.263 or §§
152.360 through 152.363 of this chapter; and public or quasi-public
facilities regulated by City Franchise, or other provisions of the City Code.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.071  PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   No buildings, structures or uses may be located in or on any public
rights-of-way, other than those specifically mentioned in the city’s policy
on public easement maintenance and public or quasi-public facilities
regulated by City Franchise or other provisions of the City Code.



(Ord. 2000-936)



RELOCATING STRUCTURES



§ 152.080  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to make sure that structures moved
into the city, are compatible with the existing neighborhood in which they
will be located and comply with City Code and state requirements. 



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.081  SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIRED.



   Applicants proposing to relocate a structure from one property to
another in the city or move a structure into the city must follow the
procedures for Site Plan Review as outlined in §§ 152.030 through 152.039.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.082  REQUIREMENTS FOR RELOCATING STRUCTURES.



   All relocated structures must meet the requirements of the district in
which they will be located.  In addition, the applicant provides the
following:



   (A)   A report from the Building Official which specifies, at a
minimum:



      (1)   The improvements to the house that may be required for
the structure to meet all applicable, current codes, based on an inspection.



      (2)   If the applicant’s submitted plans will successfully
meet the required improvements.



      (3)   If the sewer and water connections have been plugged or
discontinued at the curb line or at the main and that all other hazards have
been eliminated. 



   (B)   Evidence that all taxes and sewer and water charges have been
paid against the property the structure is being relocated.



   (C)   The applicant must submit evidence that upon completion, the
relocated structure will have a fair market value equal to at least 80% of
the assessed value of similar buildings within a 500 foot radius.



   (D)   A signed development contract stating that the applicant has
agreed to complete the necessary changes specified by the City Manager within
a period of one year, and a performance bond or cash deposit in compliance
with §§ 152.020 through 152.023.



   (E)   Evidence that the applicant has secured the necessary permits
or permission for the displacement of any overhead electrical or other wires
from the person, association, or corporation that owns, operates, or controls
the wires.



   (F)   Evidence that the applicant or their designated person, firm
or corporation engaged in moving structures has a license, in compliance with
Section 445, before moving any structure over streets controlled by the City
of Brooklyn Park.



(Ord. 2000-936)



TOWER PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



§ 152.090  PURPOSE.



   The Council finds that regulations are necessary to accommodate the
communication service facilities to benefit the needs of residents and
businesses while protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of
the community.  These regulations are necessary to:



   (A)   Provide for the appropriate locations, compatible with
surrounding land uses, for the development of communication facilities to
serve the residents and businesses of the city;



   (B)   Minimize adverse visual effects of communication towers and
other facilities through careful design and siting standards;



   (C)   Avoid potential tower failure damage to adjacent properties
through structural standards and setback requirements; and,



   (D)   Maximize the use of existing and approved towers, buildings,
and other structures to accommodate wireless telecommunication devices to
reduce the number of towers needed to serve the community.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2004-1029, passed 12-13-04)



§ 152.091  EXISTING ANTENNAS AND TOWERS.



   (A)   Previous licensees, owners, operators or secured parties must
remove all abandoned or unused towers or associated facilities and equipment
within 12 months of the cessation of operations at the site.  Cessation of
operations means the removal of the antennas from the tower or the cessation
of electricity and/or phone service to the site.



   (B)   All hazardous towers or associated facilities and equipment as
defined in the Uniform Building Codes definition of hazardous structures must
be removed from the property within a maximum of 60 days of the date of the
hazardous determination by the city.  The city may require more expeditious
removal based on the nature of the hazard.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2004-1029, passed 12-13-04)



§ 152.092  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No towers may be constructed in the Mississippi River Critical
Area Overlay.



   (B)   All towers must be considered conditional uses in all
districts, unless modified by this section.



   (C)   Towers and antennas in parks:  In addition to the other
conditions outlined in this section, towers and antennas in parks must meet
the following additional conditions:



      (1)   The site must meet the definition of a public park
elsewhere in this chapter.



      (2)   The applicant must obtain a valid lease from the
appropriate city, county or state agency.



   (D)   Antennas and similar communication devices mounted on roofs,
walls, and existing towers (excluding satellite dishes): The placement of
antennas and other communication devices on roofs, walls, and existing towers
may be considered a permitted use in all districts zoned for Public
Institution (PI), high density residential (R-5, R-6, R-7), business (B-1,
B-2, B-3, BP, I), those areas of the PCDD and PUD districts guided for high
density residential, commercial or industrial, and on those parcels zoned
residential but not used for residential purposes (such as religious
institutions), provided they meet the requirements of all applicable City
Codes and all of the following:



      (1)   Roof-mounted antennas must be no more than 15 feet in
height.



      (2)   Roof-mounted antennas and their accessory
equipment/buildings must be setback from the edge of the principal building
or structure a distance equal to the height of the antenna, equipment or
building.



      (3)   Installation of the antennas requires a building
permit.  The applicant must submit a report prepared by a qualified
professional engineer, licensed by the State of Minnesota, indicating the
existing structure or tower’s suitability to accept the antenna, and the
proposed method of affixing the antenna to the structure.  Complete details
of all fixtures and couplings, and the precise point of attachment must be
indicated. 



      (4)   All other antennas may be considered conditional unless
otherwise modified in this chapter.



      (5)   Proof of non-interference with public safety
telecommunications: Each application for construction of wireless
communication equipment includes a statement from a qualified professional
engineer licensed by the State of Minnesota that the construction of the
tower, including reception and transmission functions, will not interfere
with public safety telecommunications, provided however, that no application
requires any statement regarding the environmental effects of radio frequency
emissions to the extent that the wireless telecommunication equipment
complies with FCC regulations concerning such emissions.  Before the
introduction of any new service or changes in existing service,
telecommunication providers must notify the city and the Hennepin County
Sheriff’s Radio Systems Manager at least ten calendar days in advance of
such changes to allow interferencelevels to be monitored during the testing
process.



   (E)   Satellite or microwave dishes: Dishes may be considered
permitted in all districts, provided they meet all of the following:



      (1)   The communication sending and/or receiving dish is
accessory to the primary use on the site.



      (2)   The dish is not located within any of the building
setbacks, unless it is one meter or less in diameter and attached to a
building.



      (3)   When placed on a flat roof, the dish must be setback
from the edge of the building a distance equal to the height of the dish,
unless it is one meter or less in diameter.  The height of the dish cannot
exceed 15 feet.



      (4)   Dishes over one meter in diameter may not be placed on a
residential roof when visible from a public right-of-way.



      (5)   When placed on the ground, setbacks from other
properties are at least equal to the height of the communication device. 



      (6)   No more than one satellite dish over one meter in
diameter may be permitted on any one property zoned for residential uses and
two satellite dishes over one meter in diameter are permitted on any one
property zoned for business uses.



      (7)   All other satellite dishes are considered conditional
uses, except for the number allowed per parcel, unless otherwise modified in
this chapter.



      (8)   No satellite dishes may exceed five feet in diameter.



   (F)   Lighting: Towers and antennas may not be artificially lighted
except if required by the FAA unless they are incorporated into the approved
design of the tower, such as light fixtures illuminating ball fields, parking
lots, or a similar use.



   (G)   Construction and design requirements:  Proposed or modified
towers and antennas must meet the following design requirements:



      (1)   All towers and antennas erected, constructed or located
within the city, and all wiring must comply with the requirements set forth
in the Minnesota Building Code.



      (2)   Towers and antennas must be designed to blend into the
surrounding environment through the use of color and camouflaging
architectural treatment, except when otherwise dictated by federal or state
authorities.  The telecommunications facilities must use as many stealth
design techniques as reasonably possible.  Economic considerations alone are
not justification for failing to provide stealth design techniques.



      (3)   Commercial wireless telecommunication service towers
intended primarily for the support of their related antennas must be
self-supporting monopoles unless the City Council determines that an
alternative design would better blend into the surrounding environment.  The
use of guyed towers is prohibited.



   (H)   Permanent platforms or other structures exclusive of antennas
that serve to increase off-site visibility are prohibited.



   (I)   The use of any portion of a tower for signs other than warning
or equipment information signs is prohibited.



   (J)   Accessory buildings and equipment: All accessory equipment
related to towers and antennas must be housed within an existing structure
whenever possible.  Any new accessory buildings, lockers, and/or ground
mounted equipment must meet the following:



      (1)   They must be architecturally designed to blend in with
the surrounding environment, subject to the landscaping and screening
requirements of §§ 152.270 through 152.276 and §§ 152.370 through 152.376.



      (2)   They must meet the minimum setback requirements of the
underlying zoning district, unless they are located on the roof of the
principal building, in which case they must be setback from the edge a
distance equal to their height.



      (3)   Unless the accessory equipment is mounted on an existing
structure or housed within an existing structure, the city may require a
security fence around the base of the tower and/or accessory equipment.  If
required, the security fence must have a maximum opacity of 50% and meet the
fencing requirements elsewhere in the City Code.



   (K)   Maintenance hours: Non-emergency maintenance of towers,
antennas and associated equipment must be completed between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m. for all towers within 1,000 feet of a residential district.



   (L)   Collocation  requirements.  All towers erected, constructed,
or located within the city to support antennas for wireless communication
service providers as defined in §152.008, must comply with the following
requirements:



      (1)   The City Council will not approve a proposal for a new
tower unless it finds that the antennas cannot be accommodated on an existing
or approved tower or building within a one mile search radius (one half-mile
search radius for towers 120 feet or less in height) of the proposed tower
due to one or more of the following reasons:



         (a)   The planned equipment would exceed the structural
capacity of the existing or approved tower or building, as documented by a
qualified professional engineer licensed by the State of Minnesota and the
existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment.



         (b)   The planned equipment would cause interference
materially impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at
the tower or building as documented by a qualified professional engineer
licensed by the State of Minnesota and the interference cannot be prevented.



         (c)   Existing or approved towers and buildings within
the search radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height
necessary to function as documented by a qualified professional engineer
licensed by the State of Minnesota.



         (d)   Written documentation that the applicant made a
good faith, diligent, but unsuccessful effort to install or collocate the
antenna(e) within the defined search radius.  The documentation must include
the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners of other towers,
buildings, or other structures of appropriate height, including those on
city-owned property.



         (e)   Other unforeseen circumstances as approved by
Council.



      (2)   Any proposed tower intended to support antennas for
wireless communication service providers, as defined in § 152.008, and its
proposed site must be designed structurally, electrically, and in all
respects, to accommodate both the applicant’s antennas and accessory
equipment and comparable antennas and equipment for at least two additional
users if the tower is over 100 feet in height and for at least one additional
user if the tower is between 60 to 100 feet in height.  Towers must be
designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to
accept antennas mounted at varying heights.  Alternative designs for towers
with more than three users may be approved by the City Council, if they
prevent the construction of multiple towers and are found to be compatible
with the neighborhood.



      (3)   Any tower proposed at less than 75 feet must be
constructed with a foundation adequate to accommodate an additional 20 feet
of height to accommodate an additional user.  The applicant must provide
written evidence that they will allow the extra height added to their tower
with a reasonable request for a collocation lease.



   (M)   Tower and/or antenna setbacks. Towers and antennas must meet
the setbacks of the underlying zoning district, unless modified by the
following:



      (1)   A tower’s setback may be reduced or its location in
relation to a public street varied, at the sole discretion of the City
Council, to allow the integration of a tower into an existing or proposed
structure such as a church steeple, light standard, power line support
device, or similar structure.



      (2)   In Business Park (BP) and Industrial (I) zoning
districts, towers and/or antennas may encroach into the rear setback area,
provided that the rear property line abuts another property in the Business
Park (BP) or Industrial (I) district and the tower does not encroach upon any
easements.



      (3)   All towers and/or antennas must be set back from planned
public rights-of-way as documented in city corridor studies, the
Comprehensive Plan, or the appropriate county or state plans, by a minimum
distance equal to one half of the height of the tower including all antennas
and attachments.



      (4)   If applicable, setbacks for towers and/or antennas must
be determined for the full height of the proposed tower, including
extension/expansion height as may be required elsewhere in this chapter.



      (5)   Towers in residential districts shall be setback a
distance equal to four times the height of the structure.



      (6)   Towers in districts adjacent to residential parcels used
primarily or guided for residential purposes shall be setback a distance
equal to two times the height of the tower.



   (N)   Height. The height of a tower and/or antenna may be determined
by measuring the vertical distance from the tower’s point of contact with
the ground to the highest point of the tower, including all antennas or other
attachments.  When towers are mounted upon or attached to other structures,
the combined height of the structure and tower must meet the height
restrictions of this section.  In addition, all towers must meet the
following:



      (1)   In all residential zoning districts on parcels other
than those used primarily for residential purposes, the maximum height of any
tower, including all antennas and other attachments, may not exceed one foot
for each four feet the tower is setback from residential parcels used
primarily or guided for residential purposes, up to a maximum height of 125
feet.



      (2)   In all non-residential zoning districts, the maximum
height of any tower, including all antennas and other attachments, may not
exceed one foot for each two feet the tower is setback from residential
parcels used primarily or guided for residential purposes up to a maximum
height of 125 feet.



   (O)   Preference for identification of tower sites.  The following
preferences shall be followed in site selection for new towers when
collocation is not possible:



      (1)   Existing buildings or structures;



      (2)   Public institution sites;



      (3)   Sites zoned BP or I;



      (4)   Sites zoned B3 or B4;



      (5)   Sites zoned B1 or B2;



      (6)   Other properties consistent with provisions of this
subchapter.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2004-1029, passed 12-13-04)



§ 152.093  TOWERS AND ANTENNAS IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.



   All towers and antennas in the following residential districts: R-1,
R-2, R-2A, R-2B, R-3, R-3A, R-4, and R-4A, and in those areas in the PCDD and
PUD guided for low and medium residential development must comply to the
following:



   (A)   Radio and television towers and antennas:  Proposed towers
for personal radio and television antennas located on parcels zoned
residential and used primarily for residential purposes may be considered
permitted if they meet the following conditions:



      (1)   The tower and/or antennas, including all accessory
antennas and other attachments, is (are) at or below the maximum height as
regulated elsewhere in the City Code.



      (2)   It meets the setbacks of the underlying district.



      (3)   It is located to the rear of the property.



      (4)   Only one tower is allowed per parcel.



   (B)   Personal (non-commercial) radio and television towers and
antennas that exceed the maximum height defined elsewhere in the City Code
and commercial towers shall be considered conditional uses in residential
districts.  Commercial towers may only be allowed as a conditional use on
the following parcels:



      (1)   Religious institution sites, when constructed in or as
part of a steeple, spire, bell tower or similar architectural feature.



      (2)   Park sites, if conformance with this section are met to
the satisfaction of the city.



      (3)   Government, school, utility, and institutional uses.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2004-1029, passed 12-13-04)



§ 152.094  ADDITIONAL SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.



   In addition to the information required elsewhere in this Code,
Conditional Use Permit applications for towers require the following
supplemental information:



   (A)   A report from a qualified professional engineer licensed by
the State of Minnesota which:



      (1)   Describes the tower’s capacity, including the number
and type of antennas that it can accommodate.



      (2)   Documents the height above grade for all potential
mounting positions for collocated antennas and the minimum separation
distances between antennas.



   (B)   A letter of intent committing the tower owner and his or her
successors to allow the shared use of the tower if an additional user agrees
in writing to meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use.



   (C)   A copy of the relevant portions of a signed lease which
require the applicant to remove the tower and associated facilities when they
are abandoned, unused or become hazardous may be submitted as a requirement
of the Conditional Use Permit before any building permits may be issued.



   In the event that a tower is not removed within 12 months, the tower
and associated facilities may be removed by the city and the costs of
removal, as well as any city staff time spent in processing the removal, may
be assessed against the property.



   (D)   Proposals to erect new towers must be accompanied by any
required federal or state agency licenses.



   (E)   A signed statement that certifies that the proposed tower
complies with regulations administered by Federal Aviation Administration.



   (F)   All applications for towers erected, constructed, or located
within the city to support antennas for wireless communication service
providers, as defined elsewhere in this chapter, may be required to submit a
current area plan map showing their existing towers and the search areas for
the towers and antennas for which the Conditional Use Permit application has
been filed.  The area map must include those towers and antennas (including
existing and proposed in the Conditional Use Permit application) within the
city and a radius of one mile outside the city’s boundaries.



   (G)   Proof of non-interference with public safety
telecommunications: Each application for construction of wireless
communication equipment includes a statement from a qualified professional
engineer licensed by the State of Minnesota that the construction of the
tower, including reception and transmission functions, will not interfere
with public safety telecommunications, provided however, that no application
requires any statement regarding the environmental effects of radio frequency
emissions to the extent that the wireless telecommunication equipment
complies with FCC regulations concerning such emissions.  Before the
introduction of any new service or changes in existing service,
telecommunication providers must notify the city and the Hennepin County
Sheriff’s Radio Systems Manager at least ten calendar days in advance of
such changes to allow interferencelevels to be monitored during the testing
process.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2004-1029, passed 12-13-04)



§ 152.095  EVALUATION AND MONITORING.



   As a condition of approval for telecommunication facilities the
applicant must reimburse the city for its costs to retain outside expert
technical assistance to evaluate any aspect of the proposed siting of
telecommunications facilities, including but not limited to other possible
sites within the city.  The owner of a telecommunications facility must
provide the city with current, technical evidence of compliance with FCC
radiation emission requirements, annually or more frequently at the city’s
reasonable request.  If the owner does not promptly provide the city with
satisfactory technical evidence of FCC compliance, the city may carry out
tests to ensure FCC radiation compliance using a qualified expert.  The
owner must reimburse the city for its reasonable costs in carrying out such
compliance testing.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2004-1029, passed 12-13-04)



§ 152.096  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Initial criteria.  The City Council may grant a variance to
the setback, separation or buffer requirements, and maximum height provision
of this subdivision based on the criteria set forth elsewhere in this chapter.



   (B)   Additional criteria.  In addition to taking the criteria set
forth in §§ 152.030 through 152.039 into consideration, the City Council
may also grant a variance if the applicant demonstrates with written or other
satisfactory evidence that:



      (1)   The location, shape, appearance or nature of the use of
the proposed tower will not substantially detract from the aesthetics of the
area nor change the character of the neighborhood in which the tower is
proposed to be located.



      (2)   The variance will not create a threat to the public
health, safety or welfare.



      (3)   If the request is for a modification to the setbacks,
the size of the parcel upon which the tower is proposed to be located makes
compliance impossible, and the only alternative for the applicant is to
locate the tower at another site that poses a greater threat to the public
health, safety or welfare or is closer in proximity to residentially zoned
land.



      (4)   If the request is for a modification of separation
requirements, the applicant must provide technical evidence from an engineer
that the proposed tower and antennas must be located at the proposed site in
order to meet the coverage needs of the applicant’s wireless communications
system.  The applicant must also submit a landscape plan showing buffers to
screen the tower base from being visible from a residential area.



      (5)   If the request is for modification of the maximum height
limit, the applicant must provide evidence documented by a qualified
professional engineer licensed by the State of Minnesota, showing the
modification is necessary to facilitate collocation of telecommunication
antennas and ground equipment to avoid the construction of a new tower, or to
meet the coverage requirements of the applicant’s wireless communications
system.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2004-1029, passed 12-13-04)



LIGHTING



§ 152.110  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide regulations to balance
lighting needs for visibility and personal and property safety with the
negative impacts of off-site light spill-over.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.111  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Wall or roof lighting may be used to illuminate the pedestrian
walkways, entrance areas, loading docks, and yard areas within 20 feet of the
building.  No wall or roof lighting may be used to illuminate areas for
motor vehicle parking or access.



   (B)   Any open area used for motor vehicle parking, storage or
access must be illuminated with free-standing luminaires. 



   (C)   Free-standing luminaire regulations:



      (1)   Height maximums, as measured from the average elevation
of the finished grade within ten feet of the structure or fixture to the
highest point of the luminaire (including the support structure) may be as
follows:



      (2)   Within 500 feet of any property zoned residential: 15
feet  including any base or support structures.



      (3)   Farther than 500 feet from any property zoned
residential: 25 feet.



      (4)   Cut-off angles must be equal to or less than 90°.



   (D)   Low-pressure sodium fixtures may only be used for:
single-family, duplex, and townhouse developments.



   (E)   Lighting intensity must adhere to the following:



 


Figure 152.111.01 Required Minimum and Maximum Light Intensities
(as measured in foot candles at the ground level)




Use

 

Minimum Intensity

 

Maximum Intensity

 

Maximum Intensity at Property Line



Parking areas for non-residential uses
 

1

 

15

 

.5



Private sidewalks and other pedestrian walkways
 

10

 

20

 

.5



Building entrances and exits
 

10

 

20

 

.5



Exterior storage areas
 

NA

 

15

 

.5



Non-specified uses - For uses not specifically listed above, light
requirements may be computed by the City Manager



 



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2001-961, passed 11-26-01)



§ 152.112  GLARE.



   All lighting must be arranged so as not to produce glare.  All
properties must be in compliance with the following:



   (A)   All light sources must be controlled and equipped with lenses,
louvers, shields, or prismatic control devices designed to prevent off-site
views of the light source.



   (B)   No flickering or flashing lights except those associated with
public safety activities may be permitted.



   (C)   Light sources that are integrated into a canopy must be
designed to be recessed and flush with the ceiling of the canopy, and
equipped with a flat lens surface.



   (D)   Any light or combination of lights which cast light on a
public street may not exceed one foot candle as measured from the public
right-of-way.



   (E)   Any light or combination of lights which cast light on
residential property must not exceed one half foot candles as measured from
the residential property in question.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.113  COMPLIANCE.



   Any new lighting installed after the effective date of this chapter
must be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Any lighting in
existence before the effective date of this chapter that does not comply with
its requirements may be considered legally nonconforming and may be allowed
to continue in compliance with §§ 152.110 through 152.114.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.114  EXCEPTION.



   Seasonal lighting may not be regulated by this section except for the
provisions in § 152.112(D) and (E).



(Ord. 2000-936)



PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION (SIDEWALKS)



§ 152.130  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of establishing criteria for design of pedestrian
circulation facilities is to reduce reliance on the automobile, to provide
opportunities for recreational walking throughout the city, and to ensure
safe pedestrian movement between properties and from off-street parking areas
to building entrances.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.131  REQUIRED LOCATIONS.



   Sidewalks must be required along all existing and future minor
arterials (high and low density), all major collectors as designated by the 
Functional Classification System included in the Comprehensive Plan, and
according to the provisions of Chapter 151 of the City Code.  Sidewalks may
be required on any street where one or more of the following are present as
determined by the city:



   (A)   Concrete curb and gutter has been constructed on the roadway.



   (B)   Traffic volumes on the road exceed 1,000 vehicles per day.



   (C)   A roadway connecting a neighborhood to a commercial area,
park, school, religious institution or other community oriented facility.



   (D)   Along any street in a business district.



   (E)   A multi-family, office, commercial, or industrial use that is
expected to generate pedestrian traffic.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.132  CROSS CIRCULATION REQUIREMENTS.



   Sidewalks must be provided within all developments except single- or
two-family residential in locations that provide convenient, safe pedestrian
access as determined by the city between principal uses and must be as direct
as possible to minimize distance and other impediments to walking.



(Ord. 2000-936)



OFF-STREET PARKING, DRIVE AISLE STANDARDS, GARAGE AND DRIVEWAY REGULATIONS



§ 152.140  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter establishes off-street parking, drive aisle, and
driveway standards to allow for the orderly and adequate storage of vehicles
on property, to alleviate and prevent congestion on public rights-of-way, and
control the appearance and maintenance of parking areas and surfaces.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2005-1032, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 2010-1113, passed
4-5-10)



§ 152.141  APPLICABILITY.



   All property in the city must comply with the requirements of this
subchapter.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2005-1032, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 2010-1113, passed
4-5-10)



§ 152.142  REQUIRED QUANTITY.



   A minimum number of parking stalls is established for all uses and must
be provided on the property where the principal use is located as defined in
the following tables.  For uses not specifically listed below, off-street
parking requirements may be established by the City Manager based upon the
characteristics of the use.  These requirements may be revised upward or
downward, when approved by the City Council through the Site Plan Review
process, based on verifiable information pertaining to parking.  Proof of
parking is allowed by § 152.145.



 


Figure 152.142.01 Minimum Required Parking Spaces for Residential Uses




Use

 
Minimum Number of Spaces Required





Bed and breakfast establishments and boarding and rooming houses

 

2 spaces for the principal residential dwelling unit plus 1 space for each
rental room




Assisted living housing

 

.5 spaces for each unit




Nursing home

 

1 space per 6 patient beds, plus 1 space per employee on the largest work
shift




Daycare facilities

 

No additional spaces required if located in a single dwelling or one unit in
a multiple dwelling structure




Dwellings, detached townhouses

 

2 spaces per unit, plus 1 space for each unit for guest parking (garage
required - see § 152.143




Dwellings, single-family detached and two-family attached and residential
facilities (licensed for 6 or fewer persons)

 

2 spaces per unit (garages required - see § 152.143.)




Dwellings, townhouses and multiple family dwelling structures

 

2 spaces per unit, plus 0.5 spaces for each unit for guest parking (garages
required - see § 152.143.)




Dwellings, senior independent living

 

1 space per unit, plus 0.5 space for each unit for guest parking and an
addition .5 spaces for demonstrated parking to be paved in the event the
development is converted to regular occupancy.




Mobile home parks

 

2 space per unit, plus 3 per each 6 units as guest parking.




Model houses/temporary real estate offices in residential units

 

4 temporary spaces per dwelling or office in compliance with § 152.143.




Offices related to leasing, renting and maintenance of multiple family or
attached dwellings

 

1 space for each employee on the largest shift, plus two visitor spaces or
one space for each 100 square feet, whichever is greater.




Residential facilities (Licensed for over 6 persons)

 

1 space for each staff person on the largest shift and 0.5 space for each
resident of the licensed capacity





 



 


Figure 152.142.02 Minimum Required Parking Spaces for Assembly, Institutional
and Community Uses




Use

 
Minimum Number of Spaces Required





Athletic Facilities, Amphitheaters, Stadiums

 

1 space for each 4 seats (one seat equals 22 inches of pew or bench space) of
design capacity and/or 10 seats for each field and/or 20 seats for each ball
diamond.  A percentage of the parking may be provided in grass lots provided
those lots are used not more than 5 times per year.




Cemeteries

 

1 space for each full-time employee




Religious institutions, clubs, mortuaries, and assembly, banquet, or
convention halls

 

1 space for each 2.5 seats (one seat equals 22 inches  of pew or bench
space)based on the design capacity in the main assembly area, plus parking
figured separately for additional gymnasiums, banquet rooms, meeting rooms,
offices, and other multi-use spaces




Schools-Elementary and Junior High

 

1 space for each classroom plus 1 for each 100 students of design capacity




Schools-High School, College, Trade, etc.

 

1 space for each 5 students of design capacity, plus 1 space for every
classroom




Social Clubs

 

1 space per each person based on the maximum occupancy allowed by the fire
code





 



 


Figure 152.142.03 Minimum Required Parking Spaces for Business Uses




Use

 
Minimum Number of Spaces Required





Boat and other recreational equipment and vehicle sales

 

4 spaces plus 1 additional space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area
over the first 1,000 square feet




Bowling alley

 

5 spaces per alley, plus additional parking calculated separately for
restaurants and other related uses




Clinics-medical, dental, chiropractic, etc.

 

1 space for each staff doctor or dentist or 1 space for each 150 square feet
of gross floor area, whichever is greater




Daycare, preschools, except residential

 

1 space per employee plus one space per 7 children of licensed capacity of
the facility




Fuel or service stations

 

4 spaces plus 3 spaces for each enclosed service stall plus parking figured
separately for retail or office space.




Golf courses, driving ranges

 

4 spaces for each green, plus 1 for each employee on the largest shift, plus
2 spaces for each driving tee on a driving range




Hotel, motel

 

1 space per rental room and one additional for each 4 rental rooms, plus
additional parking calculated separately for banquet rooms, meeting rooms,
and restaurants




Hospitals

 

2 spaces for each patient bed




Manufacturing, fabricating or processing of a product or material

 

4 spaces plus 1 space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area




Movie theaters

 

1 space for each 3.5 seats of design capacity




Offices, including government buildings and other professional offices >
6,000 sq ft of floor area

 

Minimum of 5 spaces with a maximum of 5.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of
floor area




Offices, including government buildings and other professional offices 6,000
sq ft of floor area or less

 

Minimum of 3.5 spaces, with a maximum of 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of
floor area




Open sales lots

 

1 space for each 2,000 square feet of land up to the first 8,000 square feet,
plus 1 space for each 4,000 square feet up to a parcel of 24,000 square feet,
plus 1 space for each 6,000 square feet over 24,000.




Restaurants and delicatessens

 

1 space for each 40 square feet of gross floor area of dining and bar plus 1
space for each 80 square feet of kitchen area




Restaurants, fast food

 

1 space per 50 square feet of floor area, plus 1 space per employee on the
largest work shift, plus 6 off street stacking spaces per drive-through lane




Restaurants where no interior serving areas are present, such as a drive-in
or take out business

 

1 space for each 15 square feet of building dedicated to patron service and 5
spaces for employees




Retail or service use, unless otherwise specified

 

1 space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area.  No retail or service
use may provide parking in excess of 10 percent above the minimum required
parking spaces.  Such properties may hold aside additional areas for parking
which the City Council may approve for conversion if parking spaces are
proven to be under provided.




Self-service storage facility

 

Drive aisles between and around storage buildings must be 30 feet to
accommodate through traffic and parking outside individual storage units plus
parking figured separately for office and/or on-site security personnel
residences, etc




Shopping centers and big-box retailers less than 50,000 sq ft

 

Maximum of 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area




Shopping centers and big-box retailers 50,000 sq ft or greater

 

Maximum of 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area




Showrooms for display or sales including furniture stores, carpet stores, etc.

 

1 space per 400 square feet for first 25,000 square feet, plus 1 space per
600 square feet thereafter.




Showrooms for sale of automobiles

 

5 spaces for customer parking for every acre of total site area, plus 5
spaces for customer service parking for every acre of total site area, plus 1
space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area for employees.




Skating rinks (indoor), dance halls, miniature golf, ice arenas (indoor),
health and fitness clubs, commercial indoor recreational facility over 2,450
square feet, etc.

 

1 space per 300 square feet of floor area, plus 1 space per employee on the
largest work shift




Warehousing (and storage) in structures < 6,000 sf

 

1 space for each 600 square feet of gross floor area, with a minimum of 5
spaces




Warehousing (and storage) in structures > 6,000 sf

 

1 space for each 2,000 square feet of gross floor area, with a minimum of 10
spaces





 



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2001-952, passed 5-14-01; Am. Ord. 2003-997, passed
5-12-03; Am. Ord. 2004-1028, passed 12-13-04; Am. Ord. 2005-1032, passed
2-7-05; Am. Ord. 2010-1113, passed 4-5-10; Am. Ord. 2012-1133, passed 3-5-12;
Am. Ord. 2012-1139, passed 4-16-12; Am. Ord. 2015-1198, passed 10-12-15)



§ 152.143  GARAGES REQUIRED.



   All residential units must be constructed with garages.



   (A)   Single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and licensed
residential facilities constructed or moved onto any lot in the city after
May 27, 1986 are required to provide a minimum of 480 square feet of
garage.  Garages constructed in the R-2A/R-2B districts must provide a
minimum of 576 square feet of garage space.



   (B)   Townhouses.  Each townhouse unit (attached or detached) must
be constructed with a garage that is a minimum of 480 square feet in area.



   (C)   Multiple family dwelling units.  A minimum of one half of the
number of required parking spaces must be enclosed within garages or an
underground parking facility.



   (D)   All garages must have driveway access that meets the
requirements of § 152.144.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2005-1032, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 2010-1113, passed
4-5-10)



§ 152.144  DRIVEWAYS.



   (A)   All driveways installed on or after November 10, 1989 must be
paved with a continuous impervious surface or an approved pervious surface,
with the exception of farms, homes, and interim or temporary uses in the R-1
Urban Reserve District.  If a driveway that was installed before November
10, 1989 is expanded or enlarged by 20% or more in surface area from the size
that existed as of that date, the entire driveway must be paved with a
continuous impervious surface or an approved pervious surface.  All
driveways, regardless of when installed, must be maintained in compliance
with Chapter 106 of this code.



   (B)   No vehicle can be parked so that it blocks a public sidewalk,
trail, emergency access way, or a public or private fire hydrant.



   (C)   All residential driveways must be no wider than 30 feet at the
property line.



   (D)   No residential property may have driveway access to more than
one street.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2004-1012, passed 5-3-04; Am. Ord. 2005-1032, passed
2-7-05; Am. Ord. 2010-1113, passed 4-5-10)



§ 152.145  OFF-STREET PARKING AREA DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Reserved.



   (B)   Setbacks.  All parking areas created after the effective date
of this chapter must be designed and constructed so that no part of any
vehicle may ever be nearer than the following:



      (1)   Side or rear property line adjacent to a residential use
- 35 feet.



      (2)   All other interior side or rear property lines - 5 feet.



      (3)   From public rights-of-way - 15 feet.



   (C)   Design requirements.  All new construction, expansion or
modification of parking areas with more than four parking spaces must comply
with the following:



      (1)   Each parking space and drive aisle must be unobstructed
and must adhere to the design requirements included in the following table:



 


Figure 152.145.05 Required Length and Width of Parking Spaces




Angle of Parking Space

 

Type

 

Minimum Width of Space at Curb (Non- Retail Uses)

 

Minimum Width of Space at Curb (Retail Uses)

 

Minimum Length of Space from Curb

 

Minimum Drive Aisle Width



(One Way)

 

Minimum Drive Aisle Width



(Two Way)




90 degrees

 

Standard







Compact

 

9'







8'

 

10'







8'

 

18'







16'

 

20'







20'

 

25'







25'




60 degrees

 

Standard







Compact

 

10' 4"







8' 6"

 

11' 6½"







8' 6"

 

21'







17'

 

18'







18'

 

25'







25'




45 degrees

 

Standard







Compact

 

12' 7"







8' 6"

 

14' 13/4"







8' 6"

 

19' 8"







17'

 

15'







15'

 

25'







25'




 







 



Figure 152.145.06
90 Degrees (Standard)







 



Figure 152.145.07
60 Degrees (Standard)







 



Figure 152.145.08
45 Degrees (Standard)



      (2)   Parking spaces for the disabled or for specially
equipped vehicles for the disabled must comply with the State Building Code
requirements and the Americans with Disability Act standards.



      (3)   Where parking spaces abut perimeter curbs, the length of
the spaces may be shortened to account for the car overhang.  They shall not
be shorted adjacent to sidewalks.



      (4)   All parking spaces must be designated by clearly visible
painted lines.



      (5)   Non-residential driveway width shall be approved at the
time of site plan review.



      (6)   Required parking stalls may be designed and provided
with electric car plug-in devices.



   (D)   Curbing required.  Paving areas must be separated with curb
and gutter from all designated landscaping areas, curb islands, and at
ingress-egress locations to the traveled roadway. Curbing must be constructed
of poured-in-place concrete equipped with a gutter and must be of a six inch
non-surmountable design.  Other curb options may be allowed as approved by
the city.



   (E)   Paving.  Storage areas and access drives for motorized
vehicles or motorized recreational vehicles must be paved with a continuous
impervious surface, except for properties where gravel driveways existed
prior to November 10, 1989.  This paving requirement includes the entire
parking area including parking stalls, aisles and driveways.  All areas
shall be surfaced with concrete, bituminous, pavers, or pervious paving/paver
systems provided appropriate soils and site conditions exist for the pervious
systems to function. The City Engineer shall make the final determination if
soils are conducive for use of pervious paving/paver systems. The use of
pervious paving/paver systems is encouraged for pedestrian walkways, parking
areas, overflow parking areas, snow storage areas, within raised medians and
islands, emergency vehicle lanes and other low traffic areas. The owner shall
provide soils information to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City
Engineer that appropriate conditions exist for the pervious paving/paver
systems to function.  Owners of property in Business, Industrial and
Mixed-Use districts shall enter into a maintenance agreement to ensure
ongoing maintenance and operation of all pervious paving/paver systems. This
requirement also applies to open sales lots, open rental lots, and outdoor
storage or display areas. Other materials such as decorative rock, gravel,
sand, or bare soil are prohibited.



      (1)   Any parking spaces proposed in excess over minimum
requirements, as listed in § 152.142, shall use a pervious paver system
(provided appropriate soil conditions exist, as determined by the City
Engineer), within the total square footage of excess parking proposed, as
approved by the City Engineer. 



   (F)   Drainage.  Driveways shall not exceed a grade of four percent
and all parking lots except those for less than four vehicles shall include a
minimum of a one percent grade.  Catch basins, sumps, and underground storm
sewers must be installed if required by the City Engineer.



   (G)   Traffic regulatory signs.  Stop signs are required at all
driveway exits to city streets.  Other signs may be required as part of the
Site Plan Review process.



   (H)   Stacking.  All drive-through service windows must contain
room for a minimum stacking of six cars from the serving window and stacking
must not extend into drive aisles.



   (I)   Demonstrated parking.  The City Council may approve a
“proof-of-parking” plan which allows for a portion of the required
parking, but demonstrates that the minimum number of required parking spaces
can be accommodated on the property and meet setback requirements.  The plan
must demonstrate that all other applicable ordinances can be met if the full
amount of required parking were to be constructed.  The area for future
parking must be maintained as green space (sodded with grass or natural plant
materials).  Any changes to use and/or building size could invalidate the
approval for “Demonstrated Parking”.  Demonstrated parking may reserve
the right to require installation of the additional parking spaces.



   (J)   Shared parking.  Parking areas may be shared by uses on
separate lots within 500 feet of the entrance to the use it will serve
provided that the following are met:



      (1)   Certain uses that have their highest peak demand for
parking at substantially different times of the day or week can consider a
plan to provide required parking by sharing parking with adjacent uses based
on the following criteria:



         (a)   Up to 50% of the off-street parking stalls
required for a theatre, bowling alley, dance hall, bar, or restaurant may be
supplied by the off-street parking facilities provided by types of uses
specified as a primarily daytime use in subparagraph (d) below.



         (b)   Up to 50% of the off-street parking stalls
required for any use specified under subparagraph (d) below as primary
daytime uses may be supplied by the parking facilities provided by the
following nighttime or Sunday uses: auditoriums incidental to a public or
parochial school, churches, bowling alleys, dance halls, theatres, bars, or
restaurants.



         (c)   Up to 50% of the off-street parking stalls
required by § 152.142 for a church or for an auditorium incidental to a
public or parochial school may be supplied by off-street parking facilities
provided by uses specified under subparagraph (d) below as primarily daytime
uses.



         (d)    For the purpose of this section, the following
uses are considered as primarily daytime uses: banks, business offices,
retail stores/shopping centers, personal service shops, household equipment
or furniture shops, clothing or shoe repair or service shops, manufacturing,
wholesale, and similar uses.



      (2)   The parking area must have a pedestrian connection,
which includes a trail or walkway, paved with a continuous impervious surface
that connects to all users of the shared parking.



      (3)   The parking plan for the area must demonstrate that all
other applicable ordinances can be met.



      (4)   Any adjacent properties with approved shared parking
agreements must have vehicle access between them.



      (5)   The agreement between all affected property owners may
be approved as to content by the City Attorney and may define
responsibilities for maintenance.  Where shared use of parking exists within
the same site or across sites, a properly drawn legal instrument, drafted and
executed by the parties concerned, must be filed as a deed restriction on
both properties with the records for both properties in the Registrar of
Titles' or Recorder's Office of Hennepin County with proof thereof presented
to the city. The intent in either case is that the agreement will be in the
public record in perpetuity, and not altered unless approved by the city.



      (6)   Revocation. Failure to comply with the shared parking
provisions of this section constitutes a violation of this Code. A shared
parking agreement may be revoked by the parties to the agreement only if
off-street parking is provided as otherwise set forth in § 152.142 of this
Code, or if an alternative shared parking plan is approved by the city.



   (K)   Parking areas for interim or temporary uses in the R-1 Urban
Reserve District are exempt from provisions in § 152.145(C)(4), (D), (E) and
(L) only when approved through the interim use permit process as described in
§§ 152.193 through 152.196.



   (L)   Landscaping and screening.



      (1)   All landscaped areas, including parking area islands
must be equipped with an underground, automatic irrigation system. The
irrigation system must include a flow meter, moisture sensing devices and
must be calibrated to meet all applicable City Codes.



      (2)   Interior parking lot area. Ten percent of the
impervious, interior parking area must be landscape islands, rain gardens or
other green space. The 10% is included as part of the total open space
requirement.



 



      (3)   Parking area design. To break up large impervious areas
and provide greater shading and reduction of heat island effect all parking
lots of at least 25 parking stalls or more, in any Business, Industrial,
Mixed Use, Multiple Family Residential Districts and non-residential uses in
these district shall be designed with landscaped parking lot islands
distributed throughout the entire parking area. To ensure adequate
distribution of landscaped islands within parking lots no more than the
maximum number of stalls as displayed in the table below may be installed
without abutting some type of landscaped islands.  Landscaped islands may be
designed at the ends of stalls, in a continuous row between bays as shown in
the diagram below, or in other patterns, provided that an island is abutting
parking stalls based on the table below.  Islands designed at the end of
rows shall have a minimum size of 180 square feet.  Continuous parking lot
islands shall be at least nine feet in width.



   Islands can be designed at the end of rows or in a continuous row to
meet the maximum number of stalls between island requirements



 


Landscape Island Requirements



Use Type
 
Maximum Number of Stalls Between Island


Residential - multiple family uses
 
12 stalls


Commercial, mixed use, civic and institutional uses
 
22 stalls


Industrial and business park uses
 
22 stalls


Open storage warehouse and like uses
 
50 stalls



 









 



Type and quantity of landscaping required in islands and within the parking
area shall comply with landscaping standards in § 152.374. Each landscape
island must be planted with a minimum of one deciduous large or two medium
trees, two shrubs and pervious ground cover as required in § 152.374. Rain
gardens shall be finished with hardy native plant species that will survive
and remain aesthetically pleasing in wet and dry conditions. The trees and
shrubs in the landscape islands and rain gardens shall count toward the
overall required landscaping in § 152.374.



      (4)   Parking areas greater than 50,000 square feet shall be
divided both visually and functionally into smaller parking courts.



      (5)   Screening. Screening must be required for any off street
parking or loading area and may be any combination of landscaping, decorative
fencing, and berms, approved through the Site Plan Review process or as
required elsewhere in this chapter, unless further restricted by the
following:



         (a)   Residential. All parking and loading areas over
four spaces must be screened from adjacent residential zoning districts.
Screening must be a minimum of six feet in height when installed as measured
from the parking area surface to the satisfaction of the City Manager. Fences
alone shall not meet this requirement.



         (b)   Street rights-of-way. All parking areas containing
more than four stalls and all loading areas must be screened from adjacent
public rights-of-way. Screening must be a minimum of three feet in height as
measured from the top of the adjacent parking area surface.



      (6)   Perimeter parking area landscaping standards.  Where a
parking area serving a use abuts a street right-of-way, vacant land, or any
other development (except another parking use area), perimeter landscaping
strips shall be provided and maintained between the vehicle use areas and the
abutting right-of-way or property line in accordance with the following
standards:



         (a)   Location.



            1.   Perimeter landscaping strips shall be located
on the same land where the parking use area is located.



            2.   Perimeter landscaping strips may not be
placed within future street rights-of-way as identified on the city's
transportation plans.



         (b)   Minimum width.  When the parking use area is
located within 50 feet of a street right-of-way, the perimeter landscaping
shall be located within a planting strip at least six feet wide.  In all
other instances, the strip shall be the minimum width necessary to assure
required landscaping is not damaged by vehicle or other on-site activity. 
In no instance shall the strip be less than three feet wide.



         (c)   Landscaping. Each perimeter landscaping strip
shall include landscaping screening of three feet in height as measured from
the top of the adjacent parking area surface or screening that is 80% opaque
where a parking lot abuts a residential zoning district.









 



   (M)   Parking of motorized vehicles outside of driveway locations is
only allowed on areas paved with a continuous impervious surface, or approved
pervious surface, or on legal non-conforming parking areas.



   (N)   Pedestrian circulation. All parking lots in Business,
Commercial, Mixed Use, Industrial, Multiple-Family and non-residential uses
in residential zoning districts shall be subject to the following standards
to provide a safe pedestrian environment:



      (1)   Parking areas shall include a direct and continuous
pedestrian network within and adjacent to parking lots to connect building
entrances, parking spaces, public sidewalks, transit stops, and other
pedestrian destinations.



      (2)   At least one pedestrian route shall be provided between
the main building entrance and the public sidewalk that is uninterrupted by
surface parking and driveways.



      (3)   In larger parking lots or where parking lots serve more
than one building or destination, designated pedestrian pathways for safe
travel through the parking lot shall be provided.



      (4)   All pedestrian routes within a parking lot shall include
a clear division from vehicular areas, with a change in grade, soft
landscaping, or a change in surface materials.



      (5)   Where pedestrian routes cross street access driveways
and other major drive aisles, crossings shall be clearly marked and sight
distance for both pedestrian and vehicles shall be unobstructed.



   (O)   Credit for on-street parking.  This subsection is intended to
reduce the amount of unnecessary parking spaces and to encourage pedestrian
activity as an alternative means of transportation.  Credit for on street
parking shall be allowed only within mixed use developments and districts. 
Some or all of the off street parking spaces as required in § 152.142 of
this chapter may be met by the provision of on street spaces.  Such credit
shall require site plan review approval.  Requests for on street parking
shall meet the following requirements:



      (1)   All on street parking facilities shall be designed in
conformance with the standards established by the city;



      (2)  Prior to approving any requests for on street parking, the
development review team shall determine that the proposed on street parking
will not materially adversely impact traffic movements and related public
street functions; and



      (3)   Credit for on street parking shall be limited to the
number of spaces provided along the street frontage adjacent to the use.



   (P)   Parking area stormwater management design requirements. Each
development and redevelopment within and Business, Industrial, Mixed Use or
Residential District that requires a parking lot under the code, shall
incorporate a minimum of two of the follow stormwater management techniques:



      (1)   Rainwater and snowmelt shall be managed to encourage
infiltration, evapotranspiration, and water re-uses to achieve water quality
and quantity measures as required by the Watershed District in which the site
is located. Design practices for managing stormwater may include, but are not
limited to, the following practices:



      (2)   Permeable paving for parking spaces, drive aisles,
overflow parking, snow storage areas, and other hard surfaces in the parking
lot.



      (3)   Planting of trees, shrubs, and other absorbent
landscaping throughout the parking lot to provide shade and places for water
uptake.



      (4)   Creation of bio-retention areas, such as swales,
vegetated islands, and overflow ponds.



      (5)   Inclusion catch basin restrictors and oil/grit
separators as appropriate.



      (6)   Creation of opportunities to harvest rainwater from
rooftops and other hard surfaces for landscape irrigation.



      (7)   Where installed, bio-retention areas shall be
appropriately designed and located to filter, store, and/or convey the
expected stormwater flows from surrounding paved areas.



      (8)   The appropriate watershed district shall have final
review and permitting authority for all surface water management measures
proposed.



   (Q)   Cart storage.  Any retail commercial uses using carts shall
provide ample space for the storage of customer service carts within
off-street parking areas (unless all carts are stored and returned at the
building entry). The need and specific amount of required cart storage space
shall be determined as part of site plan review. When required, cart storage
areas shall not occupy required off-street parking space, shall be clearly
delineated, and include facilities for cart confinement.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2003-1008, passed 11-3-03; Am. Ord. 2004-1012,
passed 5-3-04; Am. Ord. 2005-1032, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 2006-1059, passed
6-5-06; Am. Ord. 2010-1113, passed 4-5-10; Am. Ord. 2012-1133, passed 3-5-12)



§ 152.146  TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT.



   Because the purposes and intent of this section includes the lessening
of congestion on the streets and roads, as well as generally protecting the
public health, safety and welfare, specific standards and regulations are
outlined which are intended to reduce traffic congestion and environmental
pollution associated with vehicular transportation. The standards and
regulations established are intended to be components of an overall
transportation demand management plan. These standards apply to all new
construction Business, Industrial, non-residential uses in any Residential
District, Mixed Use development in any Overlay or PUD Zone Districts.



   (A)   Bicycle parking requirements. Encouraging the use of bicycles
is an important non- motorized transportation alternative and a component of
a transportation demand management program.



      (1)   Required bicycle parking spaces. The minimum number of
bicycle parking spaces provided for any use shall be 5% of the vehicular
parking spaces required for such use.



      (2)   Design standards for bicycle parking spaces. Bicycle
parking spaces shall be:



         (a)   Located on the same lot as the principal use;



         (b)    Located to prevent damage to bicycles by cars;



         (c)   In a convenient, highly visible, active, well
lighted area;



         (d)   Located so as not to interfere with pedestrian
movements;



         (e)   As near the principal entrance of the building as
practical;



         (f)   Located to provide safe access from the spaces to
the right-of-way or bicycle lane;



         (g)   Consistent with the surroundings in color and
design and incorporated, whenever possible, into buildings or street
furniture design;



         (h)   Designed to avoid damage to the bicycles;



         (i)   Anchored to resist rust or corrosion, or removal
by vandalism.



   (B)   Car pool parking incentives. The following regulations are
intended to encourage the use of car pooling to increase vehicle occupancy
and reduce traffic volumes and congestion:



      (1)   Applicability. The regulations of this subsection shall
apply to all nonresidential buildings or uses constructed after adoption of
this title, that employ 100 or more people.



      (2)   Reserved parking spaces. Uses that encourage a car pool
program among employers are allowed to designate required parking as reserved
car pool parking. No more than 10% of the total number of employee parking
spaces for vehicles participating in a car pool program can be designated.
Car pool parking spaces shall be located to provide superior convenience.



      (3)   Submission of car pool parking plan. Each use meeting
the objectives of this subsection shall submit a plan of the employee parking
spaces reserved for car pooling to the development review team for review and
approval. The plan shall:



         (a)   Specify the total number of employee parking
spaces provided;



         (b)   Indicate the number and location of parking spaces
reserved for car pooling; and



         (c)   Include a copy of the car pool program which
identifies the individuals participating in the car pool program.



      (4)   Delineation of car pool parking spaces. Car pool parking
spaces shall be marked by sign or marking on the pavement to identify that
the use of the spaces is reserved for the car pool program.



   (C)   Transit service. Parking may be reduced by 10% for any parcel
located within one-quarter mile of a transit stop.  This 10% shall be shown
on the site as proof of parking in the event transit services are altered and
additional parking is required. To qualify, the transit stop must be served
by regular transit service on all days of the week and adequate pedestrian
access must be available between the transit stop and parcel.  Regular
transit service shall operate at least twice hourly between 7:30 a.m. and
6:30 p.m. on weekdays and once hourly after 6:30 p.m.  Regular transit
service shall operate on Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays.



   (D)   Motorcycle/scooter parking. Two motorcycle/scooter parking
spaces may be provided in lieu of one  required automobile parking space.
The maximum automobile parking space reduction under this provision shall be
calculated at a 1:30 ratio (For every 30 required automobile parking spaces,
one automobile space may be waived). Parking areas under 30 spaces may reduce
the  parking requirement by a maximum of one automobile parking space.
Motorcycle parking must be properly labeled with signs and surfaced with
concrete. The minimum stall size for one  motorcycle shall be four-foot in
width by seven foot in depth.



   (E)   Compact parking stalls. Parking areas including 30 spaces or
more may include 35%  compact parking stalls which must be labeled as such
on the parking plan and located in areas of anticipated infrequent use.
Compact parking stall sizes are stated in Figure 152.145.05.



   (F)   Planned unit development (PUD). Off-street parking
requirements may be reduced through the planned development process when an
applicant demonstrates the need for a lesser number of off-street parking
spaces. The city may require a parking and transportation study conducted in
accordance with accepted methodology approved by the city, prepared by an
independent traffic engineering professional under the supervision of the
city and paid for by the applicant.



   (G)   Industrial businesses in the General Industrial (I) zoning
district may, after five years of operation at their current location, reduce
the existing parking space width to 8.5 feet for workforce management.



(Ord. 2006-1059, passed 6-5-06; Am. Ord. 2010-1120, passed 11-22-10; Am. Ord.
2012-1133, passed 3-5-12)



§ 152.147  OFF-STREET LOADING DOCKS AND STAGING AREAS.



   All business and industrial uses must have an area designated for
loading, unloading, or staging of delivery vehicles in compliance with the
following.



   (A)   Loading docks. Loading docks must be provided in the Business
Park and Industrial Districts, at a minimum, in compliance with the following:



 


Figure 152.146.09 Required Loading Docks



Building Size (in square feet)
 
Required Loading Docks


< or = to 10,000
 
1


>10,000 and < or = to 20,000
 
2


>20,000 and < or = to 50,000
 
3


>50,000
 
4



 



   (B)   Location.  All staging areas and loading docks must be
off-street and must be located on the same lot as the building or use to be
served.  A loading dock or staging area must not be located between the
principal building and a public right-of-way or residential property.  All
loading docks and staging areas visible from public rights-of-way or
residential areas must be screened in compliance with §§ 152.370 through
152.378.



   (C)   Access.  All loading docks and staging areas must be located
with the appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or public alley in
a manner which will least interfere with traffic.



   (D)   Additional standards for loading docks:



      (1)   Outdoor storage of goods and materials is prohibited in
loading dock area.



      (2)   May not be included as part of the space requirements
necessary to meet the off-street parking area.



   (E)   Additional standards for staging areas:



      (1)   Temporary parking of commercial vehicles is allowed for
96 hours or less.



      (2)   Any commercial vehicles in the staging area must be
related and necessary to the principal permitted use of the property.



      (3)   Outdoor storage of goods or materials is prohibited in
the staging area.



      (4)   Temporary parking spaces cannot be blocking drive aisles
or public right-of-way, and must be properly marked and surfaced for orderly
site design.



      (5)   Must be maintained, organized and free of trash or
debris.



      (6)   Must be in a city-approved designated area of the
property.



      (7)   May not be included as a part of the space requirements
necessary to meet the off-street parking area.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2005-1032, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 2006-1059, passed
6-5-06)



ADDITIONAL PARKING STANDARDS



§ 152.148  ADDITIONAL PARKING STANDARDS FOR COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES.



   For all commercial and industrial uses, outdoor parking of vehicles
registered over 12,000 pounds must be in a designated city-approved staging
area in compliance with §§ 152.140 through 152.46.



(Ord. 2005-1032, passed 2-7-05)



ENCLOSURES



§ 152.150  TRASH AND WASTE ENCLOSURES.



   All uses except single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and
townhouses must store their trash in compliance with one of the following two
options:



   (A)   Indoors.  Within a designated area of the interior of the
building in conformance with the following:



      (1)   The adopted Fire and Building Codes.



      (2)   The area must be readily accessible by collection
vehicles.



      (3)   The area must be readily accessible to the users by use
of a pedestrian access, such as an easily operable door.  The door must
remain closed, except when servicing.



      (4)   The interior walls and floor of the area must be
finished with smooth, non-absorbent material sealed or finished to withstand
frequent cleaning.



      (5)   All waste storage areas must be kept clean and sanitary,
and maintained in good condition.



   (B)   Outdoors.  Outdoors within a four-sided accessory structure
designed and sized for this purpose. 



      (1)   Requirements.  The enclosure must be in conformance
with the following:



         (a)   The adopted Fire and Building Codes.



         (b)   For non-residential zoning districts the structure
must be located to the rear of the principal building, may not be located
within five feet of any interior lot line, must have the same setback as the
principal building from any public right-of-way, and must be readily
accessible by collection vehicles.



      (2)   Design standards.  All waste enclosures must meet the
following design standards:



         (a)   Design.  Walls must be constructed of
architectural masonry or similar materials.  Enclosures must have an opaque
gate made of metal or decorative wood.  Design and materials of the trash
enclosure must conform to the architecture of the buildings in the
development and be compatible with the finish of the principal building. 
Additional landscape screening may be required for any enclosure requiring
design review.



         (b)   Pedestrian access.  Trash enclosures may have a
pedestrian entrance when shared by multiple units.  No more than two
openings may be present per enclosure and the openings may not be placed in
the same wall section.  The opening may be no less than 32 inches and no
more than 36 inches.  For nonresidential properties, a gate is required for
the opening.  Where a gate is required or provided for the opening, it must
be an opaque metal or decorative wood gate, meeting the design standards of
this chapter.



         (c)   Minimum size.  Trash enclosures must have minimum
inside dimensions, excluding pedestrian access areas, of 8 feet by 12 feet,
and must be sized to accommodate all waste, recycling, and trash storage. 
Walls and gates must be of a height to fully screen the view of the bins and
storage.  A maximum 6-inch space may exist at the bottom of the gate to the
ground surface.  A maximum of two openings on not more than two sides area
allowed for drainage.  Each opening may not exceed 8 inches by 16 inches per
wall section.



         (d)   Location.



            1.   Trash enclosures must meet all setback
requirements.



            2.   Trash enclosure doors must not restrict
driveways, extend into adjacent parking spaces, or obstruct fire hydrants or
building exits.



            3.   Trash enclosures must be located so they are
accessible to collection vehicles.



            4.   Trash enclosures must remain at least five
feet from any combustible construction or building openings.



      (3)   Construction and maintenance standards.



         (a)   All waste enclosure structures, including gates,
must be designed to be durable and sound, and be maintained in good
condition.  All gates and doors must be kept closed, except during servicing.



         (b)   The enclosure area must be set on a concrete pad
at ground level, with a minimum slope to prevent accumulation of water from
cleaning and rain runoff.



   (C)   Trash compactors.  Trash compactors that are open to or
loaded outside must be located in a waste enclosure meeting the requirements
of this chapter.  Self-contained trash compactors that are completely
enclosed and loaded only from the interior of a building must be located in a
waste enclosure or meet the following criteria:



      (1)   Design.  Design and materials of the trash enclosure
must conform to the architecture of the buildings in the development and be
compatible with the finish of the principal building, such as matching paint.



      (2)   Screening.  Landscape screening or other screening may
be required to eliminate or minimize the view from adjacent properties.



      (3)   Nuisances.  Appropriate measures must be taken to
prevent or eliminate nuisances from noise, trash, or other nuisances created
by the location or use of the trash compactor.



      (4)   Alternatives.  The City Manager's designee may consider
alternatives to standard trash enclosures.  Such alternatives shall be
evaluated with respect to the following seven criteria:



         (a)   The proposal provides adequate capacity for the
use.



         (b)   The proposal blends with the architecture of the
site.



         (c)   The proposal provides convenient access for
residents and businesses located within the development.



         (d)   The proposal meets code requirements for all
setback requirements including, but not limited to, the front and street side
yards and corner cut-offs.



         (e)   The proposal is accessible to trash collection
vehicles.



         (f)   The proposal does not generate the potential for
undesirable odors, noise, flies or nuisances.



         (g)   The proposal represents an improvement upon code
requirements and more adequately meets the needs of the occupants.



      (5)   Requests for consideration of alternatives.



         (a)   Requests for consideration of alternatives must be
submitted to the City Manager's designee with the following items:  a
written letter explaining the request, the reason for it, an explanation of
how it meets the above seven criteria, a site plan, and a detail of the
proposed alternative including specifications, colors and materials, and
measures that will be taken to correct any problems associated with the
proposed use if approved. 



         (b)   After consideration, the City Manager's designee
may, upon written findings reflecting compliance with the above seven
criteria, allow installation of the requested alternative.



         (c)   Alternatively, the City Manager's designee may
deny the request. 



         (d)   Such denial shall set forth which criteria are not
met.



(Ord. 2003-997, passed 5-12-03)



REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSED DAYCARE FACILITIES



§ 152.160  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter is established to comply with state statutes and
provide safe and comfortable settings for licensed daycare facilities.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.161  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   All daycare facilities must be licensed with the county before
operations begin.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.162  COMPLIANCE.



   The structure in which a facility is located must be in continual
compliance with all building, fire, zoning, and health codes of the city and
state.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.163  REGULATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL DAYCARES.



   Daycares are limited to the following in residential districts and
residential portions of PCDD and PUD or the Conservancy District.



   (A)   Single-family structures - 14 or fewer children.



   (B)   Non single-family structures (except religious institutions or
public or private schools) - 16 or fewer children. 



   (C)   The size of the licensed daycare facility in a religious
institution or public or private school is based on the size and capacity of
the structure and the availability of parking.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.164  REGULATIONS FOR NON-RESIDENTIAL DAYCARES.



   All day cares in business districts, in areas guided for business in
the PCDD and PUD, and as an accessory use within multi-purpose buildings
(i.e. religious institutions, schools, private businesses for employees’
children, etc.) must be in compliance with the following:



   (A)   Size.  Dependent on the size and capacity of the structure
and the availability of parking.



   (B)   Pick-up/drop-off areas.  The pick-up/drop-off area(s) must be
located in close proximity to the front of the building and adjacent to a
pedestrian area.



(Ord. 2000-936)



PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS AND PUBLIC AND PRIVATE
SCHOOLS



§ 152.180  PURPOSE.



   These additional regulations are applied to religious institutions and
schools due to their substantial and long-term impact on the city and the
surrounding neighborhoods.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.181  RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS.



   Religious institutions are permitted in various districts as outlined
in §§ 152.242 and 152.342, but the restrictions on it may differ based on
the district in which the religious institution is proposed.  Architectural
materials allowed for religious institutions shall follow the regulations for
Business Districts (see § 152.392).



   (A)   Green space/landscaped area in residential districts. No more
than 60% of the site may be covered by impervious surface.  The remaining
40% must be landscaped or sodded.  Tree and shrub quantities shall be
calculated using the B1 requirements of § 152.374(A)(2) for all religious
institutions located within a residential zoning district.



   (B)   Residential districts. Religious institutions may only be
located on sites located directly at the intersections of two collector
streets or along an arterial street as designated in the Comprehensive Plan.



   (C)   Business districts. In the B-3 Zoning District, religious
institutions are only allowed as one tenant in a multi-tenant building, up to
49% of the building, located on a single tax parcel. All tenants must have
separate, independent accesses through a public corridor or directly from
outside.  All building code requirements must be met.



   (D)   An office for a religious institution is considered an office
use provided no worship services, events, or the like are conducted on site.



   (E)   Religious institutions with additional uses operating
concurrently with a worship service must be figured into parking requirements.



   (F)   Parking shall meet the requirements of § 152.142.



   (G)   All religious institutions are subject to Site Plan Review
requirements of § 152.033.



   (H)   Religious institutions may conduct worship and educational
programs as permitted accessory uses in public schools in all zoning
districts outside of normal school instructional hours.  Formal Site Plan
Review as described in § 152.033(D)(1) is not required.



   (I)   Religious institutions in residential zones are allowed to
operate a farmer's market as described in § 152.362(G) by obtaining a
conditional use permit.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2001-952, passed 5-14-01; Am. Ord. 2007-1070, passed
3-26-07; Am. Ord. 2012-1150, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 2013-1155, passed
3-25-13)



§ 152.182  PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SCHOOLS.



   (A)   All public and private schools, including charter schools and
Alternative Learning Centers established by a school district pursuant to
M.S. § 123A.05 to 123A.09, must receive a Conditional Use Permit when not
located within the Public Institution (PI) Zoning District.



   (B)   All public and private schools must conform to the minimum
guidelines for open space and recreational space of the State of Minnesota.



   (C)   Public and private schools must conform to the landscaping
requirements for business zoning districts (see §§ 152.370 through
152.378).  For sites zoned PI, the B3 landscaping requirements must be used.



   (D)   Public and private schools located in business zoning
districts must conform to the following performance standards:



      (1)   The city must find that the school use would be
compatible with existing or planned adjacent uses;



      (2)   Schools which include grades kindergarten through eight
must be adjacent to another public elementary school.  Schools which include
only grades nine and higher must be within 1,000 feet to public parks;



      (3)   The site must conform to all parking requirements of
§§ 152.140 through 152.146;



      (4)   The city must find that traffic speeds and volumes on
adjacent streets do not pose a safety hazard;



      (5)   The city must find that the site has adequate space for
school bus loading and movement, including turnarounds.



      (6)   The site must include sidewalks and/or other pedestrian
facilities appropriate to the site for student safety.



   (E)   Non-affiliated public and private schools are allowed by
conditional use permit when located within a building primarily used for a
religious institution.



   (F)   Job training programs, including those training programs for
people with a physical, mental, or developmental disability, are not
considered schools for zoning purposes, but shall be classified by the skill
or job being taught.



   (G)   Public and private schools in all zoning districts may permit
use of their facilities to community, civic, charitable, or religious
organizations outside of normal school instructional hours.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2001-952, passed 5-14-01; Am. Ord. 2002-978, passed
8-12-02; Am. Ord. 2007-1070, passed 3-26-07; Am. Ord. 2012-1138, passed
4-16-12; Am. Ord. 2012-1150, passed 10-15-12)



SUSTAINABILITY PROVISIONS



§ 152.184  COMMUNITY GARDEN STANDARDS.



   (A)   Community garden areas may be divided into separate garden
plots for cultivation by one or more individuals or may be farmed
collectively by members of the group. A community garden may include common
areas (e.g. storage sheds) maintained and used by the groups. The community
garden must comply with the lot and building standards for its zoning
district.



   (B)   Community garden or private garden may serve as a permitted
accessory use in any residential, business, public institution district or
city owned park or open space. A community garden may be permitted as an
interim use on a vacant lot in any residential district. A community garden
area may count towards required open space in any zoning district. The
following conditions shall be met for all community gardens:



      (1)   The garden area shall be limited to growth of food crops
and/or non-food ornamental crops such as flowers. Maintaining beehives,
livestock and poultry shall be prohibited.



      (2)   Location. Community gardens may not be located within
any easement without the property owner obtaining written permission from the
easement holder.



      (3)   Setbacks. The garden shall be set back a minimum of 20
feet from all property lines in order to provide a vegetated buffer of grass
or other plants to minimize the transfer of sediment and to delineate the
edges of the garden.



      (4)   Access. Paths may be installed to access the garden and
individual garden plots provided the paths are constructed using natural
landscape materials including wood chips, mulch, landscape rock or pea gravel.



      (5)   Fences. Fences are allowed as permitted by this chapter
and provided they are made of sturdy, rust resistant woven wire and/or rot
resistant wood, are well maintained and neat in appearance.



      (6)   The garden area shall be properly maintained throughout
the year by:



         (a)   Weekly mowing the grassy areas.



         (b)   Weekly removing the weeds and grasses from the
actual garden.



         (c)   Weekly collecting rotting vegetables/fruits from
garden areas and providing off-site disposal of this waste.



         (d)   Weekly collecting and removing all trash and
debris that is deposited on the site.



         (e)   Providing for season end removal of all dead plant
growth/waste no later than October 31.



      (7)   Trash containers. Trash containers may be provided on
site provided they have a cover and meet accessory structure setbacks for the
underlying zoning district. All trash shall be removed from the site at least
once per week.



      (8)   Compost bins are permitted provided they meet the
accessory structure standards of the district in which it is located.



      (9)   No overhead lighting shall be permitted on the site.



      (10)   One non-illuminated sign not exceeding four square feet
in area and six feet in height shall be permitted. The sigh face shall be
located parallel to the front property line and shall not be located in the
front yard area. The content of the sign shall be limited to identification
of the site as a community garden, sponsorship contact information and
rules/guidelines for the community garden.



      (11)   Parking. Parking for the garden shall be provided on
streets where parking is permitted or on an existing parking surface with the
written permission of the owner of the parking surface.



      (12)   Seasonal sales stands. Seasonal sales stands shall be
permitted but must be removed from the premises or stored inside a building
on the premises during that time of the year when the garden is not open for
public use. All products sold must be grown within the community garden.



      (13)   One portable restrooms shall be permitted on the site.



      (14)   One utility shed shall be allowed on the site under the
following conditions:



         (a)   Maximum area of 150 square feet.



         (b)   Must be located within the rear yard setback and
at least five feet off the side and rear property lines.



         (c)   Maximum height of ten feet.



      (15)   Any power equipment and attachments, hand tools,
fertilizer, chemicals and other equipment and materials that is kept on the
site shall be stored within a utility shed.



      (16)   The following miscellaneous improvements shall be
permitted on the site:



         (a)   Trellises.



         (b)   Raised planting beds.



         (c)   Benches.



         (d)   Covered trash receptacles.



      (17)   Negative impacts. The site shall be designed and
maintained to prevent negative impacts to adjacent properties from individual
gardeners and gardening activities including, but not limited to, irrigation,
fertilizer, soils, stormwater, cultivated areas, trespassing and garden
debris.



      (18)   Site restoration. Upon cessation of the community
garden, the site shall be fully restored to the pregarden status. All
aboveground remains of the garden shall be promptly removed and the ground
leveled and restored so it can be utilized for uses permitted in the zoning
district.



(Ord. 2012-1133, passed 3-5-12)



§ 152.185 ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Scope. Sections 152.185 through 152.188 apply to alternative
energy systems in all zoning districts.



   (B)   Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this section is
to establish standards and procedures by which the installation and operation
of wind and solar energy system shall be governed within the city. The city
finds that it is in the public interest to encourage alternative energy
systems that have a positive impact on energy production and conservation
while not having an adverse impact on the community.



   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of §§ 152.185 through 152.188
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      ACCESSORY. A system designed as a secondary use to existing
buildings or facilities, wherein the power generated is used primarily for
on-site consumption.



      ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEM. A wind energy conversion system or a
solar energy system.



      BUILDING-INTEGRATED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A solar energy system
that is an integral part of a principal or accessory building, rather than a
separate mechanical device, replacing or substituting for an architectural or
structural component of the building including, but not limited to,
photovoltaic or hot water solar systems contained within roofing materials,
windows, skylights and awnings.



      CLOSED LOOP GROUND SOURCE HEAT PUMP SYSTEM. A system that
circulated a heat transfer fluid, typically food-grade antifreeze, through
pipes or coils buried beneath the land surface or anchored to the bottom of a
body of water.



      FLUSH-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A roof-mounted system mounted
directly abutting the roof. The pitch of the solar collector may exceed the
pitch of the roof up to 5% but shall not be higher than ten inches above the
roof.



      GROUND SOURCE HEAT PUMP SYSTEM. A system that uses the relatively
constant temperature of the earth or a body of water to provide heating in
the winter and cooling in the summer. System components include open or
closed loops of pipe, coils or plates; fluid that absorbs and transfers heat;
and a heat pump unit the processes heat for use or disperses heat for
cooling; and an air distribution system.



      HORIZONTAL AXIS WIND TURBINE. A wind turbine design in which the
rotor shaft is parallel to the ground and the blades are perpendicular to the
ground.



      HUB. The center of a wind generator rotor, which holds the blades
in place and attaches to the shaft.



      HUB HEIGHT. The distance measured from natural grade to the
center of the turbine hub.



      MONOPOLE TOWER. A tower constructed of tapered tubes that
fit;together symmetrically and are stacked one section on top of another and
bolted to a concrete foundation without support cables.



      PASSIVE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A system that captures solar light
or heat without transforming it to another form of energy or transferring the
energy via a heat exchanger.



      PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM. A solar energy system that converts solar
energy directly into electricity.



      RESIDENTIAL WIND TURBINE. A wind turbine of ten kilowatt (kW)
nameplate generating capacity or less.



      SMALL WIND TURBINE. A wind turbine of 100 kW nameplate generating
capacity or less.



      SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. A device or structural design feature, a
substantial purpose of which is to provide daylight for interior lighting or
provide for the collection, storage and distribution of solar energy for
space heating or cooling, electricity generation or water heating.



      TOTAL HEIGHT. The highest point above natural grade reached by a
rotor tip or any other part of a wind turbine.



      TOWER. A vertical structure that supports a wind turbine.



      UTILITY WIND TURBINE. A wind turbine of more than 100 kW
nameplate generating capacity.



      VERTICAL AXIS WIND TURBINE. A type of wind turbine where the main
rotor shaft runs vertically.



      WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS). An electrical generating
facility that consists of a wind turbine, feeder line(s), associated controls
and may include a tower.



      WIND TURBINE. Any piece of electrical generating equipment that
converts the kinetic energy of blowing wind into electrical energy through
the use of airfoils or similar devices to capture the wind.







 



§ 152.186  WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (WECS) STANDARDS.



   (A)   Zoning districts.



      (1)   Utility wind turbines shall be allowed as an accessory
use in the I and BP districts.



      (2)   Small wind turbines shall be allowed as an accessory use
in all business districts, and non residential uses in commercial districts.



      (3)   Residential wind turbines (only vertical axis style
permitted) shall be allowed as an accessory use in all residential districts.



   (B)   Number. No more than one WECS is allowed per parcel.



   (C)   Design standards.



      (1)   Height.  The permitted maximum height of a WECS shall
be determined on the type of system proposed.



         (a)   Utility wind turbines. The height of a
freestanding WECS located in a BP or I district shall not exceed 100 feet.



         (b)   Small wind turbines.  The height of a
freestanding WECS located in a business district shall not exceed 75 feet.



         (c)   Residential wind turbines.  Residential wind
turbines can be either building mounted a maximum height of 15 feet above the
roofline of the principal structure; or mounted on a tower a maximum height
of 20 feet above the roof line of the principal structure. Poles must be
connected to the principal structure and cannot be freestanding. All
residential wind turbines shall be of the vertical axis style.



         (d)   The structure upon which the proposed WECS is to
be mounted shall have the structural integrity to carry the weight and wind
loads of the WECS and have minimal vibration impacts on the structure.



         (e)   Poles shall match the color of the principal
structure.



      (2)   Blade length.  A maximum blade length of 15 feet is
permitted. 



      (3)   Setbacks for building mounted.  A building or roof
mounted vertical axis style WECS shall be located only on the side or rear
rooflines.



      (4)   Easements.  Wind energy systems shall not encroach on
public drainage, utility roadway or trail easements. 



      (5)   Rotor clearance.  Blade-arcs created by the WECS shall
have a minimum of 30 feet of clearance over any structure or tree within a
300 foot radius.



      (6)   Feeder lines.  The electrical collection system shall
be placed underground within the interior of each parcel. The collection
system may be placed overhead near substations or points of interconnection
to the electric grid. 



      (7)   Aesthetics.  All portions of the wind energy system
shall be a nonreflective, non-obtrusive color, subject to the approval of the
City Planner. Only monopole towers are permitted. The appearance of the
turbine, tower and any other related components shall be maintained
throughout the life of the wind energy system pursuant to industry standards.
Systems shall not be used for displaying any advertising, except for
applicable warning and equipment information required by the manufacturer or
by federal, state or local regulations. Systems shall not be illuminated. 



   (G)   Noise.  Wind energy systems shall comply with Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency standards, as outlined in Minn. Rules Chapter 7030,
at all property lines. 



   (H)   Screening.  Wind energy systems are exempt from the
requirements of § 152.375.



   (I)   Safety.



      (1)   Standards.  Wind energy systems shall meet minimum
standards such as International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) 61400-2 or
the American Wind Energy Association's (AWEA) Small Wind Turbine Performance
and Safety Standard or other standards as determined by the community
development director. 



      (2)   Maintenance. Wind energy systems shall be maintained
under an agreement or contract by the manufacturer or other qualified
entity. 



      (3)   The WECS shall be equipped with both a manual and an
automatic braking device capable of stopping the WECS operation in high winds.



      (4)   Tower access.  To prevent unauthorized climbing, WECS
towers must comply with one of the following provisions:



         (a)   Tower climbing apparatus shall not be located
within 12 feet off the ground.



         (b)   A located anti-climb device shall be installed on
the tower.



         (c)   Tower capable of being climbed shall be enclosed
by a locked, protective fence at least eight feet high.



   (J)   Utility connection. All grid connected systems shall have an
agreement with the local utility prior to the issuance of a building permit.
A visible external disconnect must be provided if required by the utility. 



   (K)   Abandonment.  If the wind energy system remains nonfunctional
or inoperative for a continuous period of one year, the system shall be
deemed to be abandoned and shall constitute a public nuisance. The owner
shall remove the abandoned system at their expense after a demolition permit
has been obtained. Removal includes the entire structure including
foundations to below natural grade and transmission equipment. 



   (L)   Permits.  A building permit shall be obtained for any wind
energy system prior to installation.  All applications shall be accompanied
by detailed plans and specifications including, but not limited to, the
following information:



      (1)   Site Plan showing:



         (a)   Lot lines and dimensions.



         (b)   Location and height of all buildings, structures,
above ground utilities and trees on the lot, including both existing and
proposed structures and guy wires anchors.



         (c)   Locations and height of all adjacent buildings,
structures, above ground utilities and trees located within 300 feet of the
exterior boundary of the property in question.



         (d)   Existing and proposed setbacks of all structures
located on the property in question.



      (2)   Scaled drawings and photographic perspectives accurately
depicting the structure the proposed location of the WECS and its
relationship to structures on adjacent lots. 



      (3)   A written certification from a licensed structural
engineer that the structure has the structural integrity to carry the weight
and wind loads of the WECS and have minimal vibration impacts on the
structure.



      (4)   An analysis from a licensed engineer showing how the
WECS shall be designed, constructed and operated in compliance with all
applicable federal, state and local laws, codes, standards and ordinances.



      (5)   A written certification from a licensed engineer
confirming that the WECS is designed to not cause electrical, radio
frequency, television and other communication signal interference.



      (6)   Roof mounted WECS shall include detailed plans
illustrating roof construction, mounting techniques and wind load capacity.



(Ord. 2012-1133, passed 3-5-12)



§ 152.187  SOLAR ENERGY STANDARDS.



   (A)   Solar energy collection equipment.



      (1)   Zoning districts. Solar energy systems in accordance
with the standards in this section are allowed as a permitted accessory use
in all zoning districts.



      (2)   Exemption:  Passive or building-integrated solar energy
systems are exempt from the requirements of this section and shall be
regulated as any other building element.



      (3)   Standards.



         (a)   Location.  In residential zoning districts,
ground-mounted solar energy systems are limited to the rear yard.  In
non-residential zoning districts, ground- mounted solar energy systems may be
permitted in the side yard meeting accessory structure requirements in §
152.360.



         (b)   Height.  Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall
comply with the maximum height requirements in the applicable zoning
district.  Ground mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed 15 feet in
height.



         (c )   Setbacks.  Ground-mounted solar energy systems
shall comply with all accessory structure setbacks in the applicable zoning
district.  Roof-mounted systems shall comply with all building setbacks in
the applicable zoning district and shall not extend beyond the exterior
perimeter of the building on which the system is mounted.



         (d)   Roof mounting.  Roof mounted solar collectors
shall be flush mounted on pitched roofs unless the roof pitch is determined
to be inadequate for optimum performance of the solar energy system in which
case the pitch of the solar collector may exceed the pitch of the roof up to
5% but in no case shall be higher than ten inches above the roof.  Solar
collectors may be bracket-mounted on flat roofs.



         (e)   Easements.  Solar energy systems shall not
encroach on public drainage, utility roadway or trail easements.



         (f)   Screening.  Solar energy systems shall be
screened from view to the extent possible without impacting their function. 



         (g)   Maximum area.  In all residential districts,
ground mounted solar energy systems shall be limited to a maximum area of 200
square feet. 



         (h)   Aesthetics.  All solar energy systems shall be
designed to blend into the architecture of the building to the extent
possible without negatively impacting the performance of the system and to
minimize glare towards vehicular traffic and adjacent properties. 



         (i)   Feeder lines.  The electrical collection system
shall be placed underground within the interior of each parcel.  The
collection system may be placed overhead near substations or points on
interconnection to the electric grid.



         (j)   Structures shall not be located such that solar
power access blocks a neighboring property.



         (k)   Abandonment.  If a solar energy system remains
nonfunctional or inoperative for a continuous period of one year, the system
shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall constitute a public nuisance.  The
owner shall remove the abandoned system at their expense after a demolition
permit has been obtained.  Removal includes the entire structure including
transmission equipment.



         (l)   Permits.  A building permit shall be obtained for
any solar energy system prior to installation.



(Ord. 2012-1133, passed 3-5-12)



§ 152.188  GROUND SOURCE HEAT PUMP SYSTEM STANDARDS.



   (A)   Ground source heat pump systems.



      (1)   Zoning districts.  Ground source heat pump systems in
accordance with the standards in this section are allowed as a permitted
accessory use in all zoning districts.



      (2)   System requirements: 



         (a)   Only closed loop ground source heat pump systems
utilizing heat transfer fluids as defined in § 152.185 are permitted. Open
loop ground source heat pump systems are not permitted.



      (3)   Setbacks.



         (a)   All components of ground source heat pump systems
including pumps, borings and loops shall be set back at least five feet from
interior side lot lines and at least ten feet from rear lot lines.



         (b)   Above-ground equipment associated with ground
source heat pumps shall not be installed in the front yard of any lot or side
yard of a corner lot adjacent to a public right-of-way and shall meet all
required setbacks for the application district. 



      (4)   Easements.  Ground source heat pump systems shall not
encroach on public drainage, utility roadway or trail easements.



      (5)   Noise.   Ground source heat pump systems shall comply
with Minnesota Pollution Control Agency standards at all property lines.



      (6)   Screening.  Ground source heat pumps are considered
mechanical equipment subject to the requirements of this chapter.



      (7)   Abandonment.  If the ground source heat pump remains
nonfunctional or inoperative for a continuous period of one year, the system
shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall constitute a public nuisance.  The
owner shall remove the abandoned system at their expense after a demolition
permit has been obtained in accordance with the following:



         (a)   The heat pump and any external mechanical
equipment shall be removed.



         (b)   Pipes or coils below the land surface shall be
filled with grout to displace the heat transfer fluid.  The heat transfer
fluid shall be captured and disposed of in accordance with applicable
regulations.  The top of the pipe, coil or boring shall be uncovered and
grouted.



      (8)   Permits.  A building permit shall be obtained for any
ground source heat pump system prior to installation.



(Ord. 2012-1133, passed 3-5-12)



DRAINAGE AND PONDING



§ 152.190  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to prevent damage to surrounding
properties from storm water run-off from vacant, developing and re-developing
properties.  For specific projects, storm water run-off may be under the
jurisdiction of the applicable watershed management commission.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.191  DRAINAGE.



   No land may be developed and no use will be permitted that results in
water run-off causing flooding, erosion, or deposit of minerals on adjacent
properties.  Such runoff must be properly channeled into a storm drain,
water course, ponding area, or other public facilities.  Any change in grade
affecting storm water run-off onto adjacent property(ies) must be as approved
by the City Manager and/or the applicable watershed management commission.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.192  PONDS.



   Storm water detention/retention ponds may be required on any property
or properties that are five acres or more in size and are requirement to
provide detention/retention ponding on site.



(Ord. 2000-936)



INTERIM USES



§ 152.193 PURPOSE.



   The purpose of allowing interim uses is:



   (A)   To allow a use for a brief period of time until a permanent
location is obtained or while the permanent location is under construction.



   (B)   To allow a use that is presently judged acceptable by the City
Council, but that with anticipated development or redevelopment, will not be
acceptable in the future or will be replaced in the future by a permitted or
conditional use allowed within the respective district.



   (C)   To allow a use which is reflective of anticipated long range
change to an area and which is in compliance with the comprehensive plan
provided that said use maintains harmony and compatibility with surrounding
uses and is in keeping with the architectural character and design standards
of existing uses and development.



(Ord. 2005-1049, passed 9-26-05)



§ 152.194 PROCEDURE.



   Uses defined as interim uses shall obtain an interim use permit and
shall be processed according to the standards and procedures for a
conditional use permit as established in § 152.035.



(Ord. 2005-1049, passed 9-26-05)



§ 152.195 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   An interim use shall comply with the following:



   (A)   Meet the standards of a conditional use permit set forth in §
152.035.



   (B)   State that certain date or event that will terminate the use.



   (C)   Shall not impose additional unreasonable costs on the public.



   (D)   Interim uses are waived from compliance with the Highway
Overlay District standards.



   (E)   All lots served by an individual/private sewer and water
system must abandon the individual system and be connected to the public
sanitary sewer and water when there is a change in the use of the property,
or within one year of the date the public system becomes available to the
lot, whichever occurs first.



   (F)   Meet any conditions that the City Council deems appropriate
for permission of the use.



   (G)   Interim use permits shall be annually reviewed by the City
Council.



(Ord. 2005-1049, passed 9-26-05)



§ 152.196 TERMINATION.



   An interim use permit shall terminate on the happening of any of the
following events, whichever occurs first:



   (A)   The date stated in the interim use permit.



   (B)   Upon violation of conditions under which the permit was issued.



   (C)   Upon change in the city's zoning regulations, which render the
use nonconforming.



   (D)   The redevelopment of the use and property.



(Ord. 2005-1049, passed 9-26-05)



RESIDENTIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS



ESTABLISHMENT OF RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS



§ 152.200  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter of the chapter defines and establishes the residential
zoning districts within the city.  The residential districts as a whole are
designed to balance housing type, choices, affordability, and style in an
effort to promote neighborhood stability and livability.  The following
residential zoning classifications, except PCDD and PUD, are hereby
established within the City of Brooklyn Park.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.201  “R-1" URBAN RESERVE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The “R-1" Urban Reserve District is intended to
provide the following:



      (1)   A district which allows for the orderly phasing and
development of land until city services, including sanitary sewer, storm
sewer, and water, are extended into the area in compliance with the
Comprehensive Plan. 



      (2)   A district for uses that typically require significant
amounts of open land area such as athletic and cultural facilities, country
clubs, government buildings, educational uses, and land reclamation.



      (3)   A district which allows for short-term agriculture uses
and very low density residential uses and those accessory uses customarily
incidental to them.



   (B)   Application.  The district may be applied only to those areas
guided as an urban reserve area in the Comprehensive Land Use Plan.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.202  “R-2" DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY ESTATE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The “R-2" Detached Single-Family Estate District
is intended to provide a district which allows for large lot detached
single-family dwellings and for uses customarily incidental to them. 



   (B)   This district may be applied only to those areas guided for
low density residential development on the Comprehensive Land Use Map.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.203  “R-2A” DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The “R-2A” Detached Single-Family Residential
District is intended to provide a district which allows for detached
single-family dwellings and for uses customarily incidental to them.  The
city will evaluate all subdivision applications in this zoning district and
determine the adequacy of the proposed development considering all elements
of the site plan.  The elements that will be reviewed in detail include, but
are not limited to, landscaping; screening and buffering from public
rights-of-way and other uses; mailbox design; lighting design and spacing;
the creation and proposed use of private open space and protection of natural
environments; and trail corridors and connections.



   (B)   This district may be applied only to those areas guided for
low density residential development on the Comprehensive Land Use Map.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.204  “R-2B” DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The “R-2B” Detached Single-Family Residential
District is intended to provide a district which allows for detached
single-family dwellings and for uses customarily incidental to them.  The
city will evaluate all subdivision applications in this zoning district and
determine the adequacy of the proposed development considering all elements
of the site plan.  The elements that will be reviewed in detail include, but
are not limited to, landscaping; screening and buffering from public
rights-of-way and other uses; mailbox design; lighting design and spacing;
the creation and proposed use of private open space and protection of natural
environments; and trail corridors and connections to parks and open space
areas.



   (B)   This district may be applied only to those areas guided for
low density residential development on the Comprehensive Land Use Map.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.205  “R-3" DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The “R-3" Detached Single-Family Residential
District is intended to provide a district which allows for detached
single-family dwellings and for uses customarily incidental to them. 



   (B)   This district may be applied only to those areas guided for
low density residential development on the Comprehensive Land Use Map.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.206  “R-3A” DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The “R-3A" Detached Single-Family Residential
District is intended to provide a district which allows for detached
single-family dwellings and for uses customarily incidental to them.



   (B)   This district may be applied only to those areas guided for
low density residential development on the Comprehensive Land Use Map.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.207  “R-4" DETACHED SINGLE- AND ATTACHED TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The “R-4" Detached Single- and Attached
Two-Family Residential District is intended to provide a district which
allows for detached single and attached two-family dwellings and for uses
customarily incidental to them. 



   (B)   This district may be applied only to those areas guided for
low or medium density residential development on the Comprehensive Land Use
Map.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.208  “R-4A” TOWNHOUSE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The “R-4A" Townhouse District is intended to
provide a district which allows for a variety of attached residential
dwellings and for uses customarily incidental to them.



   (B)   This district may be applied only to those areas guided for
low or medium density residential development on the Comprehensive Land Use
Map.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.209  “R-5" MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The “R-5" Multiple Family Residential District is
intended to provide a district which allows for two story multiple family
structures and for uses customarily incidental to them.



   (B)   This district may be applied only to those areas guided for
medium or high density residential development on the Comprehensive Land Use
Map.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.210  “R-6" MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The “R-6" Multiple Family Residential District is
intended to provide a district which allows for multiple family dwellings
over two stories and for uses customarily incidental to them.



   (B)   This district may only be applied to those areas guided for
high density residential development on the Comprehensive Land Use Map.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.211  “R-7" MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The “R-7" Multiple Family Residential District is
intended to provide a district which allows for multiple family dwellings and
for uses customarily incidental to them. 



   (B)   This district may only be applied to those areas guided for
high density  residential development on the Comprehensive Land Use Map.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.212  "R-4B" DETACHED SINGLE FAMILY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The "R-4B" District is to provide regulations for
single family homes within association maintained communities.



   (B)   The District may only be applied to those areas designated for
low or medium density residential development on the Comprehensive Land Use
Map.



(Ord. 2004-1029, passed 12-13-04)



REQUIRED LOT AREA AND DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS



§ 152.220  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this section is to establish minimum area and
dimensional requirements for residential properties to allow conformance with
the residential densities and policies of the Comprehensive Plan, promote
open space around structures, provide green area and space for enjoyment by
residents, and protect public easements.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.221  STANDARDS.



   The following standards are established for all lots in the residential
zoning districts (R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-2B, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-4A, R-5, R-6, and
R-7) and lots in the residential portions of the PCDD and PUD.  Lots in
residential portions of the PCDD and PUD may be further governed as defined
elsewhere in City Code.



   (A)   No required lot area, yard or open space allocated to a
structure or lot in compliance with this chapter may be used to satisfy the
minimum lot area, yard, or open space requirement for any other structure or
lot, unless modified by this chapter.



   (B)   The maximum total building footprint, including principal and
accessory buildings, may not exceed 25% of the lot area.  The maximum amount
of impervious surface in front yards, as measured from the public
right-of-way to the front facade of the principal building, may not exceed
40%.



   (C)   Minimum lot area and width for each residential zone are
defined in the following table:



 

Figure 152.221.01 Required Minimum Lot Width and Area in Residential Districts



Zoning District

 

Minimum lot area in square feet
(unless otherwise specified)

 

Lot width in lineal feet as measured at  the front setback






R-1

 

20 Acres

 

330 feet*




R-2

 

13,500

 

100*




R-2A

 

12,825

 

95*




R-2B

 

11,475

 

85*




R-3

 

10,800

 

80*




R-3A

 

9,750

 

75*




R-4 (lots for single-family dwellings)

 

8,500

 

70*




R-4 lots for two-family dwellings (for lots of record prior to 2/1/80 and on
which two-family dwellings were existing on the effective date of this
chapter)

 

10,800

 

80




Each half of  two-family dwelling to be subdivided  (for lots of record
prior to 2/1/80 and on which two-family dwellings were existing on the
effective date of this chapter)

 

5,400

 

40




R-4 lots for two-family dwellings (for lots of record after 2/1/80 and on
which two-family dwellings were not existing on the effective date of this
chapter)

 

16,200

 

120




Each half of two-family dwelling to be subdivided (for lots of record after
2/1/80 and on which two-family dwellings were not existing on the effective
date of this chapter)

 

8,100

 

60




R-4A for townhouse

 

8,700 with basements, 10,890 without basements (buildable land only, excludes
wetlands, surface waters, flood plains)

 

NA




R-4B

 

5,000 square feet

 

45




R-5 for multiple family dwellings

 

22,000 or 3,400 square feet for each 1 bdrm unit, 4,500 square feet for each
2 bdrm unit, and 6,300 square feet for each three bdrm unit plus 500 square
feet for each bdrm over 3; whichever is greater

 

120




R-6 for multiple family dwellings

 

160,000 or 2,400 square feet for each 1 bdrm. unit, 3,000 square feet for
each 2 bdrm unit, and 3,500 square feet plus 500 square feet for each bdrm
over 3; whichever is greater

 

400




R-7 for multiple family dwellings

 

5 acres or 3,400 square feet for each 1 bdrm unit, 4,500 square feet for each
2 bdrm unit, and 6,800 square feet for each three bdrm unit plus 500 square
feet for each bdrm over 3; whichever is greater

 

500




R-5, R-6, and R-7 for Care centers and convalescent homes

 

750 square feet of lot area for each person cared for (design capacity)

 

See District Requirements Above




*See § 152.275.04 for additional lot width requirements on corner lots





 



   (D)   In order to promote individual ownership of two-family
dwellings the minimum lot areas and lot widths contained in this section do
not apply to lot splits along the common wall where an existing two-family
dwelling is being converted into two separate, attached single-family
dwellings.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2001-961, passed 11-26-01; Am. Ord. 2004-28, passed
12-13-04; Am. Ord. 2006-1055, passed 2-6-06)



§ 152.222  SETBACKS.



   Principal buildings and accessory structures must comply with the
following restrictions for setbacks in residential districts:



   (A)   Exceptions.  The following features may extend three feet
into the minimum setback:



      (1)   Chimneys, flues, belt courses, sills, pilasters, lintels.



      (2)   Ornamental features like cornices, eaves, bays, gutters
and other similar projections.



   (B)   Front setbacks (measured in feet, from the property line):



 


Figure 152.222.02 Required Front Setbacks




 

R-1

 

R-2

 

R-2A

 

R-2B

 

R-3

 

R-3A

 

R-4

 

R-4A

 

R-5

 

R-6

 

R-7




Principal and "A" or "B" Minor Arterials

 

50

 

50

 

75

 

75

 

50

 

50

 

50

 

See Townhouse Setbacks

 

50

 

50

 

50




All other public streets

 

35

 

30

 

30 house, 40 for garages on lots with sidewalks

 

30 house, 40 for garages on lots with sidewalks

 

30

 

30 with sidewalks, 25 without sidwalks

 

30

 

50

 

50

 

50




 



      (1)   All residential units must be constructed at the
required setback or no more than ten feet greater than the setback line as
established in the respective zoning district.  For in-fill development in
residential neighborhoods that do not conform to these setbacks, the minimum
setback line is the average depth of the adjacent properties’ front yard. 



      (2)   Once the front setback has been established and an
address assigned, the building or setbacks must not be reversed.



      (3)   The following are considered a permitted encroachment
into the front setback if they extend no more than a distance of six feet:
balconies and  porches, steps, stoops, and the like provided they do not
have a floor higher than the entrance floor to the building and are not
enclosed with windows, screens, or the like, although they may have a roof.



      (4)   Sidewalks, driveways, and parking areas are not
considered encroachments when in compliance with §§ 152.130 through 152.132
and §§ 152.140 through 152.146.



      (5)   Handicap access ramps may encroach into the front
setback in order to meet the running slopes required by the Minnesota
Accessibility Code.



      (6)   On lots fronting sidewalks in the R2A and R2B Zoning
Districts, garages must be setback 40 feet from the front property line,
unless the sidewalk is greater than ten feet from the front property line, in
which case, the front setback for garages may be reduced to 30 feet from the
front property line.



   (C)   Side setbacks (measured in feet, from the property line):



 


Figure 152.222.03 Required Side Setbacks




 

R-1

 

R-2

 

R-2A

 

R-2B

 

R-3

 

R-3A

 

R-4

 

R-4A

 

R-5

 

R-6

 

R-7




Interior property line

 

10

 

10

 

7.5

 

7.5

 

10

 

10

 

10

 

See Townhouse Setbacks

 

15

 

15

 

50




Corner Lots - Principal, "A" or "B" Minor Arterials, or Class I Collector
streets or any other public streets when the adjacent lot fronts the side
street

 

Front setback of the adjacent property

 

25

 

25

 

50




Corner Lots - All other public streets when the adjacent lot does not front
the side street

 

20

 

20

 

20

 

20

 

20

 

20

 

20

 



 



 






 



      (1)   If an attached garage has a dwelling unit constructed
above it, the setback must not be less than five feet on the garage side of
the lot, except in the R-2A or R-2B Single-family Residential Districts which
have a minimum 7.5-foot side setback for both garages and principal uses.



      (2)   The following may not be closer than five feet from
interior lot lines and 20 feet from public rights-of-way unless further
restricted elsewhere in this chapter:



         (a)   Carports, garages (attached or detached),
vehicles, recreational equipment and recreational vehicles, driveways, and
parking areas.



         (b)   Solar collectors, swimming pools and landscaping
structures (excluding retaining walls).



         (c)   Balconies, breezeways, gazebos, decks, patios.



         (d)   Screened porches, and three season porches



         (e)   Private outdoor recreational equipment.



   (D)   Rear setbacks (measured in feet, from the property line):



 


Figure 152.222.04 Required Rear Setbacks




 

R-1

 

R-2

 

R-2A

 

R-2B

 

R-3

 

R-3A

 

R-4

 

R-4A

 

R-5

 

R-6

 

R-7




Principal, "A" and "B" Minor Arterial and Class I  Collectors

 

50

 

50

 

75

 

75

 

50

 

50

 

50

 

See
Townhouse
Setbacks

 

40

 

40

 

50




All Other Public Streets and Interior Property Lines

 

30

 

30

 

30

 

30

 

30

 

30

 

30

 

40

 

40

 

50




Double Frontage Lots

 

Same as the front setback of any adjacent residential zoned properties

 

50

 

50

 

50




 



      (1)   The following may not be closer than five feet from
interior lot lines and 20 feet from public rights-of-way unless further
restricted elsewhere in this chapter:



         (a)   Carports, garages (attached or detached),
vehicles, recreational vehicles and equipment, driveways, and parking areas.



         (b)   Solar collectors, swimming pools and landscaping
structures (excluding retaining walls).



         (c)   Balconies, breezeways, gazebos, decks, patios.



         (d)   Screened porches, and three season porches



         (e)   Private outdoor recreational equipment.



      (2)   Handicap access ramps may encroach into the rear setback
in order to meet the running slopes required by the Minnesota Accessibility
Code.



   (E)   Setbacks for townhouses as measured in feet:



 


Figure 152.222.05 Townhouse Setbacks






 

Principal and "A" or "B" Minor Arterials, Class I Collectors

 

Perimeter




Attached or detached townhouses

 

75'

 

30'




 



   (F)   Transmission line setback. All homes shall be setback a
minimum distance equal to the tower height along power transmission lines.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2001-961, passed 11-26-01; Am. Ord. 2003-989, passed
2-10-03; Am. Ord. 2004-1011, passed 1-5-04; Am. Ord. 2004-1028, passed
12-13-04; Am. Ord. 2006-1063, passed 9-5-06)



§ 152.223  CLEAR VIEW TRIANGLES.



   (A)   No building, structure, fence or planting may be erected
inside a 50 foot clear view triangle between the rights-of-way of
intersecting streets.  This restriction does apply to fences under 30 inches
or less or trees trimmed to a distance of at least seven feet above the curb
line or to shrubs which do not exceed more than three feet in height and do
not obstruct visibility across the above described triangle.



   (B)   Driveways.  No fence may be erected inside a 30 foot clear
view triangle between a public right-of-way and an access driveway.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.224  COMPLIANCE WITH FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY AND CRITICAL AREA OVERLAY.



   All structures must comply with the requirements of the Floodplain
Overlay and Critical Area Overlay where applicable.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.225  MAXIMUM HEIGHT.



   (A)   Single and two-family dwellings. The height of these buildings
may not exceed three stories or 40 feet.



   (B)   Townhouse and multiple family dwellings.  Height of these
buildings may not exceed three stories or 40 feet.  Proposed buildings may
exceed this height by 150%, at the City Council’s discretion, through the
Site Plan Review process upon satisfactory demonstration that the proposal
includes mitigation of any off-site impacts.



   (C)   Non-residential buildings.  Height of buildings for
non-residential uses in residential districts must be three stories or 40
feet.  Non-residential buildings may exceed this height by 150%, at the City
Council’s discretion, through the Site Plan Review or Conditional Use
Permit process upon satisfactory demonstration that the proposal includes
mitigation of any off-site impacts.



   (D)   The following structures may exceed the three stories or 40
foot  height limitations by 125% without a Conditional Use Permit:



      (1)   Personal radio and television antennas (including ham
radio towers and antennas);



      (2)   Spires, bell towers, carillons, and steeples; and,



      (3)   Flag poles.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.226  LOWEST FLOOR ELEVATION. 



   The lowest floor elevation for any residential basement construction
must be at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation.  All
non-residential basements must follow the requirements of §§ 152.320
through 152.325.



(Ord. 2000-936)



PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, AND TEMPORARY USES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS



§ 152.240  PURPOSE.



   The following subchapter establishes a listing of the permitted,
conditional, and temporary uses for the residential zoning districts (R-1,
R-2, R-2A, R-2B, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-4A, R-5, R-6, and R-7).  The uses have
been allocated to the individual districts to allow reasonable use of
properties in a manner that is compatible with the purpose of each
residential zoning district and the overall purpose of this zoning code and
the code of ordinances.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.241  PROPOSED DEVELOPMENTS SUBJECT TO SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS.



   All proposed developments are subject to the Site Plan Review
requirements found in §§ 152.033 through 152.039.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2003-989, passed 2-10-03)



§ 152.242  PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES.



   Permitted and conditional uses for each residential zone are defined in
the following table:



 


Figure 152.242.01 Uses in Residential Districts






“P” = Permitted Use    “C” = Conditional Use  “NP” = Not
Permitted




Use

 
R-1
 
R-2
 
R-2A
 
R-2B
 
R-3
 
R-3A
 
R-4
 
R-4A
 
R-5
 
R-6
 
R-7


Bed and breakfast establishments
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP



Care centers, convalescent homes, and assisted living

 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
C
 
C
 
C



Cemeteries

 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP



Commercial recreational facilities (Privately owned)

 
C
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP



Daycare facilities, licensed (12 or fewer children) or group family daycare
facilities (14 or fewer children)

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP



Daycare, licensed or group daycare facilities (13 to 16 persons)

 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
P
 
P
 
P



Domesticated and farm animals

 
P
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP



Dwellings, attached two-family

 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
NP



Dwellings, detached single-family

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP



Dwellings, multiple family structures

 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
P
 
P
 
P



Dwellings, townhouses

 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P



Dwellings, townhouses constructed before July 1, 1985

 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
P
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP



Farming and cultivation of agricultural products

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P



Mobile home parks in conformance with § 152.244

 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
C
 
NP
 
NP




 



 




Figure 152.242.01 Uses in Residential Districts




“P” = Permitted Use  “C” = Conditional Use    “NP” = Not
Permitted



Use
 
R-1
 
R-2
 
R-2A
 
R-2B
 
R-3
 
R-3A
 
R-4
 
R-4A
 
R-5
 
R-6
 
R-7


Model homes
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Offices related to leasing, renting and maintenance of multiple family
dwellings and townhouses
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
P
 
P
 
P



Religious institutions subject to §§152.180 through 152.182

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P



Residential facility, licensed (6 or fewer persons)

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP



Residential facilities, licensed (7-15 persons)

 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
C
 
C
 
C



Soil processing and mining

 
C
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP



Public and utility facilities in conformance with § 152.244

 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C



Seasonal (temporary) greenhouses and garden centers in compliance with §
152.362(D)

 
C
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP




 



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2003-1008, passed 11-3-03; Am. Ord. 2004-1012,
passed 5-3-04)



§ 152.243  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES.



   Some permitted uses are further regulated to promote the health, safety
and general welfare.  If these regulations are met, the use is considered
permitted subject to the Site Plan Review requirements in §§ 152.030
through 152.039.



   (A)   Licensed daycare facilities.  All licensed daycare facilities
must comply with §§ 152.160 through 152.164.



   (B)   Keeping domestic and farm animals and beekeeping on
residential properties.



      (1)   Farm animals may be kept on parcels five acres or larger
at the rate of one animal unit per acre.



      (2)   Boarding or breeding for commercial purposes may not be
permitted in residential districts.



      (3)   The keeping of animals must be in conformance with all
other sections of the City Code.



      (4)   Beekeeping is allowed in all residential districts in
compliance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 92 of this code.



   (C)   Detached single-family dwellings.  All new detached
single-family dwellings must comply with the following conditions:



      (1)   All dwellings built after July 31, 1982, including
manufactured or mobile housing, must include a basement as defined in §
152.008.  The lowest floor elevation of any residential basement may not be
lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation.



      (2)   No single-family dwelling may be constructed less than
25 feet wide, as measured along 50% of its length.



      (3)   Once the front yard has been established and an address
determined, the building or yards may not be reversed.



      (4)   Minimum finished square footage.  The minimum required
finished floor area must comply with the following table:



 


Figure 152.243.02 Required
Finished Square Footage




District

 

Minimum Finished Square Footage
(in Square Feet)






R-1

 

1,040




R-2

 

1,040




R-2A

 

1,400 Ramblers
2,200 all other designs




R-2B

 

1,400 Ramblers
1,900 all other designs




R-3

 

960




R-3A

 

960




R-4

 

960





 



   (D)   Attached two-family dwellings. The conditions for the
construction and zero-lot line subdivision of attached two-family dwellings
are as follows:



      (1)   Attached two-family dwellings constructed before 1974
may be considered legal conforming uses without obtaining a Conditional Use
Permit.



      (2)   All dwellings built after July 31, 1982, including
manufactured or mobile housing, must include a basement as defined in §
152.008.



      (3)   No attached two-family dwellings may be constructed less
than 20 feet wide.



      (4)   The units must be constructed in a side-by-side manner.



      (5)   Attached two-family dwellings may be divided into single
parcels of record with the party wall acting as the dividing lot line subject
to the following conditions:



         (a)   Each of the lots created in subdividing lands on
which a two-family structure is located may be equal in area or as near equal
as is reasonably possible.



         (b)   Each lot created must contain no less than ½ the
minimum land area requirement for a two-family dwelling, and may be shown on
a registered land survey.



         (c)   Except for setbacks along the common property
line, all other setback and yard requirements must be met.



         (d)   Separate services may be provided to each
residential unit for sanitary sewer, water, electricity, natural gas,
telephone, and other utilities.



         (e)   The units may be constructed in a side-by-side
manner with each unit having direct access to a public street.



         (f)   The units may not be divided until a common party
wall fire rating is brought up to new construction standards contained in the
Uniform Building Code (UBC).  The walls must provide sound transmission
control ratings as per the UBC.



         (g)   The applicant or the property owner may execute
and record at their expense a “Declaration of Covenants, Conditions and
Restrictions”.  The declarations, covenants, conditions and restrictions
provide direction to the property owners and the city on the following
subjects:



            1.   Architectural design and treatments,
construction materials, maintenance, landscaping and other restrictions.



            2.   Relationships among owners of adjoining
living units and arbitration of disputes.



            3.   The authority to divide a single structure
containing two dwelling units may be subject to Chapter 151 of the City Code
relating to park dedication and other subdivision requirements and the
Council may impose other reasonable conditions as required by the situation.



   (E)   Townhouses.  All townhouses, attached or detached, must
comply with the following conditions:



      (1)   All yard requirement areas must be free of
encroachments, such as buildings, accessory structures and interior vehicular
circulation systems.  Driveways that provide direct access to the garage
area are not considered an encroachment.



      (2)   All buildings within an attached townhouse development
must be a minimum of 25 feet apart.  In detached townhouse developments,
minimum distance between units is 15 feet for living space and 10 feet for
adjacent garages.



      (3)   Requirements for District R-4A and R-4B minimum finished
square footage above grade are:



         (a)   1,200 square feet (if constructed with a basement
as defined in § 152.008).



         (b)   1,400 square feet (if constructed without a
basement as defined in § 152.008).



         (c)   A minimum of 120 square feet of contiguous
interior storage area must be located on the lower floor or in the garage of
any townhouse unit constructed without a basement.  This storage area may
not be used to fulfill the unit's minimum finished square footage requirement.



      (4)   A declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions
or the equivalent document shall be submitted for review and approval by the
City Attorney.  The declaration may include, but is not limited to, the
following:



         (a)   A statement requiring that the deeds, leases or
documents of conveyance affecting buildings, units, parcels, tracts,
townhouses, or apartments are subject to the terms of the declaration.



         (b)   A provision for the formation of a property owners
association or corporation and that all owners must be members of said
association or corporation which may maintain all properties and common areas
in good repair and which may assess individual property owners proportionate
shares of joint or common costs.  The association or corporation must remain
in effect and may not be terminated or disbanded. 



         (c)   Membership in the association shall be mandatory
for each owner and any successive buyer.



         (d)   The open space restrictions must be permanent and
may not be changed or modified without city approval.



         (e)   The association is responsible for liability
insurance, local taxes and the maintenance of the open space facilities
deeded to it.



         (f)   Property owners are responsible for their pro-rata
share of the cost of the association by means of an assessment to be levied
by the association that meet the requirements for becoming a lien on the
property in accordance with Minnesota Statutes.



         (g)   The association may adjust the assessment to meet
changing needs.



      (5)   No exterior trash receptacles or enclosures are allowed.



      (6)   In the Site Plan Review of new townhouse proposals, the
following items may be evaluated and be in compliance with the city’s goals
and policies:



         (a)   Mailboxes and traffic around mail delivery areas.



         (b)   Trail connections and functional open space.



         (c)   Circulation systems.



         (d)   Architectural design and standards.



      (7)   For consideration of a development that exclusively
provides a detached townhouse product, the city requires that the following
design criteria be included in the site plan:



         (a)   The minimum development area shall be three acres;



         (b)   The maximum development area shall be 15 acres;



         (c)   An amenity plan shall be designed that is relevant
to the housing proposed. Items may include, but are not limited to, tot-lots,
picnic facilities, trails, sidewalks, gazebo, community room and fountains;



         (d)   Notwithstanding the density provisions of the land
use plan, the site shall include a minimum of 50% green space.  Of the
total, 15% must be contiguous, usable upland that is addressed in the amenity
plan.



   (F)   Multiple family dwellings.  All multiple family dwellings
built after July 24, 1995 must comply with the following conditions:



      (1)   Minimum floor area requirements:



 




 

One Bedroom Units

 

Two Bedroom Units

 

Three Bedroom Units




R-5

 

680 square feet

 

750 square feet

 

900 square feet




R-6

 

600 square feet

 

750 square feet

 

900 square feet




R-7

 

850 square feet

 

1,000 square feet

 

1,150 square feet, with 150 square feet for each additional bedroom above
three




 



      (2)   All multiple family dwellings built after July 24, 1995,
must comply with the following conditions:



         (a)   A reduction of 300 square feet of lot area may be
given for each enclosed parking space provided under the principal building.



         (b)   Minimum floor area requirements:



            (1.)   One bedroom units - 850 square feet;



            (2.)   Two bedroom units - 1,000 square feet;



            (3.)   Three bedroom units - 1,150 square feet’



            (4.)   Over three bedroom units - 1,150 square
feet plus 150 square feet for each additional bedroom.



      (3)   A minimum 20 foot setback is required between driveways,
drive aisles, or parking areas and any building.



      (4)   Controlled access entry systems are required for all
multiple family buildings.



      (5)   No exterior trash receptacles or enclosures are allowed.



      (6)   In the Site Plan Review of new multiple family dwelling
development proposals, the following items may be evaluated and be in
compliance with the city’s goals and policies:



         (a)   Mailboxes and traffic around mail delivery areas.



         (b)   Trail connections and functional open space.



         (c)   Circulation systems.



         (d)   Architectural design, treatments, and standards.



         (e)   Amenities.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2001-952, passed 5-14-01; Am. Ord. 2003-989, passed
2-10-03; Am. Ord. 2003-997, passed 5-12-03; Am. Ord. 2004-1028, passed
12-13-04; Am. Ord. 2015-1191, passed 5-18-15)



§ 152.244  CONDITIONAL USES.



   No permit may be issued for construction of a structure that is
intended to be used for conditionally permitted uses unless a Conditional Use
Permit has been granted by the City Council in accordance with §§ 152.030
through 152.039.  In addition, the following conditions apply to the
applicable uses:



   (A)   Mobile home parks.  Subject to the approval of a site plan
which includes:



      (1)   Internal street system with all-weather hard surfaced
roadways, to city standards, not less than 25 feet in width.



      (2)   All units must be connected to city sewer and water
systems prior to occupancy.



      (3)   All hydrant locations must be approved by the city prior
to occupancy of any units.



      (4)   All mobile homes must be setback a minimum of 25 feet
from any internal roadway.



      (5)   Minimum lot size per mobile home must not be less than
40 feet wide x 100 feet long or 4,000 square feet.



      (6)   Each mobile home park must provide a recreation area(s)
equal to 800 square feet per unit and a development plan must be submitted
and approved.  None of the 800 square feet must be included in the minimum
lot calculation.



   (B)   Public and quasi-public uses.  All uses must provide the
following evidence:



      (1)   The use is in conformance with the surrounding
neighborhood and required setbacks and side-yard requirements are met.



      (2)   Equipment is completely enclosed in a permanent
structure with no outside storage, except for electrical substation
structures.



      (3)   Adequate screening and landscaping from neighboring
residential districts is provided.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.245  TEMPORARY USES.



   This section allows for certain temporary uses that are accessory to
the principal use in residential districts but are not regulated by any other
section of this chapter.  These temporary uses include, but are not limited
to, model homes and temporary events.



   (A)   Temporary events.



      (1)   Event permit required.  Permits are required for any
event with temporary structures or tents, preparation and service of food or
beverages for sale, road blockage, or traffic or parking congestion beyond
that expected without the event for all uses in residential districts except
single- and two-family dwellings and except for block parties in conjunction
with a City of Brooklyn Park sponsored event.  Permits will not be issued
until these issues have been resolved and demonstrated in compliance with
§§ 152.030 through 152.039 and all applicable City Codes to the
satisfaction of the City Manager.



      (2)   Performance standards for temporary events.  Temporary
events include, but are not limited to, outdoor religious events and rental
or employment fairs, but do not include construction activities related to
the construction, demolition, or rehabilitation of a dwelling, building, or
structure.



         (a)   Duration.  Events are limited to ten days per
calendar year and all equipment, structures, signs, or other evidence of the
use must be removed from the property one week after termination of the
event. 



         (b)   Disturbed turfed areas must be restored to their
pre-event condition within three weeks.



         (c)   Sanitary facilities must be provided as required
by the Building Official.



         (d)   Any impairment to traffic flow must be mitigated
to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, Fire Chief and the Police Chief.



         (e)   All other sections of the city code, including but
not limited to compliance with residential quiet hours and the creation of
nuisances, apply.



   (B)   Model homes.  This section allows for the provision of model
homes and temporary real estate offices in new subdivisions without adversely
affecting the character of surrounding residential neighborhoods or creating
a general nuisance.  As model homes represent a unique temporary commercial
use, special consideration must be given to the peculiar problems associated
with them and special standards must be applied to ensure reasonable
compatibility with their surrounding environment.  All model homes and
temporary real estate offices must comply with the following special
requirements:



      (1)   Model home or temporary real estate office lighting must
comply with §§ 152.110 through 152.114.



      (2)   Signs for model homes and temporary real estate offices
must comply with the sign regulations as contained elsewhere in the City Code.



      (3)   The model home or temporary real estate office is
permitted only until all the other lots in the subdivision have active
building permits.



      (4)   The applicant for a model home may be required to submit
a cash bond to guarantee the conversion of the model home to a single-family
home in a timely manner if alterations to the site have occurred such as the
provision of paved parking, removal of lighting, and similar uses.  Such
conversion includes, but is not limited to, the provision of landscaping,
turf restoration and the removal of parking lots, signage and lighting.



(Ord. 2000-936)



RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES



§ 152.260  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter provides standards that accessory uses and structures
in residential districts are required to meet.  These standards allow the
property owner to use the property in ways that are normally associated with
the principal residential use of the property and allow the city appropriate
means to maintain the residential nature of neighborhoods.  The accessory
uses listed in § 152.262 are permitted in the individual residential zoning
districts provided that:



   (A)   Such uses are subordinate and incidental to the principal
residential use of the property.



   (B)   No accessory use is permitted that changes the residential
character, rating or appearance of the lot or any structures on the lot.



   (C)   No accessory use or structure other than a fence or a
temporary construction office for a project to be built on the property may
be permitted in a residential district without a principal use occupying the
property.



   (D)   There may be no exterior storage or display of equipment,
materials or products except as permitted by this section and Chapter 150 of
the City Code.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.261  ACCESSORY USES.



   The following table provides a listing of accessory uses permitted in
each residential district.  Other similar uses must be reviewed by the City
Manager.  These uses may be further regulated in § 152.262.



 


Figure 152.261.01 Accessory Uses in Residential Districts






“P” = Permitted Use    “C” = Conditional Use  “NP” = Not
Permitted




Accessory Use

 
R-1
 
R-2
 
R-2A
 
R-2B
 
R-3
 
R-3A
 
R-4
 
R-4A
 
R-5
 
R-6
 
R-7



Antennas, satellite dishes and the like as regulated by §§ 152.090 through
152.096

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
C
 
C
 
C



Bed and breakfast establishments as regulated by §§ 152.240 through 152.245

 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP



Community garden in conformance with § 152.262

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P




Construction Debris Dumpster (Oversize), as regulated by § 152.262

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P



Daycare facilities, licensed (12 or fewer children) or Group family daycare
(14 or fewer children) as regulated by §§ 152.160 through 152.164

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP



Daycare or group daycare facilities, licensed (13 to 16 persons) as regulated
by §§ 152.160 through 152.164

 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
P
 
P
 
P




 



 


Figure 152.261.01 Accessory Uses in Residential Districts






“P” = Permitted Use    “C” = Conditional Use    “NP” = Not
Permitted



Accessory Use
 
R-1
 
R-2
 
R-2A
 
R-2B
 
R-3
 
R-3A
 
R-4
 
R-4A
 
R-5
 
R-6
 
R-7



Daycare facilities, licensed. in schools and religious institutions as
regulated by §§ 152.160 through 152.164

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P



Emergency repair of motor vehicles and recreational vehicles as regulated by
§ 152.262

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P



Gas/Fuel tanks (above ground)

 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP



Garage sales as regulated by § 152.262

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P



Garages, parking areas and spaces in compliance with §§ 152.140 through
152.146

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P



Gardening, farming and cultivation of agricultural products

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P



Ground source heat pump systems as regulated by § 152.187

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P




Home vocations and avocations as regulated by § 152.262

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P



Live/work uses within a dwelling unit conformance with § 152.262

 



 



 



 



 



 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P




Outside storage of agricultural equipment as regulated as regulated by §
152.262

 
P
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP



Outside storage of recreational vehicles as regulated by § 152.262

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P



Parks and playgrounds, open spaces, natural areas (private)

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P



Private residential recreational equipment

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P



Public and private schools located within religious institutions as regulated
by §§ 152.181 through 152.182

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C




Sale of agricultural products grown on the property

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P



Sale of residential motor vehicles and recreational vehicles as regulated by
§ 152.262

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P



Signs as regulated by Chapter 150 of the City Code

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P



Solar energy system in conformance with § 152.187

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P




 



 


Figure 152.261.01 Accessory Uses in Residential Districts




“P” = Permitted Use    “C” = Conditional Use    “NP” = Not
Permitted



Accessory Use
 
R-1
 
R-2
 
R-2A
 
R-2B
 
R-3
 
R-3A
 
R-4
 
R-4A
 
R-5
 
R-6
 
R-7



Telecommunication towers as regulated in §§ 152.090 through 152.096

 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C



Temporary Portable Storage Containers

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P



Waste and recycling storage as regulated in Chapter 98 of the City Code and
§ 152.263

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P




Wind energy conversion system in conformance with § 152.186

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P



 



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2003-989, passed 2-10-03; Am. Ord. 2003-1008, passed
11-3-03; Am. Ord. 2007-1070, passed 3-26-07; Am. Ord. 2012-1133, passed
3-5-12)



§ 152.262  ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY USES.



   Certain permitted accessory uses have characteristics that require
regulation by the city to assure compatibility with other residential
properties and neighborhoods.  The following accessory uses must comply with
all sections of the City Code, this section of the chapter, and the following
established regulations for the use:



   (A)   Motor and recreational vehicle and equipment sales.



      (1)   The vehicle(s) must have current registration plates.



      (2)   The vehicle(s) must be licensed to a resident of the
property.



      (3)   The vehicle(s) must comply with the parking requirements
in all applicable sections of the City Code and this chapter.



      (4)   No more than two vehicle and equipment sales may be
permitted per parcel per calendar year.



   (B)   Vocations and avocations in residential districts.



      (1)   Repair services.  Repair services are limited to those
appliances or other goods small enough to be carried by one person.  Motor
and recreational vehicles and equipment and small engine repair are not
permitted except for minor emergency repairs and minor maintenance to autos,
non-commercial trucks, or recreational vehicles and equipment that are
licensed to residents of the property, provided they can be completed within
a 24-hour period or are conducted inside a garage or accessory structure and
are in compliance with the City Code.  Vehicle painting will not be
permitted in residential districts.



      (2)   Deliveries.  Deliveries are limited to the type that
typically service residences.  Such traffic and parking needed for
deliveries must comply with §§ 152.140 through 152.146, and all other
applicable sections of the City Code.



      (3)   Employees.  The use may be carried out by the residents
of the dwelling unit and no more than one nonresident employee.



      (4)   Sales.  No retail sale of merchandise produced off-site
is permitted, except those products that are not marketed and sold in
wholesale or retail outlets.



      (5)   Parking.  Parking for clients or customers coming to
the property must comply with §§ 152.140 through 152.146, and all other
applicable sections of the City Code and are limited to five vehicles at any
one time.  Storage or overnight parking of commercial vehicles, including
tow-trucks, is prohibited unless further regulated in this section.



      (6)   Permits required.  All vocations based in a dwelling
unit must have an administrative permit.



      (7)   Nuisances.  No use may use or create noise, dust,
vibration, odor, glare, electrical interference, fire hazards, garbage,
hazardous chemicals that exceed standards published in the City Code, or by
the PCA or Department of Health standards; and traffic or parking congestion
to a degree that cannot be proportionally accommodated by adjacent street or
private driveways and garages, or any other public health, safety or general
welfare hazard or nuisance to any greater or more frequent extent than that
usually experienced in an average dwelling unit or private garage, sewer or
water services; under normal circumstances wherein no vocation or avocation
exists in the zoning district where the vocation or avocation exists, except
as superceded by state or county ordinance, statute, or law.



      (8)   All vocations and avocations must adhere to any and all
applicable city, county, state, and federal regulations.  Vocations and
avocations which violate or can not operate in compliance with those
regulations are prohibited.



      (9)   Any hazardous materials handling permits must be
reported to the City Manager or his/her designated agent.



   (C)   Garage sales.



      (1)   Each property is limited to four garage sales per year.



      (2)   Each sale is limited to three days.



      (3)   Signs must be in conformance with Chapter 150 of the
City Code.



   (D)   Exterior (outdoor) storage of goods, equipment, materials,
vehicles, and the like are not permitted except for the following:



      (1)   Firewood storage.  Firewood must be stacked on an
impervious surface or be elevated at least three and a half inches off of the
ground, and may not include more than two cords of wood per property. 
Unrestrained stacks may not exceed six feet in height.  Firewood stacks
located next to structures and supported by restraints, may not exceed ten
feet in height and may be so contained as not to constitute a safety hazard,
as determined by a Zoning Enforcement Officer.  Firewood storage must comply
with accessory structure setbacks in §§ 152.220 through 152.226.



      (2)   Commercial vehicles and equipment may not be stored on
properties zoned residential, except for the following:



         (a)   One non-commercial vehicle with an attached snow
plow can be parked outside of an enclosed building in compliance with all
other City Codes.



         (b)   Taxis and limousines are allowed to be parked in
compliance with §§ 152.140 through 152.146 and this section with the
following restrictions:



            1.   One vehicle per property.



            2.   The vehicle must be less than 30 feet in
length.



      (3)   Agricultural equipment.  Storage of agricultural
equipment may be permitted only on land assessed, used, and zoned as
agricultural and must comply with all other applicable sections of the City
Code.



      (4)   Equipment, materials and dumpsters may be stored outside
if in compliance with the following:



         (a)   All items must be directly related to a current
on-site construction or landscaping project;



         (b)   Except as otherwise allowed in division (c) below,
no items may be stored outside for more than three months in any calendar
year;



         (c)   All items directly related to a project for which
a valid building permit has been issued are allowed to be stored outside
while the permit is active;



         (d)   All debris must be contained within the dumpster
and prevented from becoming airborne;



         (e)   All items must be located on private property and
must not block sidewalks, trails, hydrants or emergency access;



         (f)   All items must be immediately removed from the
property upon completion of the current on-site project;



      (5)   Private outdoor recreational equipment provided the
equipment is not for display, storage or sales in connection with any
vocation except a daycare.



      (6)   Outdoor storage of recreational vehicles, recreational
equipment and trailers.  "Private outdoor recreational equipment" as defined
by this chapter is exempted from this subsection.  Storage of recreational
vehicles, recreational equipment, and trailers must meet the following
standards:



         (a)   Front yard storage.



            1.   Items stored in the front yard must be
located on a continuous impervious surface.  Storage is not allowed on
landscaped or grass areas in the front yard.



            2.   All front yard storage must not encroach on
any sidewalk or obstruct visibility of vehicle or pedestrian traffic.



           (b)   Gravel parking surface requirements.  Where
gravel parking surfaces are allowed, each of the following conditions must be
met:



            1.    A minimum depth of three inches of Class V
gravel or equivalent must be installed; and



            2.   An edging material must be provided or other
approved method must be used, and maintained to contain the gravel in the
designated parking pad. 



         (c)   Existing gravel driveways.  For properties where
gravel driveways existed prior to November 10, 1989, a gravel parking
surface, meeting the specifications in subpart (b) is allowed for front yard
storage.  When driveways are upgraded to a continuous, impervious surface,
other storage surfaces existing on that property must meet the surface
requirements indicated in subpart (a).



      (7)    Ownership.  Vehicles, equipment and other items stored
outside on residential property must be owned by a person who resides on that
property.  Students who are away at school for periods of time or persons on
military leave, but still claim the property as their legal residence, will
be considered residents on the property.  This does not include vehicles or
equipment being used by occasional guests.



   (E)   Temporary portable storage containers.



      (1)   One temporary portable storage container is allowed per
dwelling unit for a maximum of 30 consecutive days in a calendar year.



      (2)   The storage container must be located on the driveway of
the dwelling unit it is serving.  An alternate location may be approved by
the City Manager.



   (F)   Gardening.



      (1)   If a home garden is present it shall be maintained by
one or more individuals who reside in a dwelling unit located on the subject
property.  Food and/or horticulture products grown in the home garden may be
used for personal consumption. A home garden is an accessory uses to a
principal residential uses and must comply with the lot and building
standards for its zoning district. 



   (G)   Community garden.



      (1)   All community gardens shall comply with § 152.184.



   (H)   Live/work uses.



      (1)   The residential portion of a live/work use shall not
occupy more than 50% of the entire square footage of the structure/or unit.



      (2)   The residential portion of the live/work uses, if
located on the ground floor, shall be completely located behind the
commercial portion of the structure or unit such that the ground floor street
façade is a commercial use and commercial façade.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2001-952, passed 5-14-01; Am. Ord. 2003-989, passed
2-10-03; Am. Ord. 2003-1008, passed 11-3-03; Am. Ord. 2012-1133, passed
3-5-12; Am. Ord. 2013-1163, passed 10-21-13; Am. Ord. 2015-1189, passed
3-23-15; Am. Ord. 2014-1184, passed 10-20-14; Am. Ord. 2015-1190, passed
4-28-15)



§ 152.263  ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Accessory structures secondary to primary uses that required a
Conditional Use Permit or those that require a Formal Site Plan Review may
also be considered Conditional or needing Formal Site Plan Review and may be
subject to the applicable standards listed in division (B) below.



   (B)   Standards for accessory structures (except fences and walls).



      (1)   Accessory structures must conform to the following:



         (a)   Front setbacks.  No accessory structures are
permitted between a public right-of- way and the dwelling or principle use,
except garages which must adhere to the same setbacks as the principal
building as described in §§ 152.220 through 152.226.



         (b)   Interior side or rear setbacks.  No accessory
structures are permitted closer than five feet from interior side property
lines.  Except in the R-2A and R-2B districts where garages must be ten feet
from interior side property lines.



         (c)   Side or rear setback adjacent to public
right-of-way.  Same as for the principal building as described in §§
152.220 through 152.226.



      (2)   Any accessory structures sheltering or housing more than
two animal units on a farm, hobby farm, or the like may not be less than 50
feet from all dwellings other than that of the owner.



      (3)   Structure size.  On any lot zoned R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-2B,
R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-4A, or guided for residential under the PCDD or PUD, the
combined floor area of all accessory structures (including the attached or
detached garage) may not exceed the following:



         (a)   For lots one acre or less: 1,000 square feet or
the foundation footprint of the habitable portion of the principle building,
whichever is greater.



         (b)   For lots greater than one acre: 1,500 square feet
or the foundation footprint of the habitable portion of the principle
building, whichever is greater.



      (4)   Accessory structure height.  A maximum of 18 feet or
the height of the principle building, whichever is less.  The highest point
of the roof of the accessory structure shall not be higher than the highest
point of the roof of the principle structure. Accessory structures for non-
residential uses may exceed this height, up to a maximum of 22 feet, through
the Conditional Use Permit process upon demonstration that the proposal
includes mitigation of any off-site impacts.



      (5)   No lot of record may have more than two detached
accessory structures, except public parks and open space.



      (6)   Accessory structures in the Flood Hazard Area Overlay:



         (a) Accessory structures shall not be designed for human
habitation.



         (b)   Accessory structures shall be constructed and
placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the
flow of flood waters:



            1.   Whenever possible, structures shall be
constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood
flow: and



            2.   So far as practicable, structures shall be
placed approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining
structures.



         (c)   Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or
structurally dry flood proofed to the regulatory flood protection elevation
in accordance with the State Building Code. As an alternative, an accessory
structure may be wet flood proofed to the flood proofing classification in
the State Building Code provided the accessory structure constitutes a
minimal investment and does not exceed 500 square feet in size. All flood
proofed accessory structures must meet the following additional standards:



            1.   The structure must be adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and shall be
designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls;



            2.   Any mechanical and utility equipment in a
structure must be elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection
elevation or properly flood proofed; and



            3.   To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic
pressure, there must be a minimum of two "automatic" openings in the outside
walls of the structure having a total net area of not less than one square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. There must
be openings on at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all
openings must be no higher than one foot above the lowest adjacent grade to
the structure. Using human intervention to open a door prior to flooding will
not satisfy this requirement for automatic openings.



   (C)   Residential fencing and walls.



      (1)   Fences or walls which detain or inhibit the flow of
surface water drainage to and from abutting properties is prohibited.



      (2)   Setbacks.



         (a)   Front.  Fences and walls more than 42 inches in
height must be setback 15 feet from the property line.  Multiple family
dwelling developments or townhouse developments may have wrought iron (or
similarly designed) fences constructed up to the front property line with the
approval of the City Manager.



         (b)   Interior side or rear.  No setback.



         (c)   Side or rear abutting public right-of-way. 
Fences and walls must be setback 15 feet from the property line and
restricted for traffic visibility unless they qualify for one of the
following exemptions.  Fences may be allowed up to the property line if:



            1.   Properties are located on corners with
controlled intersections, (i.e. stop signs or stop lights).



            2.   Fence or wall does not encroach into the
clear view triangle as defined and regulated in § 152.223.



      (3)   Access required.



         (a)   Detached single- and attached two-family
dwellings.  Where any fence connects to a building at least one gate with a
minimum width of two feet, six inches  is required to allow access around
the building.



         (b)   All other uses.  Plans for fences and gates
controlling access to the property must be approved by the Police and Fire
Departments before construction begins.



      (4)   Fence height.  No fence may exceed eight feet, six
inches as measured from the top of the fence or supports to grade. 
Exceptions to this height may be made for fences enclosing tennis courts and
other similar recreational uses or as may be required elsewhere in the City
Code.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2003-989, passed 2-10-03; Am. Ord. 2003-997, passed
5-12-03; Am. Ord. 2005-1033, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 2011-1127, passed
7-25-11)



§ 152.264  TEMPORARY FAMILY HEALTH CARE DWELLINGS.



   The city opts out of the requirements of M.S. § 462.3593, which
defines and regulates temporary family health care dwellings.



(Ord. 2016-1206, passed 8-22-16)



RESIDENTIAL LANDSCAPING STANDARDS



§ 152.270  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of establishing minimum landscape standards is to enhance
the city’s environmental and visual character for its citizens’ use; and
enjoyment; preserve and stabilize the ecological balance in the city;
establish a healthy environment by using vegetation to mitigate pollution’s
ill-effects; safeguard property values; protect public and private
investments; and promote high quality development in the city.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.271  LANDSCAPE PLAN REQUIRED.



   Prior to the issuance of a building permit for new construction of a
structure in any residential townhome or multiple family district, or a
structure for a non-residential use in a residential district, a landscape
plan must be submitted for review and approval to the City Manager in
compliance with the Site Plan Review process in §§ 152.030 through 152.039.
Review and approval of a landscape plan may also be required for new parking
lots and changes to existing parking areas that affect more than four stalls
prior to issuance of any permits.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2003-989, passed 2-10-03)



§ 152.272  INSTALLATION OF LANDSCAPE MATERIALS.



   All landscaping elements must be installed with professional
horticultural standards as established with the most current edition of the
Landscape Construction Reference Manual as published by the Minnesota Nursery
and Landscape Association within 90 days of the issuance of the Certificate
of Occupancy, or by June 15 for homes for which a Certificate of Occupancy is
issued between September 1 and March 1.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2003-989, passed 2-10-03)



§ 152.273  MINIMUM REQUIRED OPEN SPACE.



   Each lot may have, at a minimum, the  percentage open space shown in
the following table.  These areas may not be covered by a building or other
impervious surface, and must be landscaped with sod, gardens, natural areas,
landscape rock or mulch, trees and shrubs, or similar landscaping
materials.  Areas used for demonstrated parking can not be used to fulfill
the open space requirement.



 


Figure 152.273.01 Minimum Required Open Space




 

Single and Two-Family Dwellings

 

Townhouse Developments
(May be placed in private lots or in common areas)

 

Multiple Family Dwellings and Non-Residential Uses in Residential Districts




Minimum Open Space

 

25%  total, to include a minimum of 50% of front yard

 

40%

 

40%




Parking Areas

 

Not Applicable

 

10% of interior parking lot area.
This area counts towards total green area of the site.




 



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2003-1008, passed 11-3-03)



§ 152.274  MINIMUM TREE AND SHRUB QUANTITIES.



   (A)   All developments and subdivisions that occur in the
residential districts after the effective date of this chapter may be
required to provide the minimum number of trees and shrubs as specified in
the following table:



 


Figure 152.274.02 Minimum Required Tree and Shrub Requirements




Vegetation Type

 

Size

 

Single and Two-Family Dwellings

 

Townhouse Developments
(May be placed in private lots or in common areas)

 

Multiple Family Dwellings and Non-Residential Uses in Residential Districts




Overstory deciduous trees

 

2" bb
(Caliper)   

 

2 in the front yard, 1 of which must be within 1 foot of the front property
line, 3 additional on property

 

5 per unit or 1/40 lineal feet of site perimeter, whichever is greater

 

2/Dwelling or 1/1,000 gross square feet of building area (grade level floor)
or 1/40 lineal feet of site perimeter, whichever is greater




Coniferous trees

 

6' bb

 

May be substituted for any of the overstory deciduous trees except the front
yard tree at the property line

 

May be substituted on a 1 for 1 basis for the overstory deciduous trees

 

Minimum of 30% of required overstory trees must be coniferous




Ornamental deciduous trees

 

1.5" bb (Caliper)

 

2 may be substituted for 1  overstory tree

 

1 per unit required. 2 additional may be substituted for 1  overstory
(maximum substitution = 50% of required overstory trees)

 

2  may be substituted for 1 overstory (maximum substitution = 50% of
required overstory trees)




Understory shrubs

 

3 gal. potted or 18"

 

10 per unit

 

5 per unit

 

1/300 gross square feet of building footprint area or 1/30 lineal feet of
site perimeter, whichever is greater




 



   (B)   Additional landscape requirements: All portions of a site that
are not covered by a building, hardsurface coverage or water on a permanent
basis must be planted with ground cover and landscaping materials.



      (1)   Ground cover. All site areas must be covered with sod
from curb(s) to all interior property lines. Seeding may not be permitted. 
Rock and mulch may be substituted for sod in landscaping planting beds and
along the perimeter of buildings.  Native plant communities may be
reestablished as a part of a Site Plan Review in compliance with all other
sections of the City Code.  Exceptions:



         (a)   Areas for gardens, decorative landscape plantings,
and/or native plant communities. 



         (b)   Developments in the Urban Reserve District (R-1).



         (c)   Berms, swales, drainage ponds, and the like with
slopes greater than 4 to 1.



      (2)   Top soil.  Prior to sodding, all single-family and
two-family lots subdivided after the effective date of this chapter must have
a minimum of three inches of black dirt as topsoil.



      (3)   Intersection visibility.  All landscape materials must
comply with the intersection visibility requirements of §§ 152.220 through
152.226.



      (4)   Utility interference.  Overstory trees may not be
installed underneath overhead utility lines nor may any landscape materials
be installed over utility lines except in compliance with city policy.



      (5)   Irrigation.  All sodded or landscaped areas for
multiple family dwellings, townhouses, or non-residential uses must have and
maintain irrigations systems, including landscaped parking islands and
boulevards.



   (C)   Quantity credits.  Existing healthy trees that are not
susceptible to disease, alternate sized trees, or decorative landscaping may
be credited toward the required trees detailed in division (A) and the
additional trees required for screening as defined in § 152.275. The
following table establishes the landscaping credits.



 


Figure 152.274.03 Credits





Vegetation Type
 

Size

 

Exchange Credit



Existing trees
 

2” bb (Caliper)

 

1 tree




4” bb (Caliper)

 

2 trees



New larger trees
 

4" bb (Caliper) or 14' Coniferous

 

2 trees



Smaller trees
 

min. 1½” bb Deciduous

 

2 smaller trees for 1 overstory tree.  Maximum substitution = 50% of
required overstory trees




Shrubs (non-residential uses only)

 



 

10 shrubs for 1 tree (1½” bb ornamental or 2" bb overstory or 6'
coniferous)




Decorative Landscape Yard

 



 

Exterior sculptures, fountains, decorative walks, courtyards and/or
additional ponds beyond those required, shown on a landscape plan that meets
the intent of this section to the satisfaction of the City Manager





 



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.275  SCREENING.



   Screening may be accomplished through the use of screen fences, walls,
earth berms (not to exceed slopes of 4:1), and/or landscape plantings
consisting primarily of evergreens.  Must achieve 80% opacity year round. 
Fences and walls are regulated elsewhere in this chapter.



   (A)   Residential uses must be screened from all non-residential
mechanical or accessory uses, including, but not limited to, exterior storage
areas, accessory buildings, waste service areas, exterior loading, service
areas, mechanical areas, and rooftop equipment.  Screening must be a minimum
of six feet in height at installation.



   (B)   All multiple family dwellings and non-residential mechanical
or accessory uses, including, but not limited to, exterior storage areas,
exterior loading, waste service areas, mechanical areas, and rooftop
equipment, must be screened as follows:



      (1)   The above may be screened using a parapet, wing-wall or
other architectural feature that is an integral part(s) of the building.



      (2)   Screening may incorporate similar architectural features
as the building, the same exterior materials as the principal structure, and
designed so that the equipment is not visible from any public right-of-way or
other residential development.



      (3)   Incidental equipment deemed unnecessary to be screened
by the City Manager must be of a color to match the building, roof, or the
sky, whichever is more effective as screening.



      (4)   Metal cabinets used to enclose and protect mechanical
equipment may not substitute as screening.



      (5)   Landscaping may be used as additional screening for
equipment that cannot be effectively screened with materials matching the
design of the building, at the discretion of the City Manager.



   (C)   All townhouses, multiple dwelling, and non-residential uses
must screen their exterior storage areas, waste service areas, exterior
loading docks, service areas, mechanical areas, rooftop equipment and other
similar areas.



   (D)   Rear or side yard screening areas for all multiple frontage
lots or lots adjacent to the North Hennepin Regional Trail.  The rear or
side yards of all residential multiple frontage lots of all lots subdivided
or developed after the effective date of this chapter, must be screened from
the abutting public right-of-way.  The plant materials used to screen the
rear or side lots must also satisfy the requirements of § 152.274.  The
berming and landscaping must be located in the required areas as defined
below and comply with the associated minimum height and depth requirements
when installed:



 


Figure 152.275.04 Additional Screening for Residential Properties




Along ...

 

Height of Berming
(in feet)

 

Depth of Berms or Landscaped Area (measured in feet from the property line on
private property)
See Alternate Requirements Below

 

Amount of plant materials




Principal and "A" Minor Arterials

 

6

 

50-foot bermed and landscaped area

 

4 coniferous trees and
3 deciduous trees




"B" Minor Arterials and Class I Collectors

 

3

 

25-foot landscaped area

 

4 trees and 5 shrubs




North Hennepin Regional Trail

 

NA

 

20-foot landscaped area

 

4 coniferous trees and
3 deciduous trees




 



   (E)   Alternative screening. The City Council may approve decorative
fencing and landscaping meeting minimum opacity requirements of § 152.275 in
lieu of the berming requirements of § 152.275.04.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2001-961, passed 11-26-01; Am. Ord. 2003-989, passed
2-10-03; Am. Ord. 2003-997, passed 5-12-03)



§ 152.276  NON-RESIDENTIAL USES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.



   Non-residential uses located within residential zoning districts must
adhere to the B1 Zoning District landscaping requirements of  §§ 152.370
through 152.379.



(Ord. 2008-1085, passed 3-24-08)



RESIDENTIAL ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS



§ 152.290  PURPOSE.



   Because buildings have a life expectancy beyond that of the original
owner or tenant, it is the city’s goal to encourage the construction of
quality structures that exhibit an attractive appearance both to residents
and potential future owners.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.291  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Residential additions and accessory buildings.  All facades
of new additions and accessory structures must be coordinated with the
facades of the principal building by integrating some or all of the same
materials, textures and colors. 



   (B)   Exterior surfaces.  All exterior surfaces must be finished
with the appropriate sealant, stain, paint, or other process (to
manufacturer’s specifications) to withstand the elements and prevent
fading, chipping, chalking, cracking, peeling, warping, rot, rust, water
damage, or other natural degrading process, with the exception of those
materials, like copper, where the degrading process is architecturally
desirable.  This includes the following prohibitions:



      (1)   Metals.  The following metals are prohibited as facade
materials:



         (a)   Any metal roof that has exposed fasteners,
semi-concealed fasteners on a facade, or any fastener system that does not
adhere directly to the support system.



         (b)   Any metal that is not a high-quality commercial
thickness/weight (for example, the minimum for architectural steel panels is
.024 thickness, architectural aluminum panels is .032 thickness and
architectural copper panels is 16 ounce sheets, and the equivalent in other
metals).



         (c)   Any metal that has not been treated with a factory
applied color coating system against any applicable degradation listed above.



         (d)   Metal of any kind as a primary facade material
(excluding steel or aluminum lap siding).  Metal may be used for trim or
accent up to 15% of any facade.



         (e)   Metal is prohibited for use as a facade material
for accessory structures.  This prohibition includes, but is not limited to,
trailers or recreational vehicles that have been converted to buildings or
storage structures under the UBC, anchored, and used for storage.  This
prohibition does not include steel or aluminum lap siding.



      (2)   Smooth concrete block is prohibited as a primary facade
material.  Smooth concrete block used as part of the foundation may be
permitted to be exposed at up to 15% of any facade.



      (3)   Non-durable siding materials such as plywood, corrugated
metal or fiberglass, or other materials that decay rapidly when exposed to
the elements are prohibited as a facade material.



   (C)   Finished sides of fences and walls.  If the visible facade
material is not finished on both sides, the finished side of the material
must be on the outside, facing the abutting or adjoining properties and all
posts or structures supporting the fence or wall must be on the inside.



   (D)   Northern Growth Area. All homes constructed in the R-2A and
R-2B Zoning Districts after November 26, 2001, shall establish architectural
covenants consistent with city architectural and development guidelines. The
covenants shall remain in existence until issuance of the final certificate
of occupancy for all platted property. All properties must adhere to the City
of Brooklyn Park Northern Growth Area Single Family Residential Development
Guidelines and Policies dated November 26, 2001.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2001-961, passed 11-26-01; Am. Ord. 2013-1158,
passed 7-15-13)



§ 152.292  USE SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All non-residential uses in residential districts may be
regulated by the standards in §§ 152.390 through 152.393.



   (B)   Fences.



      (1)   Prohibited fence materials.  Electric, concertina or
barbed wire, or chicken wire fences are prohibited.



      (2)   Restricted fence materials.



         (a)   Silt and other construction fences must be removed
from the property at project completion. 



         (b)   Snow fences may not be installed before November
1st and must be removed from the all properties by April 1st.  If snow is
present within one foot of the fence location, the presence of the snow fence
may be maintained at the discretion of the City Manager.



         (c)   Chain link fences must have a top rail and posts
must be spaced at intervals not to exceed ten feet.



         (d)   Chain link fences in the front yard must have a
black, brown, or green vinyl coating.  Bare galvanized chain link fences are
not allowed in front yards.  Privacy slats are not allowed in chain link
fences in the front yard.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2003-997, passed 5-12-03; Am. Ord. 2011-1127, passed
7-25-11; Am. Ord. 2013-1158, 7-15-13)



§ 152.293  MAINTENANCE.



   All surfaces must be maintained with the appropriate seal, stain,
paint, or other process (to manufacturer’s specifications) to withstand the
elements and prevent fading, chipping, chalking, cracking, peeling, warping,
rot, rust, water damage, or other natural degrading process, and are not
allowed to become or remain in an unsafe condition as defined by the Uniform
Building and Fire Code.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.294  MINIMUM DESIGN AND SITE REQUIREMENTS FOR MEDIUM AND HIGH DENSITY
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose. Medium and high density housing is an important
element in the overall housing choice in the City of Brooklyn Park. These
types of developments are varied and can include small lot single-family,
attached townhome and stacked multi-family. To ensure high quality
development, buildings and internal community areas minimum design and site
requirements have been prepared and shall apply to all new developments in
the R-4, R-4A, R-5, R-6, R-7 residential districts and the Village Zoning
District.  Specific site design, landscaping and pedestrian amenities will
help to create an active, comfortable, livable community and a shared sense
of ownership among residents.



   (B)   It is the intent with these standards to provide requirements
to help developers achieve high quality residential construction. It is not
intended to dictate designs that may not be appealing because they are forced
to meet a certain mix of materials. Distinctive architecture with unique
design style is encouraged and will be considered if shown to meet the intent
of the ordinance.  While the requirements stated in this section shall apply
to all new construction, in the districts listed above, additional policies
shall also be considered including the following:



      (1)   Homes (as related to single-family, twin homes, and
townhomes), in proximity to each other shall not look alike in terms of
color, siding, accent and roofing materials. To maintain variety in colors
and materials the home under consideration should be compared to the two
homes on the two lots on either side of it and to the three homes directly
facing it.



      (2)   Home design should minimize the use of elevations that
have a garage forward design ("snout houses").



      (3)   New multi-family development shall be amenity rich
catered to the targeted population of the development.



      (4)   Neighborhoods shall be designed to be connected and
accessible to promote active living.



   (C)   Neighborhood outreach shall be provided per the adopted
Multi-Family Housing Community Outreach Policy.



   (D)   Minimum building design standards for small lot detached
single-family or two-family homes (as part of an association) in the R-4
district, shall be constructed with the following design elements:



      (1)   Front elevation:



         (a)   Each front elevation shall have a minimum of 30%
comprised of natural material consisting of brick, stone, stucco,
hardi-board, redwood, cedar or other similar materials.



         (b)   Homes on corner lots must relate to both streets
with windows, accent and building articulation.



         (c)   Prominent front entry, including but not limited
to, covered entry, front porch or similar accent shall be incorporated into
the overall front elevation.



         (d)   Design of front exterior elevations shall be
varied within the development with a minimum of five different styles
provided.



         (e)   Two-family attached buildings shall be articulated
to break up the building faced on all elevations.  Rooflines and building
elevations shall be articulated to break up the mass of buildings.



      (2)   Garages:



         (a)   Single-family and two-family homes shall include a
garage that is a minimum of 480 square feet in size.



         (b)   Side entry garages are encouraged where feasible.



         (c)   Garage shall not comprise more than 55% of the
viewable ground floor street-facing linear building frontage.  This standard
is based on the measurement of the entire garage structure and not on a
measurement of the garage door or doors only.  Corner lots are exempt from
this requirement.



         (d)   Garage doors shall be architectural styled to
match the exterior design of the home.



      (3)   Roof:



         (a)   Architectural design roofing materials including
composition, wood shingles (including shake), architectural asphalt shingles,
concrete, clay or ceramic tile roofs are required on all roofs.



         (b)   Overhangs must be a minimum of 12 inches.



         (c)   No bright or garish shingles are allowed.



      (4)   Side and rear facades:



         (a)   Each side elevation that faces an interior lot
shall have at least one window or door opening which cannot be garage. 
Where a side elevation faces a street or is visible from a public street, at
least two windows or door openings, which cannot be a garage, shall be
provided. Alternatives may be considered for LEED or other efficiency
standards.



         (b)   A maximum of 18 inches of the foundation wall may
be exposed on any elevation.



      (5)   Setbacks: front yard: The front yard setback for a
single-family or townhome shall meet the requirements in § 152.222. The
setback may be reduced down to a minimum of 20 feet if the following
conditions are met:



         (a)   The setback reduction is for an attached living
area or porch to the front entry of the principal structure, not including
the garage, which does not exceed a total of 240 square feet of above grade
finished livable space.



         (b)   The exterior materials of the proposed living area
or porch are consistent or complementary in color, texture and quality with
those visible at the front of the dwelling.



         (c)   The roof of the proposed living area or porch is
properly proportioned to and integrated with the roof of the dwelling.



      (6)   Subdivision requests: Building elevations and floor
plans shall be furnished with subdivision requests illustrating exterior
building material and colors to demonstrate compliance of this section.



   (E)   Minimum design standards for townhomes structures including
row style, back to back, multi-story (not stacked) or one level attached.



      (1)   Design character:  A high quality of building design is
an important way to bring larger buildings into a traditional neighborhood
scale.



      (2)   Subdivision requests: Building elevations and floor
plans shall be furnished with subdivision requests illustrating exterior
building material and colors to demonstrate compliance of this section.
Building floor plans shall identify the interior storage space within each
unit.



      (3)   Decks or porches:  Provision shall be made for possible
decks, porches or additions as part of the initial dwelling unit building
plans. The unit lot shall be configured and sized to include decks or porches.



      (4)   Minimum overhang: In case of a gable roof, a minimum
12-inch soffit shall be required.



      (5)   Exterior building finish: The exterior of attached
townhome dwelling units shall include a variation in building materials which
are to be distributed throughout the building facades and coordinated into
the architectural design of the structure to create an architecturally
balanced appearance. In addition, attached townhome dwelling structures shall
comply with the following requirements:



         (a)   A minimum of 30% of the combined area of all
building facades of a structure shall have an exterior finish of brick,
natural or artificial stone.



         (b)   Except for brick, natural or artificial stone, no
townhome dwelling structure shall have more than 60% of all building facades
of one type of exterior finish.  Other acceptable materials includes
maintenance free metal or vinyl siding, glass, stucco, and cement fiber
siding.



         (c)   For the purpose of this section and material
calculations:



            1.   The area of the building facade shall not
include area devoted to windows, entrance doors, garage doors, or roof areas.



            2.   Variations in texture or style (i.e., lap
siding versus shake shingle siding) shall be considered as different
materials meeting the requirements of this section.



            3.   Integral colored split face (rock face)
concrete block shall not qualify for meeting the brick, stucco and/or natural
or artificial stone material requirements.



            4.   Multiple unit buildings in proximity to each
other shall not look alike in terms of color of siding, accent and roofing
materials. The building under consideration will be compared to two homes on
two lots on either side of it and to the three homes directly facing it.



      (6)   Facades and walls:  Each attached townhome dwelling
unit shall be articulated with projections, recesses, covered doorways,
balconies, covered box or bay windows or other similar features, dividing
large facades and walls into human scaled proportions similar to adjacent
single-family dwellings.



      (7)   Garages: Each dwelling unit shall include an attached
garage.



         (a)   Garages shall comply with the following minimum
size standards:



            1.   For dwellings with basements:  480 square
feet.



            2.   For dwellings without basements: 480 square
feet with an additional 120 square feet for storage.



      (8)   Roofs:  Each attached townhome building shall feature a
combination of primary and secondary roofs.  Primary roofs shall be
articulated by at least one of the following elements:



         (a)   Changes in place and elevation.



         (b)   Dormers or gables.



         (c)   Transitions to secondary roofs over entrances,
garages, porches, bay windows.



         (d)   Architectural design roofing materials including
composition, wood shingles (including shake), architectural asphalt shingles,
concrete, clay or ceramic tile roofs are required on all roofs.



         (e)   Overhangs must be a minimum of 12 inches.



         (f)   No bright or garish shingles are allowed.



      (9)   Side and rear facades:



         (a)   Four sided architecture shall be used for all new
townhome construction when located on or visible from an arterial roadway or
public park. Accenting materials and design elements shall be uses on all
facades.



         (b)   Each side elevation shall have at least one window
or door opening which cannot be garage.  Alternatives may be considered for
LEED or other efficiency standards.



         (c)   A maximum of 18 inches of the foundation wall may
be exposed on any elevation.



      (10)   Setbacks: Setbacks shall follow the requirements in §
152.222 with the following exceptions:



         (a)   For townhomes, approved as part of a master site
plan, using build-to-lines, the front yard build-to-line shall be established
as part of the master site plan and may be reduced to zero feet.



         (b)   Residential uses on first floor:  Whenever
residential uses are included on the first floor, the first floor elevation
shall be a minimum of two feet six inches above the sidewalk elevation
immediately adjacent to the front of the residential unit. In addition, each
first floor unit must have an individual private entrance at street level.



   (F)   Minimum design standards for multi-family (stacked units)
residential units.



      (1)   Design character:  Minimum design standards in this
section pertain to multi-family stacked units including condominiums and
apartments. The scale of these building types makes them highly visible thus
it is critical to incorporate high quality architecture. Building materials
shall be attractive in appearance, durable, and of a quality which is both
compatible with adjacent structures. All buildings shall be of good aesthetic
and architectural quality, as demonstrated by the inclusion of elements such
as accent materials, entrance and window treatments, contrasting colors,
irregular building shapes and rooflines, or other architectural features in
the overall architectural concept.



      (2)   Subdivision requests: Building elevations and floor
plans shall be furnished with subdivision requests illustrating exterior
building material and colors to demonstrate compliance of this section.
Building floor plans shall identify the interior storage space within each
unit.



      (3)   Exterior building finish:



         (a)   Major exterior surfaces on all walls shall include
a minimum of 60%, of the combined area of all building facades of a
structure, shall contain the following permitted major exterior materials:
face brick (glazed or unglazed), clay faced tile, stone masonry (granite,
limestone, marble, slate, sandstone, or quartzite) and other comparable
materials as approved by the city.



         (b)   Accent materials may include: finished texture
stucco (cement or synthetic), exterior finished wood siding (painted,
stained, or weather sealed), exterior finished metal siding (not including
sheet metal of any kind), exterior finished vinyl siding or fiber cement
siding in lap or panel design (color impregnated or painted). Panel seam
lines shall be architecturally integrated into the building design so that
they are not visible. Seam lines can either be filled, covered with accent
material or some other method to make seam lines invisible.  Accenting
materials and design shall be included on all facades.



         (c)   All building and roofing materials shall meet
current accepted industry standards, and tolerances, and shall be subject to
review and approval by the city for quality, durability, and aesthetic
appeal. The applicant shall submit to the city product samples, color
building elevations, and associated drawings which illustrate the
construction techniques to be used in the installation of such materials.



         (d)   If complementary building styles, materials, and
color schemes are proposed for a development, the developer shall submit to
the city a plan showing the distribution of the styles, materials, and colors
throughout the development.



         (e)   Building elevations shall be articulated to reduce
the mass of the building. Large blank exterior walls shall be prohibited.
Variation in elevations can be accomplished with projections, recesses,
covered doorways, balconies, covered box or bay windows or other similar
features, dividing large facades and walls into human scaled proportions.



         (f)   There shall be no height maximum for stacked
multi-family; however, the proposed height and building design will be
reviewed through the site plan review process and shall be compatible in
scale and design with other buildings in the surrounding area.



      (4)   Garages: A minimum of one-half of the number of required
parking spaces must be within attached garages or an underground parking
facility.



   (G)   Maintenance. A property maintenance agreement must be arranged
by the applicant and submitted to the City Attorney for review and comment. 
The agreement shall ensure the maintenance and upkeep of the structure and
lots to meet minimum city standards. The agreement is to be filed with the
Hennepin County Recorder's office as a deed restriction against the title of
each unit lot.



   (H)   Energy efficiency. All buildings and sites are to be sited and
developed in such a way to maximize the benefits of the site for solar
heating and passive cooling, and provide other amenities aimed at promoting
energy efficiency and sustainability.  Each new building or development
shall incorporate a minimum of three elements:



      (1)   Buildings are to be oriented on the site to optimize
passive solar heating and cooling opportunities.



      (2)   Buildings are to be oriented so as to minimize wind
loads on the structure.



      (3)   Windows are to be placed, and appropriately shaded, to
maximize solar penetration during the winter months and minimize solar
penetration during the summer months.



      (4)   Use of white membrane roofing material.



      (5)   Installation of a green roof occupying a minimum of 30%
of the total roof area.



      (6)   Install solar panels in conformance to § 152.187 to
provide at least 10% of the project's estimate electricity demand.



      (7)   A minimum of 50% of all exterior light fixture used
within the development shall be powered by solar panel energy.



      (8)   All lighting shall use LED fixtures.



      (9)   Daylight sensors or times shall be installed and used on
all exterior lighting.



      (10)   Electric vehicle stalls/plug-in's.



      (11)   Indoor bicycle parking.



      (12)   On-site recycling and organic waste disposal.



      (13)   Community garage space available to all residents.



      (14)   Other such sustainable elements and amenities as
proposed by the applicant to meet desired objectives.



   (I)   Unit mix.  In order to retain a balance of housing choice in
all new multi-family residential developments a range of unit mix is
required. Apartment and condominium buildings, not including age restricted,
shall include a mix of unit types with no more than 40% of the units
constructed as one-bedroom units and no more than 60% of any other bedroom
type.



   (J)   Site design. The character of the site, in addition to the
buildings, is an important element in creating an aesthetic pleasing
residential community.



      (1)   Orient and consolidate structure to complement exiting,
adjacent development to create a coordinated and visually attractive
residential setting.



      (2)   Buildings with frontage on a primary street shall orient
front facades parallel to the street.



      (3)   Buildings shall have a clearly defined primary
pedestrian entrance at the street level.



      (4)   Wherever a surface parking lot for an apartment
building, condominium or parking lot of four or more spaces faces a street
frontage, such frontage shall be screened with a decorative wall, railing,
hedge or a combination of these elements to a minimum height of three feet
and a maximum of three and one-half feet.



   (K)   Pedestrian environment.



      (1)   Pedestrian connections to the surrounding neighborhood
shall be provided as feasible.



      (2)   Sidewalks and trails shall be included that provides
connections to all areas of the development including community facilities,
as well as to public sidewalks, adjacent city park and/ or facilities and
transit. Detailed site plans shall be provided that demonstrates these
connections.



   (L)   Crime prevention. Building access and internal hallways shall
be so designed that any one single point of building entry cannot provide
full access to the floor in which the access is located or the entire
building.



   (M)   Community and recreational facilities.  On site amenities and
recreational facilities shall be provided in all multi-family developments.
Minimum amenities in all developments 50 units or greater shall include
outdoor common landscape areas and indoor/outdoor facilities that meet the
needs of the intended population including such things as a community/party
room, theatre, indoor/outdoor recreation areas such as swimming pools, indoor
fitness centers, tennis courts, play equipment, walking trails, community
gardens, and basketball courts. Details as to the proposed community and
recreational facilities shall be provided during site plan review.



   (N)   Roadway and driveway design.  All private roadways in
multi-family developments shall have a design speed of 25 miles per hour, and
shall have a maximum grade of 7%. All private driveways for garages in
townhouse developments shall have a maximum grade of 11%.



   (O)   Common areas. The following minimum requirements shall be
observed governing common areas:



      (1)   Ownership: All common areas within a multi-family
development (attached or detached) not dedicated to the public including, but
not limited to, open space, driveways, private drives, parking areas, play
areas, recreational facilities, etc., shall be owned in one of the following
manners:



         (a)   Condominium ownership pursuant to M.S. 515A.1-106.



         (b)    Single-family, twin-home, townhome subdivision
common areas shall be owned by the owners of each unit lot, with each owner
of a unit having an equal and undivided interest in the common area.



      (2)   Homeowners' association (HOA): A homeowners' association
shall be established for all townhome developments intended for individual
ownership, subject to review and approval of the City Attorney. The HOA shall
be responsible for all exterior building maintenance, approval of any
exterior architectural modifications, landscaping, snow clearing and regular
maintenance of private driveways and other areas owned in common.



   (P)   Lighting. New multi-family developments shall utilize
decorative lighting for all required lighting areas.



      (1)   Decorative style lighting a maximum of 15 feet in height
shall be used to illuminate all common areas.



      (2)   Decorative pedestrian scaled lighting shall be used for
all trails and pathways.



      (3)   Shoe box style lighting shall only be permitted in
parking areas of four or more vehicles.



      (4)   Wall-mounted lighting shall be used to illuminate entry
points and highlight architectural features.



      (5)   All lighting shall use downcast or shielded light source
fixtures.



   (Q)   Signs.  Development signage shall be submitted with the
initial city application and shall be considered as part of the site review
process.



(Ord. 2013-1158, passed 7-15-13)



BUSINESS DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS



ESTABLISHMENT OF BUSINESS DISTRICTS



§ 152.300  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter of the chapter defines and establishes the commercial
and industrial zoning districts within the city.  The business districts as
a whole are designed to balance the community need for employment
opportunities, goods, services and tax base diversification with their impact
on neighboring uses.  The following business zoning classifications, except
PCDD and PUD, are hereby established within the City of Brooklyn Park.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.301  “B-1" OFFICE PARK DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The “B-1" Limited Business District is intended
to provide a district primarily for office uses, with other accessory retail
and service uses offered on site to serve the primary use or their employees.



   (B)   This district may be applied only to those properties
designated for office, commercial, or mixed use development on the
Comprehensive Land Use Map.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.302  “B-2" NEIGHBORHOOD RETAIL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The “B-2" Neighborhood Retail Business District
is intended to provide a district which encourages compact centers for retail
sales and services that serve the adjacent neighborhoods and to preserve and
protect the general character of the adjacent areas.  The city has
determined that certain uses may present a greater impact on adjacent land
uses than others due to characteristics unique to the function and design of
the particular use.



   (B)   This district may be applied only to those properties
designated for commercial or mixed use development on the Comprehensive Land
Use Map.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.303  “B-3" GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The “B-3" General Business District is intended
to provide centralized areas for businesses that have a community or regional
customer base in that they generally draw customers from farther away than
the adjacent neighborhoods.



   (B)   This district may be applied only to those properties
designated for commercial or mixed use development on the Comprehensive Land
Use Map.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.304  “B-4" VEHICLE SALES AND SHOWROOM DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The “B-4" Vehicle Sales and Showroom District is
intended to provide areas for vehicle sales businesses that draw from a
regional customer base and has outdoor storage, display and/or sales of
vehicles and/or recreational equipment. 



   (B)   This district may be applied only to those properties
designated for commercial development on the Comprehensive Land Use Map.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.305  “BP" BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The “BP" Business Park District is designed to
provide areas in which to locate businesses that enhance the city's tax base,
have few customers coming to the site, but may have a large employee base,
involve manufacturing, warehousing, office uses, and other accessory retail
and service uses offered on site to service the primary use or their
employees.  The properties and buildings in this district must be designed
to promote a campus-like setting that exhibits a landscape theme and high
quality exterior building materials.



   (B)   This district may be applied only to those properties
designated for office, commercial, industrial, or mixed use development on
the Comprehensive Land Use Map.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2014-1180, passed 9-21-14)



§ 152.306  “I" GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The “I” General Industrial District is designed
to provide a district for warehousing and industrial uses that may present
negative off-site impacts to adjacent properties and are potentially
environmentally sensitive due to the characteristics of the use of the
property, and/or have an extensive amount of outdoor storage requirements.



   (B)   This district may be applied only to those areas designated
for industrial development on the Comprehensive Land Use Map.



(Ord. 2000-936)



REQUIRED LOT AREA AND DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR BUSINESS DISTRICTS



§ 152.320  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish minimum area and
dimensional requirements for the business zoning districts to allow
conformance with the policies of the Comprehensive Plan, promote open space
around structures, provide green area and space for the enjoyment of all, and
protect public easements.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.321  STANDARDS.



   The following standards are established for the business zoning
districts (B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, BP, and I) and must apply to all properties
within these districts:



   (A)   No required lot area, yard or open space allocated to a
structure or lot in compliance with this chapter may be used to satisfy the
minimum lot area, yard, or open space requirement for any other structure or
lot, unless modified by this chapter.



   (B)   The maximum amount of building footprint and impervious
surface on any one parcel within the business districts may adhere to the
following restrictions:



 




Figure 152.321.01 Maximum Allowable Building Footprint and Impervious Surface



Zoning District
 
Maximum Building Footprint
 
Minimum Building Footprint
 
Maximum Impervious Surface on all Sites Receiving Site Plan Approval Prior to
(March 5, 2012)
 
Maximum Impervious Surface on all Sites Receiving Site Plan Approval after
(March 5, 2012)


B-1
 
35%
 
NA
 
70%
 
70%


B-2
 
35%
 
NA
 
75%
 
70%


B-3
 
35%
 
NA
 
80%
 
75%


B-4
 
35%
 
10%
 
80%
 
75%


BP
 
FAR 1:1
 
NA
 
85%
 
70%


I
 
FAR 1:1
 
NA
 
85%
 
75%




 



   (C)   The minimum lot area and width for each parcel within a
business district must adhere to the following restrictions:



 


Figure 152.321.02 Required Lot Area and Width






Zoning District

 

Minimum Lot Area in Square Feet

 

Lot Width in Lineal Feet




B-1

 

15,000

 

100




B-2

 

25,000

 

125




B-3

 

25,000

 

150




B-4

 

87,120

 

150




BP

 

25,000

 

100




I

 

40,000

 

150




B-1, B-2, and B-3 for Care centers and convalescent homes

 

600 square feet of lot area for each person cared for (design capacity)

 

See District Requirements Above





 



   (D)   All uses must occur within the principal structure(s) on the
property.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2012-1133, passed 3-5-12)



§ 152.322  SETBACKS.



   Principal buildings and accessory structures must comply with the
following setback restrictions from property lines within the business
districts:



 


Figure 152.322.03 Minimum Required Setbacks




 

B-1

 

B-2

 

B-3

 

B-4

 

BP

 

I




From public right-of-way

 

50

 

50

 

50

 

50

 

50

 

50




Side - From interior property line (Except as noted below)

 

10

 

10

 

15

 

15

 

15

 

15




Rear - From interior property line

 

30

 

30

 

30

 

30

 

30

 

30




Side or Rear - From residential district property line

 

50

 

75

 

75

 

75

 

110

 

110




 



   (A)   Interior side building setbacks for the BP and I district are
the height of the building or the distance shown in the above table,
whichever is greater.



   (B)   A 35 foot bermed and landscaped area must be included within
the required setback area from residential district property lines.



   (C)   The interior property line may be reduced to zero feet where a
property has a railroad trackage abutting the interior side of the lot and
the existing or planned principal structure on the property has railroad
loading docks.



   (D)   The following features may extend into the required setback
from a public right-of-way:



      (1)   3 feet - Pilasters, lintels, stoops, ornamental
features, cornices, eaves, bays, gutters, and similar projections



      (2)   10 feet - Canopies, awnings, and other similar features
as determined by the City Manager.



      (3)   25 feet - outdoor or patio food service (restaurants
only).  These areas may be covered with a canopy or awning, but may not be
enclosed.



   (E)   Zero lot line development standards.  A business may request
to be a zero lot line development if all of the following conditions are met:



      (1)   Each lot of record comprising a zoning lot must meet the
minimum lot area and width requirements of the district.



      (2)   The landscaping and screening provision of this chapter
must apply to each lot.



      (3)   Individual land uses within each zoning lot must each
adhere to the applicable minimum parking requirements of this chapter.



      (4)   Cross access easements must be required to accommodate
shared parking arrangements and access drives, and evidence of the
maintenance of all shared facilities may be provided to the city and may be
recorded with the resolution approving the Conditional Use Permit or Site
Plan Review (whichever applies according to §§ 152.030 through 152.039).



      (5)   Signed agreements for the maintenance of shared signs
may be provided to the city and may be recorded with the resolution approving
the Conditional Use Permit or Site Plan Review (whichever applies according
to §§ 152.030 through 152.039).  For the purpose of determining the use,
placement and number of signs for a zoning lot and the individual uses, the
entire zero lot development may be considered a “business property” as
referenced in the city’s Sign Ordinance.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.323  CLEAR VIEW TRIANGLES.



   (A)   Intersections.  No building, structure, fence or planting may
be erected inside a 50 foot clear view triangle between the rights-of-way of
intersecting streets.  This restriction may not apply to trees trimmed to a
distance of at least seven feet above the curb line or to shrubs which do not
exceed more than three feet in height and do not obstruct visibility across
the above described triangle. 



   (B)   Access drives.  No building, structure fence or planting may
be erected inside a 30 foot clear view triangle between a street right-of-way
and an access driveway.  This restriction may not apply to standard
mailboxes, trees trimmed to a distance of at least three feet in height at
maturity and do not obstruct visibility across the above described triangle.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.324  BULK RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Floor area ratio. The maximum floor area of commercial
buildings must not exceed a one- to-one ratio unless otherwise approved in a
Conditional Use Permit.



   (B)   Minimum height limitations.  The minimum height for a
principal building on any property must be no less than 15 feet in height as
measured from the highest adjacent grade to the top of the roof.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.325  HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   Unless otherwise approved through a site plan approval all
non-residential uses on parcels adjacent to residential uses in residential
districts must be constructed at a height no greater than 35 feet or the
height of any residential use, whichever is greater.  Consideration to
approve greater height may include, but not limited to, existing conditions,
increased setbacks, and buffering.



   (B)   Exemptions.  Height limitations do not apply to radio and
T.V. antennas, belfries, steeples, cooling towers, and water towers.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2012-1133, passed 3-5-12)



PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, AND TEMPORARY USES IN BUSINESS DISTRICTS



§ 152.340  PURPOSE.



   The following section establishes a listing of the permitted,
conditional, and temporary uses for the business zoning districts (B-1, B-2,
B-3, B-4, BP, and I).  The uses have been assigned to the appropriate
business districts to allow reasonable use of properties in a manner that is
compatible with the purpose of each business zoning district and the overall
purpose of this zoning code and the code of ordinances.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.341  PROPOSED DEVELOPMENTS SUBJECT TO SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS.



   All proposed developments are subject to the Site Plan Review
requirements found in §§ 152.030 through 152.039.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.342  PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES.



   Permitted and conditional uses for each business district are defined
in the following table:



 


Figure 152.342.01 Uses in Business Districts






“P” = Permitted Use    “C” = Conditional Use  “NP” = Not
Permitted




Principal Use

 

B-1

 

B-2

 

B-3

 

B-4

 

BP

 

I



Assembly, banquet,  convention halls, or conference centers
 

NP

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

NP

 

NP



Automobile rental containing more than six cars on site
 

NP

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

NP

 

NP



Body art in compliance with M.S. Chapter 146B and Chapter 123 of this code
 

NP

 

P

 

P

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP



Bus or truck storage or service shops, including fuel stations
 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

C



Business, trade, or non-academic colleges operated for profit
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

NP



Care centers, convalescent homes, hospitals, veterinary clinics, and assisted
living facilities
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

NP

 

NP



Clubs
 

NP

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

NP

 

NP



Commercial indoor recreational facilities under 2,450 square feet
 
NP
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Commercial indoor recreational facilities over 2,450 square feet
 

NP

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Commercial kennels in accordance with § 92.15
 

NP

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Commercial outdoor recreational facilities
 

NP

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

NP

 

NP



Concrete or asphalt mixing plants, concrete block fabrication, or builders’
or contractors’ yards, brick yards, and accessory sale of dirt, sand,
gravel, rock, concrete blocks, bricks, etc.
 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

C



Daycare facilities, licensed
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Distribution center
 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

P

 

P



Fabrication or assembly of heavy equipment or vehicles
 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

C



Funeral homes
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP



Helicopter pad/landing site
 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

C

 

NP



Hotels and motels
 

NP

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

NP



Manufacturing, assembly, processing, fabricating, brewing, distilling, and
accessory sale of the product produced on site, except those uses further
restricted in this ordinance.
 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

P

 

P



Multiple principal structures on a single lot
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Multiple family dwelling and cluster housing in compliance with § 152.344
 

NP

 

C

 

C

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP



Offices, banks or clinics
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Public and quasi-public facilities
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

NP

 

C



Public schools, including charter schools in compliance with § 152.182
 

C

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP



Religious institutions, in compliance with §§ 152.180 through 152.182
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

NP

 

NP



Restaurants, brewpub
 

NP

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Restaurants, Class I, in compliance with § 152.033
 

NP

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Restaurants, Class II
 

NP

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Sales and Service



   All structures for retail or service businesses with 25,000 square feet
or less, excluding those mentioned elsewhere in this section

 

NP

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

C

 

C




   All structures for retail or service businesses with between 25,000 and
50,000 square feet, excluding those mentioned elsewhere in this section

 

NP

 

C

 

P

 

P

 

NP

 

NP




   All structures for retail or service businesses with 50,000 square feet
or more, excluding those mentioned elsewhere in this section

 

NP

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

NP

 

NP




   Auto oriented repair services

 

NP

 

NP

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C




   Carwashes

 

NP

 

NP

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

NP




   Currency exchanges and pawnshops in compliance with § 152.344

 

NP

 

NP

 

C

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP




   Fuel stations

 

NP

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C




   Heavy equipment, machinery and farm vehicle sales, contractors yards,
bulk firewood sales, and gravel and rock sales

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

P




   Indoor sales of automobiles, trucks and recreational vehicles and the
like in compliance with § 152.344

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

C

 

C

 

C




   Sexually oriented businesses in compliance with § 152.343

 

NP

 

NP

 

P

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP




   Showrooms and sales of automobiles, trucks and recreational vehicles
and equipment and the like in compliance with § 152.344

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

C

 

NP

 

NP



   Wholesale, broker and auction dealer of automobiles, trucks and
recreational vehicles and the like in compliance with § 152.343
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Self-service storage facility
 

NP

 

NP

 

C

 

C

 

NP

 

C



Social clubs
 

NP

 

NP

 

C

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP



Stone, marble or granite grinding and cutting
 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

C



Theaters, excluding drive-ins
 

NP

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

NP

 

NP



Transient sales, in compliance with § 152.344
 

NP

 

NP

 

C

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP



Truck or motor freight terminal
 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

C



Vehicle impound yards
 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

C



Warehousing
 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP

 

P

 

P





 



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2001-952, passed 5-14-01; Am. Ord. 2002-978, passed
8-12-02; Am. Ord. 2003-989, passed 2-10-03; Am. Ord. 2003-1000, passed
6-16-03; Am. Ord. 2003-1008, passed 11-3-03; Am. Ord. 2004-018, passed
8-23-04; Am. Ord. 2004-1024, passed 12-13-04; Am. Ord. 2005-1032, passed
2-7-05; Am. Ord. 2006-1058, passed 6-5-06; Am. Ord. 2007-1070, passed 3-26-
07; Am. Ord. 2010-1122, passed 12-20-10; Am. Ord. 2012-1133, passed 3-5-12;
Am. Ord. 2012-1138, passed 4-16-12; Am. Ord. 2012-1139, passed 4-16-12; Am.
Ord. 2012-1149, passed 9-4-12; Am. Ord. 2014-1169, passed 5-5-14; Am. Ord.
2014-1180, passed 9-2-14; Am. Ord. 2014-1182, passed 10-6-14; Am. Ord.
2015-1198, passed 10-12-15; Am. Ord. 2016-2011, passed 11-14-16; Am. Ord.
2018-1232, passed 7-9-18)



§ 152.343  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR PERMITTED USES.



   Some permitted uses are further regulated to promote the health, safety
and general welfare.  If these regulations are met, the use is considered
permitted subject to the Site Plan Review requirements in §§ 152.030
through 152.039.



   (A)   Sexually oriented businesses.



      (1)   All entrances to the business, with the exception of
emergency fire exits which are not usable by patrons, must be visible from
the public right-of-way.  When such businesses are located within an
enclosed commercial complex, all patron entrances may open onto the common
concourse.



      (2)   Layout of the publicly accessible areas must be designed
so that the management of the establishment and any law enforcement personnel
inside the business can observe all patrons while they have access to any
merchandise offered for sale.



      (3)   The site must be at least 750 feet from any school;
daycare/preschool; library; park, playground, or other public or private
recreational facilities in any zone; and another adult entertainment/adult
service business.



      (4)   No establishment may be open to the public from the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.



      (5)   Signs visible to the public comply with the city’s
sign ordinance and may not contain graphic descriptions or representations of
the adult theme of the operation.



      (6)   All establishments may apply for and obtain a license
from the City of Brooklyn Park before a building permit may be issued.



   (B)   Wholesale, broker, and auction dealer of automobiles.



      (1)   Must meet minimum state guidelines for dealer license
under M. S., Chapters 168, 168A, and 325F, pertaining to dealer licensing and
motor vehicle titles and registration, as well as Minnesota Rules, sections
7400.0100 through 7400.6000.



      (2)   No storage and display of vehicles is allowed.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2016-2011, passed 11-14-16)



§ 152.344  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR CONDITIONAL USES.



   No permit may be issued for construction for a building, structure or
land use that is intended to be used for conditional uses unless a
Conditional Use Permit has been granted by the City Council in accordance
with §§ 152.030 through 152.039.  Some businesses may be required to
submit additional information above and beyond that shown in §§ 152.030
through 152.039, those conditions are defined in this section.



   (A)   Currency exchanges. 



      (1)   All entrances to the business, with the exception of
emergency fire exits which are not usable by patrons, must be visible from
the public right-of-way.  When such businesses are located within an
enclosed commercial complex, all patron entrances must open onto the common
concourse.



      (2)   Layout of the publicly accessible areas must be designed
so that the management of the establishment and any law enforcement personnel
inside the business can observe all patrons while they have access to any
merchandise offered for sale.



      (3)   The site must be at least 500 feet from the property
line of a pawnshop, an adult entertainment/adult service, or any residential
district and one-half mile from a site containing another currency exchange
business.  The site plan must show the location of the proposed currency
exchange business and any other currency exchange business if any are located
within one mile of the proposed site.



      (4)   All establishments may apply for and obtain a license
from the State of Minnesota, before a building permit may be issued.



   (B)   Pawnshops.



      (1)   All entrances to the business, with the exception of
emergency fire exits which are not usable by patrons, must be visible from
the public right-of-way.  When such businesses are located within an
enclosed commercial complex, all patron entrances must open onto the common
concourse.



      (2)   Layout of the publicly accessible areas must be designed
so that the management of the establishment and any law enforcement personnel
inside the business can observe all patrons while they have access to any
merchandise offered for sale.



      (3)   The site must be at least 500 feet from the property
line of a site containing a religious institution, school,
day-care/preschool, another pawnshop, an adult entertainment/adult service
business, a currency exchange or any residential district.



      (4)   All establishments must apply for and obtain a license
from the City of Brooklyn Park, before a building permit may be issued.



   (C)   Automobile sales and showrooms.  The CUP application must be
accompanied by plans showing the following:



      (1)   Lot requirements.



         (a)   Contiguous property.  Motor vehicle sales must be
on contiguous lots not separated by a public street, alley or other use.



         (b)   Access driveways.



            1.   Distance from intersections.  The distance
of the driveway from any street intersection must be not less than 50 feet,
unless, in the opinion of the City Manager, present or future traffic
conditions warrant greater distances, such greater distances may be required.



            2.   Driveway angles. The minimum driveway angle
to street must be 60 degrees.



            3.   Separation between driveways.  The minimum
distance between a driveway and an adjacent property must be five feet at the
curb cut.



      (2)   Site design.



         (a)   Impervious surface.  All areas on which motor
vehicles are stored or displayed must be paved with concrete or a bituminous
surface.  No display, sale or storage of automobiles or other vehicles are
permitted on landscaped areas.



         (b)   Parking.  In addition to the requirements of §§
152.140 through 152.146, the parking areas may be:



            1.   Shown and designated on the site plan,



            2.   Kept free of display vehicles, on a continual
basis, and,



            3.   Appropriately designated with signs for use
by customers and employees.



         (c)   Damaged and inoperable vehicles.  All damaged and
inoperable vehicles may be kept in an enclosed building or area completely
screened from public streets and adjacent property.



         (d)   Display vehicle parking.



            1.   Each display vehicle parking space must meet
the required size of a parking space as defined in §§ 152.140 through
152.146, and must be striped accordingly. 



            2.   No display vehicles may be parked on grass,
curb islands, sidewalks, other landscaped areas or in the required customer
parking.



            3.   No vehicles may be displayed on elevated
platforms, jacks, or berms.  However, parking will be allowed in
approved/designated concrete display areas with a maximum height of six
inches above the parking lot surface.



            4.   No rows of display vehicles may be longer
than 180 feet.  Landscaped areas with overstory deciduous trees are required
to separate rows of display vehicles.  Required parking lot open space areas
may be larger than typically required in the district to accomplish this
objective.



            5.   No display parking of vehicles may be
permitted in the drive aisles.



         (e)   No outside storage of scrap metal, auto parts, or
the like is allowed.



         (f)   No vehicles may be unloaded from transport trucks
in the public rights-of-way.



         (g)   Signs.  In addition to the regulations found
elsewhere in the City Code, the following may apply:



            1.   No signs may be permitted in or on any
display vehicles except the following and no signs may be readable from a
public right-of-way or adjacent property:



               a.   Disclosure statements required by state
and/or federal law.



               b.   Identification of the displayed
vehicles by make, model, year and price.



            2.   Window signs must be limited to 25% of the
window area, up to a maximum of 200 square feet.



         (h)   All outdoor illumination on sales lots may be
provided with lenses, reflectors, or shades, which will concentrate the light
upon the premises so as to prevent glare or direct rays of light from being
visible upon any adjacent public right-of-way or any private property
occupied for residential purposes.  Lighting from any source on the property
may not exceed three foot candles as measured from the centerline of any
adjacent street nor three foot candles at any property line which is not also
a public right-of-way line.



      (3)   Building requirements.



         (a)   The City Council may review and approve all facade
materials to ensure quality architectural design.



         (b)   The orientation of the buildings must be toward
the public rights-of-way and must be setback a distance no greater than 200
feet.



   (D)   Passenger vehicle fuel and/or service stations.



      (1)   All applications for Conditional Use Permits must be
accompanied by the following:



         (a)   An evaluation of subsurface conditions, soil
resistivity and groundwater table conditions prepared by a professional
engineer, licensed by the State of Minnesota.



         (b)   Information that demonstrates compliance with the
installation requirements of §§ 93.30 through 93.41 of the City Code and
the requirements of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



      (2)   Minimum frontage and lot area.  The minimum frontage on
any street must be 150 feet for a station with four pump/meter stations or
less; and stations with additional pump/meter stations may provide additional
frontage and area to provide equivalent and sufficient space for servicing
vehicles, for off-street parking, for safe vehicular approaches into the
station, and for visibility for pedestrians and drivers.



      (3)   Building setbacks (from property lines). 



         (a)   From public right-of-way - 60 feet.



         (b)   Interior side or rear - 30 feet.



         (c)   Residential - see district requirements.



      (4)   Canopies or other weather protection structure (free
standing or projecting from a building). 



         (a)   Setbacks (from property lines):



            1.   Public right-of-way - 40 feet.



            2.   Interior side or rear - 30 feet.



            3.   Residential - 50 feet.



         (b)   Maximum height.  Twenty-five feet.



         (c)   Lighting. 



            1.   Neon banding, whether around the exterior of
the canopy or behind panels are not permitted.



            2.   With the exception of permitted signs, no
lighting or the face of the canopy is allowed.  This includes a prohibition
on backlit panels on the face of the canopy.



            3.   All lighting installed must be recessed into
the canopy and lights must be directed downward and away from adjacent
properties in compliance with §§ 152.110 through 152.114.



         (d)   Signs.  All signs must conform to requirements of
Chapter 150 (Sign Chapter).



      (5)   Pump/meter islands.



         (a)   Setbacks.



            1.   From public right-of-way - 50 feet.



            2.   Interior side or rear - 40 feet.



            3.   Residential - 100 feet.



         (b)   Vehicle stacking.



            1.   Vehicle stacking for gas pump dispensing must
be provided for at least one car beyond the pump island in each direction in
which access can be gained to the pump.  The required vehicle stacking area
for gas dispensing may not interfere with the internal circulation drive
aisles or designated parking aisles.



            2.   Vehicle stacking for gas pump dispensing may
not be permitted in any public right-of-way, private access easement, or
within the required parking setback area.



      (6)   Landscaping.



         (a)   Sites with areas adjacent to residential uses. 
The setback from residential district property lines must include a 35 foot
bermed and landscaped area.



         (b)   From public rights-of-way.  The setback from
public rights-of-way must include a 15 foot bermed and landscaped area.



         (c)   From interior side and rear property lines.  The
setback from public rights-of-way must include a five foot landscaped area.



      (7)   Paving required.  All paved areas must be surfaced with
concrete or bituminous surfacing to control dust and provide adequate
drainage, designed to meet the requirements of a minimum seven ton axle load.



      (8)   Access driveways.  The distance of the driveway from
any street intersection must be not less than 100 feet, unless, in the
opinion of the City Manager, present or future traffic conditions warrant
greater distances then such greater distances may be required.



        (9)   If the business is located in a shopping center or
other integrated development, it must be in harmony with the rest of the
center or development.



        (10)   Layout of the publicly accessible areas on the site
may be designed so that the employees of the establishment and any law
enforcement personnel inside the business can observe all patrons while they
have access to any merchandise offered for sale in the building or are at
fuel pumping areas.



   (E)   Transient sales.  All applications for Conditional Use
Permits must be in compliance with the following.



      (1)   The location for the sale must have a minimum 150 foot
setback from any intersection.



      (2)   The location for the sale must meet the minimum setbacks
for a principal building on the property, and may not be permitted on the
following: public rights-of-way, landscaped areas, fire lanes, or drive
aisles.



      (3)   The location for the sale may not occupy more than 100
square feet.



      (4)   The location for the sale may not occupy the required
minimum parking spaces for the principal use(s) on the site.



      (5)   The location for the sale must be large enough to
provide adequate parking.



      (6)   Use of the property for transient sales may not exceed
ten days within a maximum period of six months.



      (7)   Transient sales may not take place between the hours of
6:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.



      (8)   No overnight storage of transient merchant equipment or
merchandise may be allowed.  Transient merchant equipment may be permitted
on the premises only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on a day
transient sales are to take place.



      (9)   Signs must be in conformance with Chapter 150 of the
City Code and may not include horns, bells, loudspeakers, balloons, pennants,
or other attention getting devices.



        (10)   A license may be issued pursuant to the City Code,
and may be conspicuously posted in the transient merchant’s location.



        (11)   Written permission to occupy the property must be
filed with the application for Conditional Use Permit.



   (F)   Social clubs.



      (1)   The hours of operation available to customers are
limited to 10:00 am to midnight daily.  Minor patrons must follow curfew
ordinances. 



      (2)   The business owner must provide an up-to-date security
plan that is acceptable to the Police Chief.  The security plan must be
reviewed annually. 



      (3)   Commercial kitchen facilities must be licensed and
maintained on-site for preparation and service of food and non-alcoholic
beverages available to patrons.



      (4)   Disorderly conduct, as listed in Section 112.003(C),
shall be grounds for revocation. 



      (5)   The establishment may impose a cover charge.



      (6)   The establishment may have live entertainment
(including, but not limited to bands, comedians, and disc jockeys)



      (7)   The establishment is not eligible for alcoholic
beverages under any license type



   (G)   Residential/multifamily/cluster housing in a B-2, Neighborhood
Retail District. All applications for Conditional Use Permits must be in
compliance with the following:



      (1)   It is part of a commercial development permitted within
the district.



      (2)   The building design and placement provide a desirable
residential environment.



      (3)   Access to open space, plazas, and pedestrian ways is
provided.



      (4)   The housing is located above the ground floor.



      (5)   The minimum spacing between buildings is at least equal
to the average heights of the buildings except where dwellings share common
walls.



      (6)   The total number of units provided on an individual
parcel does not exceed eight units.



   (H)   Residential/multifamily/cluster housing in a B-3, General
Business District. All applications for Conditional Use Permits must be in
compliance with the following:



      (1)   It is part of a larger commercial development permitted
within the district.



      (2)   The building design and placement provide a desirable
residential environment.



      (3)   Access to off-site parks, open space, plazas and
pedestrianways is provided.



      (4)   The housing represents a maximum of 30% of the ground
floor area of total development. 100% of floor area above the ground floor
may be developed as housing.



      (5)   A minimum of 12% of the site area is developed outdoor
recreation area.



      (6)   The minimum spacing between buildings is at least equal
to the average heights of the buildings except where dwellings share common
walls.



      (7)    All dwelling units are at or above the grade of all
land within a distance of 25 feet from all faces of the buildings.



      (8)   Buildings are located a minimum of 15 feet from the back
of the curbline of internal private roadways or parking lots.



      (9)   Housing density does not exceed 25 units per acre.



      (10)   The use is in conformance with the comprehensive plan.



   (I)   Commercial indoor recreational facilities over 2,450 square
feet in the General Industrial District must meet the following conditions.



      (1)   Site design.



         (a)   In addition to the requirements of §§ 152.140
through 152.146, parking areas must be:



            1.   Shown and designated on the site plan;



            2.   Appropriately designated with signs for use
by customers and employees;



            3.   Large enough to provide adequate parking for
all uses on the site;



            4.   Separated by distance, location, and/or
special landscaping provisions between cars and trucks.



      (2)   If located in a multi-tenant building or development,
the use must be compatible with the rest of the building or development.



      (3)   Signs must be in conformance with Chapter 150 of the
City Code.



      (4)   Adequate lighting for night time pedestrian use must be
provided.



      (5)   The building design and site plan must provide a safe
and desirable pedestrian environment.



      (6)   The use is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan.



   (J)   Indoor Sales of automobiles, trucks, and recreational vehicles
and the like.



      (1)   Must meet minimum state guidelines for dealer license
under M.S., Chapters 168, 168A, and 325F, pertaining to dealer licensing and
motor vehicle titles and registration, as well as Minnesota Rule, sections
7400.0100 through 7400.6000.



      (2)   Storage and display of vehicles must be completely
enclosed inside a building if vehicles are located on site.



      (3)   No vehicles may be unloaded from transport trucks in the
public rights-of-way.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2001-952, passed 5-14-01; Am. Ord. 2002-977, passed
6-24-02; Am. Ord. 2006-1058, passed 6-5-06; Am. Ord. 2010-1122, passed
12-20-10; Am. Ord. 2012-1133, passed 3-5-12; Am. Ord. 2012-1139, passed
4-16-12; Am. Ord. 2015-1198, passed 10-12-15; Am. Ord. 2016-2011, passed
11-14-16)



§ 152.345  TEMPORARY USES AND EVENTS.



   This section allows for certain temporary events and uses that are
accessory to the principle use in a business district and typically occur for
short durations on an infrequent basis. All events or uses may be conducted
by the proprietor of the business conducted within the principal structure on
the property.



   (A)   Administrative permit required.  Permits will not be issued
until the  issues discussed below have been resolved and the event or use is
demonstrated to be in compliance with §§ 152.030 through 152.039 and all
applicable City Codes to the satisfaction of the City Manager.



   (B)   Temporary events.  Permits may be required for any event with
temporary structures or tents, preparation and service of food or beverages
for sale, or traffic or parking congestion beyond that expected without the
event.  The events include outdoor religious events, tent sales, employment
fairs, and other similar outdoor uses and events as determined by the City
Manager.  Construction activities related to the construction, demolition,
or rehabilitation of a dwelling, building, or structure are not regulated by
this section.



      (1)   Events may be limited to ten consecutive days per
calendar year and all equipment, structures, signs, or other evidence of the
use may be removed from the property one day after termination of the event. 



      (2)   Disturbed turfed areas must be restored to their
pre-event condition within three weeks.



      (3)   Sanitary facilities must be provided as required by the
City Manager.



      (4)   Any impairment to traffic flow must be documented and
mitigated to the satisfaction of the City Manager.



   (C)   Temporary uses.  Temporary uses may include environmental
monitoring of a use and structures for hiding the monitoring equipment and
other similar outdoor uses as determined by the City Manager.  No
administrative approval of temporary uses may be given for structures
primarily for storage associated with the principal use.



      (1)   Duration of permit.  The permit must include a specific
date, not to exceed one year, during which time the use may exist.  By the
specified date, the use and any associated structure(s) must be removed from
the property and the site returned to a condition that meets or exceeds the
pre-use condition.



      (2)   Financial guarantees.  Financial guarantees or a cash
escrow may be required at the time of permit application to guarantee the
restoration of the site to its pre-use condition.



(Ord. 2000-936)



BUSINESS DISTRICT ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES



§ 152.360  PURPOSE.



   This section provides standards that accessory uses and structures in
business districts are required to meet.  These standards allow the property
owner to use the property in ways that are normally associated with the
principal business use of the property and allow the city appropriate means
of implementing the Comprehensive Plan’s goals, objectives and policies for
business neighborhoods.  The accessory uses listed in § 152.361 are
permitted/conditional in the individual commercial zoning districts provided
that:



   (A)   Such uses are subordinate and incidental to the principal use
of the property.



   (B)   No accessory use is permitted that changes the character,
rating or appearance of the property or any structures on the property.



   (C)   No accessory use or structure other than a fence or a
temporary construction office for a project to be built on the property is
permitted in any business district without a principal use occupying the
property.



   (D)   No exterior storage or display of equipment, materials or
products is allowed, except as permitted by this section and Chapter 150 of
the City Code.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.361  ACCESSORY USES.



   The following table provides a listing of accessory uses permitted in
each commercial district.  Other similar uses may be reviewed by the City
Manager.  These uses may be further regulated in § 152.362:



 


Figure 152.361.01 Accessory Uses in Business Districts






“P” = Permitted Use  “C” = Conditional Use  “NP” = Not Permitted




Accessory Use

 
B-1
 
B-2
 
B-3
 
B-4
 
BP
 
I


Antennas, satellite dishes and the like as regulated by §§ 152.090 through
152.096
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Beekeeping
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Buildings temporarily located for purposes of construction on the premises
for a period not to extend beyond the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
or the end of construction
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Car wash (automatic) when accessory to a fuel station in compliance with §
152.362
 
NP
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
NP


Cocktail room
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP


Community garden as regulated by § 152.184
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Crematories/Crematoriums when accessory to a funeral home subject to the
state license and regulation process
 
P
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP


Drive-through windows
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C


Farmers' market in compliance with § 152.362
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C


Gas tanks (above ground) for propane, liquid nitrogen, etc. (excludes motor
vehicle fuel) when fully screened or located out of public view
 
NP
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Live entertainment in conjunction with a Class I, II, or brewpub restaurant
 
NP
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Live entertainment in conjunction with a taproom or cocktail room
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
P
 
P


Live entertainment in conjunction with a Class I, II, or brewpub restaurant
where a cover charge is required
 
NP
 
NP
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C


Live entertainment in conjunction with a taproom or cocktail room where a
cover charge is required
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
C
 
C


Loading docks in compliance with §§ 152.140 through 152.148
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Mobile food units in compliance with § 152.362
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Outdoor pet runs in conjunction with a commercial kennel
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
C
 
C


Outdoor sales and display in compliance with § 152.362(D) and (H)
 
NP
 
NP
 
C
 
C
 
NP
 
NP


Outdoor storage in compliance with § 152.362(I)
 
NP
 
NP
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C


Overnight recreational vehicle/recreational equipment parking or camping
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP


Repair of vehicles when accessory to a vehicle sales business in conformance
with §§ 152.340 through 152.345
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
C
 
NP
 
NP


Restaurants, Class I, in compliance with §§ 152.033 and 152.362(C)
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Restaurants, Class II, in compliance with § 152.362(C)
 
NP
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C


Retail and service businesses as regulated by § 152.362
 
P
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
P
 
P


Seasonal (temporary) greenhouses and garden centers in compliance with §
152.362(B)
 
NP
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
NP
 
NP


Seasonal sales (temporary) of Christmas trees
 
NP
 
P
 
P
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP


Seasonal sales (temporary) of fireworks between June 15 and July 5
 
NP
 
P
 
P
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP


Signs as regulated by Chapter 150 of the City Code
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Solar energy system in conformance with § 152.187
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Staging area in compliance with §§ 152.140 through 152.148
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Storage shed when accessory to daycare facilities or religious institutions
in compliance with § 152.362
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Structures designed to house environmental monitoring equipment
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C


Taproom
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
NP
 
C
 
C


Telecommunication towers as regulated in §§ 152.090 through 152.096
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C


Transient sales, in compliance with § 152.344
 

NP

 

NP

 

C

 

NP

 

NP

 

NP



Exterior, food and beverage vending machines, ice machines, and propane tank
exchanges in compliance with § 152.362
 
NP
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Warehousing, incidental repair, or processing in compliance with § 152.362
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Waste and recycling storage as regulated in §§ 98.01 through 98.16 of the
City Code and §§ 152.290 through 152.293
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P


Wind energy conversion system in conformance with § 152.187
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P










(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2001-952, passed 5-14-01; Am. Ord. 2002-977, passed
6-24-02; Am. Ord. 2003-989, passed 2-10-03; Am. Ord. 2003-997, passed
5-12-03; Am. Ord. 2003-1004, passed 10-6-03; Am. Ord. 2003-1008, passed
11-3-03; Am. Ord. 2005-1032, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 2007-1081, passed
11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2010-1118, passed 10-4-10; Am. Ord. 2012-1133, passed
3-5-12; Am. Ord. 2012-1139, passed 4-16-12; Am. Ord. 2012-1143, passed
5-21-12; Am. Ord. 2012-1149, passed 9-4- 12; Am. Ord. 2013-1153, passed
1-28-13; Am. Ord. 2014-1177, passed 7-7-14; Am. Ord. 2014-1182, passed
10-6-14; Am. Ord. 2015-1191, passed 5-18-15)



§ 152.362  ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY USES.



   Certain accessory uses have characteristics that require additional
regulation by the city to assure compatibility with other business properties
and neighborhoods.  The following accessory uses must comply with the
following additional performance standards:



   (A)   Car washes in the B-2 district. 



      (1)   The use must be accessory to a vehicle fuel station.



      (2)   The lot must be a minimum of two acres.



      (3)   The building/structure housing the car wash must be no
closer than 100 feet to the residential district boundary.



      (4)   Additional regulations may be required through the
Conditional Use Permit process to mitigate noise and/or other potential
nuisances.



   (B)   Seasonal greenhouses or garden centers. The Conditional Use
Permit may reflect the location, extent, content and allowable time period,
the location, appearance and size of any outdoor seasonal greenhouse or
garden center.  The Conditional Use Permit must also comply with the
following:



      (1)   The area(s) designated may not be located in the
required parking areas, block sidewalks, or interfere with public safety.



      (2)   The area(s) designated may not be permitted in the
required setback from residential districts or public rights-of-way.



      (3)   The proprietor of the business must keep a copy of the
Conditional Use Permit on the premises and demonstrate compliance with the
permit upon inspection.



      (4)   Conditional Use Permits may be revoked by the City
Council if the activity is not used on an annual basis or if violations to
any of the above regulations have been documented and were not corrected in a
timely manner as determined by the City Manager. 



   (C)   Restaurants and retail or service businesses as accessory uses.



      (1)   May be located within the principal building or as a
single tenant in a multi-tenant building.



      (2)   The area of the building for restaurants or retail or
service businesses are restricted to one-half of the total floor area of the
ground level floor of a multistory building, but may not be restricted to any
location in the building, or 10% of the floor area of a single story building.



   (D)   Exterior food and beverage machines, ice machines, and propane
tank exchanges.



      (1)   Must be in conjunction with approved fuel or vehicle
service businesses and convenience or full-service grocery or variety goods
store.



      (2)   Must be adjacent to and project no further than five
feet from the primary building.



      (3)   Where sidewalks are present, a minimum access width of
four feet must be provided and may not be blocked by the vending machines or
containers.



      (4)   In addition to subsections (1) through (3) above,
propane tank exchanges must be located within a metal cabinet painted to
blend into the building.  The cabinet, not to exceed 52 cubic feet, must
receive a permit from the Fire Chief.



      (5)   In addition to subsections (1) through (4) above,
propane tank exchanges in the Planned Unit Development (PUD), Planned
Community Development District (PCDD), and Town Center (TC) Zoning Districts
may be approved through the conditional use permit process as described in §
152.035.



      (6)   Exterior food and beverage vending machines, ice
machines, and propane tank exchanges must be in good repair at all times.



   (E)   Warehousing, incidental repair, or processing.



      (1)   In the B1 - B-4 Districts, accessory warehousing may
only be conducted in up to 30% of the gross floor area of the principal
building.



      (2)   Must be necessary and related to the permitted principal
use.



   (F)   Storage shed when accessory to a daycare facility or a
religious institution.



      (1)   Setback adjacent to rights-of-way.  No storage sheds
are permitted between a public right-of-way and the principal structure.



      (2)   Interior side or rear setbacks.  No storage sheds are
permitted closer than five feet from interior side property lines.



      (3)   Structure size.  Storage sheds may not exceed 120
square feet.



      (4)   Structure height.  Storage sheds may not exceed 12 feet
in height.



      (5)   No more than one storage shed is permitted per lot of
record.



      (6)   The storage shed must be on the same lot of record as
the daycare facility or religious institution and the lot of record must not
have more than one detached storage shed.



      (7)   Storage sheds shall not be designed or used for human
habitation.



      (8)   Storage sheds shall have the same or similar facade and
roof colors as the principal building.



      (9)   The storage shed must be removed upon change of use of
the principal building to a use other than a daycare facility or a religious
institution.



   (G)   Farmers' market.



      (1)   No portion of the use or event shall take place within
200 feet, as measured in a straight line from the closest point of the
property line of the property upon which the farmers' market is located, to
the property line of any R-1 zoned property with residential buildings.



      (2)   A farmer's market shall be conducted only within a
parking lot that has a minimum of 200 off street parking spaces.  It is not
required that all 200 spaces be used for the market.



      (3)   Parking and display areas associated with the sale shall
not distract or interfere with existing business operations or traffic
circulation patterns.



      (4)   Display areas and parking spaces shall use those parking
lot spaces that are in excess of the minimum required parking for the primary
use of that property.



      (5)   A farmers' market shall provide one and one-half parking
stalls per producer and one and one-half customer parking stalls per producer.



      (6)   Sales merchandise trailers, temporary stands, etc.,
shall be located on an asphalt or concrete surface.



      (7)   The owner/operator shall have the written permission of
the current property owner to locate on a specific site.



      (8)   No uses or displays shall be permitted in required green
areas, parking setback areas, or any right-of-way or other public property.



      (9)   Signage shall be limited to one sign not to exceed 32
square feet. The sign may be a banner, shall have a professional appearance,
and shall be mounted or erected in an appropriate location. The sign may be
illuminated, but must comply with all requirements of Chapter 30 of this
title.



      (10)   All lighting shall comply with the lighting standards
of Chapter 150 of the City Code.



      (11)   All producer merchandise shall be unloaded prior to the
opening of the market and confined to the off street parking lot area. No on
street parking or unloading shall be allowed.



      (12)   No public address system or speakers shall be used.



      (13)   The site shall be kept in a neat and orderly fashion,
free from litter, refuse, debris, junk, or other waste, which results in
offensive odors or unsightly conditions.



      (14)   Display of items shall be arranged in as compact a
manner as reasonably practicable with particular reference to vehicle and
pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in
case of fire or other emergency.



      (15)   All products, materials, quantities to be sold or
displayed, and the dates, times, and duration of the market must be approved
by the City Council.



      (16)   If the farmers' market is operated by a person other
than the property owner, the property owner must notify the city of the full
name, address, date of birth and telephone number of the operator in writing.
The property owner is responsible for the actions of the operator and for
compliance with the conditions of this section.



   (H)   Outdoor sales and display.



      (1)   The designated area must be identified on the site plan.



      (2)   The designated area cannot block sidewalks.



      (3)   The designated area must not encroach into setbacks.



   (I)   Outdoor storage.  Outdoor storage of materials, equipment,
and products accessory and necessary to the principal use must obtain a
Conditional Use Permit and comply with the following:



      (1)   The items in the area designated for outdoor storage
must be completely screened from view from adjacent public rights-of-way or
adjacent properties.



      (2)   The area must not be used for the storage of junk
vehicles, trash, debris, or other nuisance items as defined elsewhere in the
City Code.



      (3)   The area designated for storage must be clearly defined
by fencing, striping, paving, or other means.  Any storage outside of the
designated area shall be a violation of the Conditional Use Permit.



      (4)   Outdoor storage is not permitted in the Highway Overlay
(HO) District.



      (5)   Height of materials, vehicles, or equipment in outdoor
storage area shall not exceed the height of the principal structure.



      (6)   The following performance standards apply to outside
storage:



 


Figure 152.362.01: Outdoor Storage Requirements




 
Zoning Districts



B3

 

B4

 

BP

 

I





Minimum lot area to allow outside storage
 
25,000 sq. feet
 
2 acres
 
5 acres
 
40,000 sq. feet


Area limit on storage allowed
 
50% of site
 
70% of site
 
15% of building footprint
 
80% of site




 

Setbacks
 
From ROW
 
15 feet
 
15 feet
 
75 feet
 
15 feet


From side and rear
 
5 feet
 
5 feet
 
50 feet
 
5 feet


Adjacent to residential districts
 
35 feet
 
35 feet
 
NP
 
35 feet


Location restriction
 
Side or rear yard only
 
Side or rear yard only
 
Must be located to the rear of the front entrance
 
Side or rear yard only




 



   (J)   Mobile food units.



      (1)   The owner/operator shall have written permission of the
current property owner to locate at a designated area.



      (2)   The proprietor of the business must keep copy of the
mobile food unit license with the unit and demonstrate compliance with the
license upon inspection.



      (3)   The area(s) designated for the mobile food unit and
accessory outdoor seating may not block sidewalks, impede pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, or interfere with public safety.



      (4)   No mobile food unit or accessory outdoor seating area
may occupy parking spaces which may be leased to other businesses or used to
fulfill its minimum parking requirements or any handicap accessible parking
space.



      (5)   Mobile food unit locations are limited to private
property located in a Business District as listed in § 152.361.



      (6)   Mobile food units shall be located on an asphalt or
concrete surface.



      (7)   The owner/operator must provide trash receptacles for
customer use and keep the site in a neat and orderly fashion, free from
litter, refuse, debris, junk or other waste which results in offensive odors
or unsightly conditions.



      (8)   Temporary signage is permitted in accordance with §
150.06(A)(6) pedestrian signs. 



      (9)   Mobile food units cannot locate within 100 feet of from
the main entrance of an eating establishment or any outdoor dining area.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2005-1032, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 2007-1081, passed
11-26-07; Am. Ord. 2010-1118, passed 10-4-10; Am. Ord. 2012-1133, passed
3-5-12; Am. Ord. 2012-1143, passed 5-21-12; Am. Ord. 2014-1177, passed 7-7-14)



§ 152.363  ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.



   Only commercial fences and walls that meet the following specifications
are permitted as accessory structures on any site in a business district.



   (A)   Prohibited structures  Fences or walls that detain or inhibit
the natural flow of surface water drainage to and from abutting properties
are prohibited.



   (B)   Setbacks.



      (1)   Public right-of-way.  Fences and walls more than 30
inches in height may not be constructed between the public right-of-way and
the facade of the principal building.



      (2)   Interior side or rear.  No setback.



   (C)   Access required. 



      (1)   Where any fence connects to a building at least one gate
with a minimum width of two feet, six inches is required to allow access
around the building.



      (2)   Fences and gates controlling access to the property must
be approved by the City Manager before a building permit may be issued or
approval is given through another process.



   (D)   Height.  No fence may exceed eight feet, six inches as
measured from the top of the fence or supports to grade.  Exceptions to this
height may be made for fences enclosing tennis courts and other similar
recreational uses with the approval of the City Manager.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2003-997, passed 5-12-03)



LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING STANDARDS FOR BUSINESS DISTRICTS



§ 152.370  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of establishing minimum landscape standards is to enhance
the city’s environmental and visual character for its citizens’ use; and
enjoyment; preserve and stabilize the ecological balance in the city;
establish a healthy environment by using vegetation to mitigate pollution’s
ill-effects; improve property values; protect public and private investments;
and promote high quality development in the city. 



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2008-1085, passed 3-24-08)



§ 152.371  LANDSCAPE PLAN REQUIRED.



   Prior to the issuance of a building permit for new construction or
expansion of a structure in any business district (B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, BP, I,
PCDD, TC, PUD) a landscape plan must be submitted for review and approval to
the City Manager in compliance with the Site Plan Review process in §§
152.030 through 152.039.  Review and approval of a landscape plan must also
be required for new parking lots and changes to existing parking areas that
create or affect more than four stalls prior to issuance of any permits,
including snow removal.  Landscape plans must be prepared by a landscape
architect and be overlaid on the grading plan.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2008-1085, passed 3-24-08)



§ 152.372  INSTALLATION OF LANDSCAPE MATERIALS.



   All landscaping elements and plant materials must be installed with
current professional horticultural standards.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2008-1085, passed 3-24-08)



§ 152.373  LANDSCAPING STANDARDS.



   (A)   Landscaping standards.  Mixed use, commercial, and industrial
uses shall be subject to the landscaping requirements. The landscape
requirements have been divided into four categories: Canopy Cover (C),
Foundation Landscape (FL), Open Areas Landscape (OL), Landscape Screen (LS)
and street trees.



      (1)   Canopy cover. The purpose of this requirement is to
mitigate the effects of vehicular hardscape by establishing tree canopy cover
to intercept rainfall, protect pavement from sun deterioration, reduce the
heat island affect, and improve aesthetics. Vehicular hardscape area shall
include all loading drives, parking lots, driveways, dropoffs and other areas
covered with a hard surface intended for vehicles. 



         (a)   Vehicle hardscape area requirements.  A minimum
of one large tree or two medium trees shall be provided per 360 square feet
of required parking lot area green space. These trees shall be located within
parking areas and not within any required perimeter landscaping area. 
Pervious pavements are considered 50% hardscape.



         (b)   Placement.  Required canopy trees shall be
located within the parking lot area islands (minimum width of six feet and
total area of 180 square feet if designed as end island or nine feet in with
if designed as continuous island between bays.



      (2)   Foundation landscape (FL). The purpose of this
requirement is to soften and enhance building architecture, define access
points, add color and seasonal interest, and to blend buildings in with the
natural environment. 



         (a)   Building perimeter landscaping requirement. At
least 50% of the total building perimeter shall be sodded or landscaped with
approved ground cover, low level plantings in an area of no less than six
feet in width.



      (3)   Open areas landscape (OL). The purpose of this
requirement is to provide general site beautification and high aesthetic
quality with a mix of plant materials in open areas. Open areas include all
areas not occupied by building or hardscape. Open areas landscaping shall
meet the following requirements.



         (a)   Open area landscape requirements.  Each
development must have at least the minimum percentage open space shown in the
following table.



 


Figure 152.373.01 Minimum Required Open Space




 

Minimum Open Space Requirement




B-1

 

B-2

 

B-3 and B-4 and Mixed Use

 

BP

 

I




Total development site

 

30%

 

30%

 

20%

 

30%

 

20%




 



         (b)   The open space areas must not be covered by a
building or other impervious surface, and must be planted with trees, shrubs,
flowers, native plant species or similar and covered with sod, landscape rock
or mulch.  All site areas and areas that have been disturbed during
construction must be covered with sod to property lines and/or adjacent
rights-of-way.  Rock and mulch may be substituted for sod in landscaping
planting beds.  Areas used for demonstrated parking cannot be used to
fulfill the open space requirement.  Interior parking lot landscaping
provided on site to meet requirements in § 152.145(L) counts towards this
open space requirement.



         (c)   Planned Community Development District (PCDD) and
Planned Unit  Development (PUD) sites shall use the B1 Zoning District
landscaping requirements; Town Center (TC) shall use the B3 Zoning District 
landscaping requirements; however can be modified through the Site Plan
Review Process.



         (d)   Plant diversity. No more than 25% of any trees
planted shall come from the same family and 15% of the same species. In
addition the landscape plan design shall, at a minimum, provide at least
three of the following required numbers of trees and shrubs in addition to
any trees and shrubs required for screening in § 152.375:



            1.   One overstory tree per 3,000 square feet of
open area.



            2.   One ornamental tree per 1,500 square feet of
open space.



            3.   One evergreen tree per 3,000 square feet of
open area, except on sites where security, pedestrian or traffic safety are a
concern evergreens may be excluded or installed in a reduced number.



            4.   One deciduous or evergreen shrub per 100
square feet of open area.



      (4)   Street trees. (a)  The purpose of this requirement is
to soften and screen street corridors, define site access points, and blend
site and streets in with the natural environment.  Trees are required at the
rate of one tree per 70 linear feet of road frontage, within the property
line, where the property fronts any public road.  Trees may be planted in
the right-of-way if the species is listed in Table 152.373.01(A) of this Code
and have a minimum trunk diameter of two inches measured six inches above
grade.



 


Table 152.374.01A  Acceptable Street Trees



Acceptable Shade Trees
 
Acceptable Ornamental Dwarf Trees


Bi-Color Oak (swamp white oak)

Black Ash

Columnar Norway Maple

Freeman Maple

Ginko (no seed producing)

Hackberry

Imperial Honey Locust

Little Leaf Linden

Mancana Ash

New Horizon Elm

Northwood Maple

Sugar Maple

Summit Ash

River Birch

Triumph Elm (street)
 
Amur Maple (single stem) 

Heritage River Birch

Ironwood

Japanese Lilac Tree

Korean Mountain Ash

Newport Plum

Pink Spire Crabapple

Red Splendor Crabapple

 


Additional species may be allowed with City Manager approval



 



         (b)   Evergreens shall not be planted as a street tree.



         (c)   The boulevard (planting area) must be at least
eight feet in width.



         (d)   The street tree planting site must be located as
follows:



            1.   Fifty feet or greater from street curb
intersections as per § 152.323.



            2.   At least 15 feet from curb on Class-I
collector and any arterial streets.



            3.   At least ten feet from curb on local or
Class-II collector streets.



            4.   At least ten feet from any sewer line, water
line, or driveway.



            5.   At least five feet from a fire hydrant per §
93.26 and the International Fire Code.



            6.   At least five feet from any gas. electric,
telephone, cable TV or other underground utility.



            7.   At least three feet from any sidewalk or
trail.



            8.   At least 20 feet from overhead utility cables
or using an approved ornamental dwarf tree noted in Table 152.373.01(B).



         (e)   Street tree species and placement will be reviewed
and approved by the Operations and Maintenance Department as not to interfere
with existing or proposed utility systems.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2006-1059, passed 6-5-06; Am. Ord. 2008-1085, passed
3-24-08; Am. Ord. 2012-1133, passed 3-5-12)



§ 152.374  LANDSCAPING GUIDELINES.



   (A)   Landscaping guidelines.  The purpose of the guidelines and
technical requirements is to encourage plant longevity, minimize maintenance,
and mitigate conflicts with other site features.  An initial investment in
high quality materials, careful design and planning, and proper construction
techniques can result in plant longevity and long term maintenance cost
reduction.



      (1)   Species selection. Appropriate species selection is
critical to maximize the benefits of plant materials.  Healthy, long lived
plants well suited to a site will reduce maintenance and replacement costs,
while providing the most aesthetic and environmental gain.  Native species
in the built environment will supplement and connect the existing natural
areas.  Diversity is also important for an overall healthy and balanced
landscape that is less susceptible to pests and disease.



      (2)   The city shall maintain a list of approved species which
species acceptable trees within the size categories reference in this
section.  Approved species are classified by size.  For each site, plants
shall be selected based on mature size and adaptability to site conditions,
such as microclimate, salt, pollution and other factors.  The list of
approved species is not exhaustive.  Applicants requesting to plant a
species not on the list shall submit species name, height, width, form,
hardiness zone, and other relevant information.  The city shall classify new
species based on tree size standards.  For large projects the city may
require applicants to comply with the following requirements:



         (a)   Species diversity;



         (b)   A minimum percentage of native species;



         (c)   A minimum percentage of large trees;



         (d)   A minimum percentage of evergreen streets.



      (3)   Prohibitive species. The following trees/plants are
prohibited due their high maintenance costs, surface roots, intolerance to
storms, undesirable fruiting habits, or a susceptibility to disease or pests:
all species of North American Ash, Cottonwood, Lomardy Poplar, Box Elder,
American Elm, and Siberian Elm, Amur Maple, Common Buckthorn, Barberry,
Burning Bush, Russian Honeysuckle, Japanese Spirea.  The minimum plant size
requirements are described in the following table:



 


Table 152.374.01C Minimum Plant Size Requirements




Plant Type

 

Minimum Size*





Large trees
 
Bare root - 1.75"

Balled and burlapped or container - 2" caliper


Medium and small trees
 
Bare root - 1.5"

Balled and burlapped or container - 1.5" caliper


Evergreen trees
 
6' height


Large shrubs
 
5 gallon container


Medium shrubs, small shrubs and groundcovers
 
3 gallon container


Ornamental grasses and perennials
 
4" pot


* City may limit bare root plantings in areas of high visibility.  In
selected situations the City may allow ten  whip bare root plantings, or
five 3/4" caliper bare root plantings to be substituted for 1 large tree. 
Bare root plantings must be protected with rodent guards.


a.   All boulevard trees shall be balled and burlapped and a minimum size
of 2" caliper.




 



   (C)   Quality credits.  Existing healthy trees that are not
susceptible to disease, new larger or smaller sized trees, or decorative
landscaping may be credited toward the required trees detailed in this
section, and the additional trees required for screening as defined in §
152.375. The following table establishes the landscaping credits.



 


Figure 152.374.03 Credits



Vegetation Type
 

Size

 

Exchange Credit





Existing Trees
 

2” bb (Caliper) Deciduous or between 6' and 14' Coniferous

 

1 tree




4” bb (Caliper) Deciduous or 14' Coniferous or larger

 

2 trees



New larger trees
 

4" bb (Caliper) or 14' Coniferous

 

2 trees




 

Two 3" bb (Caliper)

 

three 2" trees




Ornamental Deciduous Trees or smaller overstory deciduous

 

min.1.5" (Caliper)

 

2 trees may be substituted for 1 overstory deciduous tree (maximum
substitution = 50% of required overstory trees   )



Shrubs
 

10 large shrubs

 

1 tree



Decorative Landscape Yard
 



 

Exterior sculptures, fountains, decorative walks, courtyards and/or
additional ponds beyond those required, shown on a landscape plan that meets
the intent of this section to the satisfaction of the City Manager and/or
City Council





 



   (D)   Energy conservation. Plant material placement should be
designed to reduce the energy consumption needs of the development.



      (1)   Deciduous trees should be placed on the south and west
sides of buildings to provide shade from the summer sun.



      (2)   Evergreens and other plant materials should be
concentrated on the north and west sides of buildings to dissipate the effect
of winter winds.



   (E)   Sustainable landscaping requirements. The city encourages the
use of special design features such as Xeriscaping; rain gardens/bioretention
systems; landscaping with native species; green rooftops; heat island
reduction; and aesthetic design. All new development and redevelopment must
include two of the following choices in subsections (1) through (3) below or
a green roof:



      (1)   Xeriscaping.  Xeriscaping is landscaping which uses
plants that have low water requirements, making them able to withstand
extended periods of drought. Xeriscaping landscapes are a conscious attempt
to develop plantings which are compatible with the environment and make a
conscious effort to minimize use of water.  A minimum of 20% of the total
required landscaping vegetation shall be of low water requirement types.



      (2)   Rain gardens/bioretention systems. Bioretention systems
can be described as shallow, landscaped depressions commonly located in
parking lot islands or within areas that receive stormwater runoff. For
credit under this section, the rain garden/bioretention system shall be
aboveground and a visible part of the green or landscaped area. Stormwater
flows into the bioretention area, ponds on the surface, and gradually
infiltrates into the soil bed. Pollutants are removed by a number of
processes including absorption, filtration, volatilization, ion exchange, and
decomposition. Filtered runoff can either be allowed to infiltrate into the
surrounding soil (functioning as an infiltration basin or rainwater garden),
or discharged to the storm sewer or directly to receiving waters (functioning
like a surface filter). The use of under drain systems are discouraged unless
where infiltration is prohibited by the water resources management plan.
Runoff from larger storms is generally diverted past the area to the storm
drain system.



      (3)   Landscaping with native species.  Fifty percent of the
plantings used in the landscape plan shall be of native plant communities of
Brooklyn Park on file with the city and approved by the City Planner.  These
plant communities include:



      (4)   Green rooftops. Green rooftops are veneers of living
vegetation installed atop buildings, from small garages to large industrial
structures. Green rooftops help manage stormwater by mimicking a variety of
hydrologic processes normally associated with open space. Plants capture
rainwater on their foliage and absorb it in their root zone, encouraging
evapotranspiration and preventing much stormwater from ever entering runoff
streams. What water does leave the roof is slowed and kept cooler, a benefit
for downstream water bodies. Green roofs are especially effective in
controlling intense, short duration storms and have been shown to reduce
cumulative annual runoff by 50% in temperate climates.  A minimum of 50% of
the total roof area shall be planted material.  Living vegetation must cover
90% of the surface of the green roof area.




   (E)   Aesthetic design. Sites shall be designed to include two of
the following: public art, fountains, plazas, perennial beds, landscaping at
entry of the site, or other amenities reviewed and approved by the City
Planner.
















   (F)   Intersection visibility.  All landscape materials must comply
with the intersection visibility requirements of §§ 152.320 through 152.325.



   (G)   Utility interference.  Overstory and coniferous trees may not
be installed underneath overhead utility lines nor may any landscape
materials be installed over utility lines except in compliance with the City
Code and city policy.




(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2001-952, passed 5-14-01; Am. Ord. 2003-989, passed
2-10-03; Am. Ord. 2003-997, passed 5-12-03; Am. Ord. 2006-1059, passed
6-5-06; Am. Ord. 2008-1085, passed 3-24-08; Am. Ord. 2012-1133, passed 3-5-12)




§ 152.375  SCREENING.



   All mechanical or accessory uses, including, but not limited to,
exterior storage areas, exterior loading docks, service areas, mechanical
areas, and rooftop equipment, must be screened as follows:



   (A)   All ground level mechanical equipment and accessory uses must
be screened using a wing-wall or other architectural features that are an
integral part(s) of the building or landscaping materials. Landscaping
materials must consist primarily of evergreen materials and must achieve a
minimum of 50% opacity at planting and 80% opacity at maturity.



   (B)   Rooftop equipment screening must be provided by the building
parapet, or incorporate similar architectural features as the building, use
the same exterior materials as the principal structure, or be designed so
that the equipment is not visible from six feet above ground level on any
property line of the applicable site.



   (C)   Incidental equipment deemed unnecessary to be screened by the
City Manager must be of a color to match the building, roof, or the sky,
whichever is most effective.



   (D)   Metal cabinets and/or fences used to enclose and protect
mechanical equipment may not substitute as screening.



   (E)   Berm slopes must not exceed 4:1.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2003-989, passed 2-10-03; Am. Ord. 2008-1085, passed
3-24-08; Am. Ord. 2016-1212, passed 11-14-16)



§ 152.376  CRIME PREVENTION THROUGH ENVIRONMENTAL DESIGN.



   Landscaping plans shall promote safety and visibility in order to
reduce crime. The  landscaping plan shall further the principles of Crime
Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED) through the incorporation of
the principles of natural surveillance, natural access  control, and
territorial reinforcement through the following:



   (A)   Providing visibility to building and site entrances from
public rights-of-way.



   (B)   Providing proper placement of landscape materials not to
create shadows in public outdoor spaces, such as parking lots and walkways.



   (C)   Providing proper placement of landscape materials to
discourage pedestrian access in sensitive areas.



   (D)   In areas where the required number of evergreen trees would be
contrary to the CPTED principals, the required quantity of evergreen trees
may be exchanged for deciduous trees.



(Ord. 2008-1085, passed 3-24-08)



§ 152.377  (RESERVED).



§ 152.378  IRRIGATION SYSTEM REQUIRED.



   (A)   All landscaped areas, including parking area islands must be
equipped with an underground, automatic irrigation system or an alternative
as outlined in § 152.378(B).  The irrigation system must include a flow
meter, moisture sensing devices and must be calibrated to meet all applicable
City Codes.  Irrigation of adjacent rights-of-way is required; however,
irrigation equipment must not be located within the right-of-way without
approval from the City Manager.



   (B)   In lieu of an underground automatic irrigation system, an
alternative irrigation plan  may be approved. An alternative plan can
include, but is not limited to, rain gardens, closed rain barrels, or
greywater systems. Any alternative system must ensure that landscaping will
be  provided with adequate irrigation.



      (1)   The greywater shall be contained on the site where it is
generated.



      (2)   Greywater shall be directed to and contained within an
irrigation or disposal field.



      (3)   Ponding or runoff is prohibited and shall be considered
a nuisance.



      (4)   Greywater may be released above the ground surface
provided at least two inches of mulch, rock, or soil, or a solid shield
covers the release point. Other methods which provide equivalent separation
are also acceptable.



      (5)   Greywater systems shall be designed to minimize contact
with humans and domestic pets.



      (6)   Greywater shall not contain hazardous chemicals derived
from activities such as cleaning car parts, washing greasy or oily rags, or
disposing of waste solutions from home photo labs or similar hobbyist or home
occupational activities.



   (C)   Arid landscaping plans are exempt from irrigation requirements.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2008-1085, passed 3-24-08; Am. Ord. 2012-1133,
passed 3-5-12)



§ 152.379  CONFORMANCE WITH APPROVED PLAN.



   All landscaped areas must be in conformance with the approved
landscaping plan.  Planted landscaped materials must be replaced if it
becomes diseased, dies, or removed. All  landscaped areas and adjacent
rights-of-way must be maintained in conformance with Chapter 97: Grass, Weed,
and Tree Regulations.



(Ord. 2008-1085, passed 3-24-08)



ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS IN BUSINESS DISTRICTS



§ 152.390  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of establishing criteria for architectural design and
exterior facing materials is to ensure a high standard of development that is
compatible with neighboring development and contributes to a community image
of permanence, stability, and visual aesthetics, while preventing impermanent
construction and use of materials that are unsightly, rapidly deteriorate,
contribute to depreciation of neighborhood property values, or cause urban
blight.  The standards are further intended to ensure coordinated design of
building facades, additions and accessory structures in order to prevent
visual disharmony.  The standards apply in all business districts (B-1, B-2,
B-3, B-4, BP, I.)



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.391  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Building construction and design may be used to create a
structure with equally attractive sides, except for those instances specified
in this section.



   (B)   Primary building entrances must be clearly defined to promote
visual interest and architectural presence.



   (C)   Large, uninterrupted expanses of a single material are not 
permitted, unless the design is obviously superior to the intent of this
chapter as determined by the City Manager.



   (D)   No wall that faces a public right-of-way, parks, the public
view from adjacent properties or a residential use or district shall have an
uninterrupted length exceeding 100 feet without including at least two of the
following: change in plane, change in texture or masonry pattern, two class
one materials, windows in a manner that is impactful to the design, or an
equivalent element that subdivides the wall into human scale proportions.



   (E)   Any other building, such as the case with multiple buildings
on a single parcel, accessory buildings, or parking structures, should be of
compatible design and materials with emphasis on the position(s) of the
building(s) to give visual interest. 



   (F)   Additions for principal buildings constructed before the
effective date of the chapter may be of similar materials and design as the
principal structure.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2016-1212, passed 11-14-16)



§ 152.392  SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS.



   Different exterior materials must be specifically approved as part of a
development plan in conjunction with an Overlay,  the Planned Unit
Development District (PUD) or Planned Community Development District (PCDD).



   (A)   Classes of materials.  For the purpose of this section,
acceptable exterior materials are divided into Class 1 and Class 2 categories
as shown in the following table:



 


Figure 152.392.01 Classes of Materials




Class 1

 

Class 2



1.   Brick

2.   Natural or cementious stone

3.   Glass, or other glazing materials

4.   Masonry stucco

5.   Architectural metal panels

6.   Specialty concrete block (including textured, burnished block or rock
faced block)

7.   Architecturally textured concrete precast panels

8.   Other materials not listed elsewhere as approved by the City Manager
or as recommended by the Planning Commission
 
1.   Industrial grade concrete precast panels

2.   Wood

3.   Tile (masonry, stone or clay), ceramic

4.   Other materials not listed elsewhere as approved by the City Manager
or as recommended by the Planning Commission

5.   EFIS in conformance with the ICC ES report



 



   (B)   Required combination of materials. Buildings must incorporate
classes of materials for each facade in the following manner:



      (1)   Office, service, and retail buildings.



         (a)   Front facades and side and rear facades visible
from public right(s)-of-way, the public view from adjacent properties, parks,
or residential uses or districts must be composed of at least two or more
Class 1 materials totaling 65% of the facade.



         (b)   Side and rear facades not visible from public
right(s)-of-way, parks, public view from adjacent properties or residential
uses or districts must use a combination of Class 1 or 2 materials.



         (c)   Facades visible from public right(s)-of-way must
include windows, doors, canopies or other treatments that help mitigate the
appearance of blank walls.



      (2)   Industrial and warehouse buildings, multi-tenant
office/industrial/warehouse or showroom/warehouse or other combinations.



         (a)   Front facades must be composed of at least two or
more Class 1 materials totaling 65%.



         (b)   Side and rear facades visible from public
right(s)-of-way, parks, public view from adjacent properties, or residential
uses or districts must be composed of at least two or more Class 1 materials
totaling 50%.



         (c)   Side and rear facades not visible from public
right(s)-of-way, parks, public view from adjacent properties or residential
uses or districts must use a combination of Class 1 or 2 materials.



      (3)   Buildings for uses that do not conform to any of the
above list of uses must conform to the materials and proportion of office and
retail buildings listed in subdivision (1), above.



      (4)   Fence materials.  All accessory structures must be
constructed of durable, weather resistant materials and properly constructed
and anchored in compliance with the Uniform Building Code.



         (a)   Prohibited fence materials include electric,
chicken, concertina or barbed wire fences.



         (b)   Restricted fence materials. 



            1.   Silt and other construction fences must be
removed from the property at project completion. 



            2.   Snow fences must be removed from all
properties by April 1st.  If snow is still present within one foot of the
fence location, removal may be extended at the discretion of the City Manager.



            3.   Chain link fences must have a top rail,
barbed ends must be placed at the bottom of the fence, and posts must be
spaced at intervals not to exceed ten feet.



         (c)   Finished sides.  If the material used in fence
construction is not finished on both sides, the finished side of the material
must be on the outside, facing the abutting or adjoining properties and all
posts or structures supporting the fence or wall must be on the inside.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2003-997, passed 5-12-03; Am. Ord. 2016-1212, passed
11-14–16)



§ 152.393  EXTERIOR SURFACE FINISHES.



   All exterior surfaces must be finished with the appropriate sealant,
stain, paint, or other process (to manufacturer’s specifications) to
withstand the elements and prevent fading, chipping, chalking, cracking,
peeling, warping, rot, rust, water damage, or other natural degrading
process, with the exception of those materials, like copper, where the
degrading process is architecturally desirable and must not be allowed to
become or remain in an unsafe condition as defined by the Uniform Building
and Fire Codes.



(Ord. 2000-936)



PLANNED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (PCDD)



§ 152.410  PURPOSE.



   The district is designed for use where the general areas contain a
unique physical or recreational feature or require detailed, coordinated
planning efforts to achieve specific goals.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.411  ESTABLISHMENT.



   This zone is hereby established within the City of Brooklyn Park and
may be applied to those areas designated on the Zoning Map.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.412  SITE PLAN REVIEW.



   All proposed uses are subject to the Site Plan Review requirements
found in §§ 152.030 through 152.039.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.413  APPLICATION COMPONENTS.



   Each application for a General Plan of Development must address the
following components and may contain a descriptive statement of objectives,
principles and standards used in its formulation:



   (A)   Land use component.  The distribution, location and extent of
acres of land devoted to each land use.



   (B)   Circulation component. All transportation facilities included
in the area, including the methods of handling pedestrian and bicycle
crossing points.



   (C)   Population component.  Estimated future residential
population changes per school districts as well as construction timing and
phasing; indicating square footage by type for office and retail facilities
and such data to determine traffic generation, parking requirements, and
water and sewage consumption and capacity flows.



   (D)   Subdivision and design component.  All those items required
by Chapter 151 of the City Code, plus information that conforms with the
following must be provided to the city for review and approval:



      (1)   Housing.  The proposed house styles and plans for
integrating different housing design must be provided in sufficient detail to
provide an accurate visualization of the final housing product. A declaration
of covenants, conditions and restrictions must be presented to the Planning
Commission and approved by the City Council relating to building square
footage, driveway material, facade treatment, roof pitches, roofing
materials, landscaping, garage or storage accommodations, standards for
accessory buildings, and the like.



      (2)   Services and facilities.  The location, extent and
phasing of all existing and proposed sanitary sewage, water and storm sewer,
surface drainage retention and detention ponds, local utilities,
rights-of-way, easements, and utility facilities may be provided.  The
description may include proposed ownership, method of operation and
maintenance and phasing of construction and phasing of maintenance release
and acceptance to occupy completed structures of all services and facilities.



      (3)   Marketing.  The location, size, height and type of
on-site advertising signs and model homes, subdivision identification signs,
monument signs, landscaping, fencing, berming, and all other ornamental
treatment of entrances must be provided.



   (E)   Additional components.  The city may require that additional
components be submitted that reasonably relate to the development or the
neighborhood in which the development is located.  These components may
include, but are not limited to, an economic feasibility study or an economic
benefit analysis, a recreation component, an environmental impact component,
social services component, and a public buildings component.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.414  PROCEDURES.



   Submission and review of a General Plan of Development, or an
amendment, may require a public hearing and follow the same procedures as a
Conditional Use Permit as described in §§ 152.030 through 152.039.  All
proposed uses are subject to the Site Plan Review requirements found in §§
152.030 through 152.039.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.415  USES.



   Unless otherwise prohibited by law within the city, any use of land or
buildings that is clearly designated by type or category on the approved and
adopted General Plan of Development or the City's Comprehensive Plan may be
allowed as follows: 



   (A)   Uses on properties guided for industrial may be defined as
those uses listed for the Business Park (BP) District. 



   (B)   Uses with greater impact on surrounding land uses are subject
to additional regulations in §§ 152.243, 152.245, 152.262, 152.263,
152.323, 152.324, 152.325, 152.343, 152.344, 152.362, 152.363. 



   (C)   Conditional uses defined in the Residential and Business
Districts may be subject to the administrative procedures defined in §
152.035.



   (D)   With the exception of a temporary greenhouse, in conformance
with § 152.345 and seasonal displays and sales at full service grocery
stores in conformance with § 152.362, no outdoor display, sales, or storage
may be allowed in this district.  All uses previously approved with outdoor
display, sales or storage must be in conformance with §§ 152.050 through
152.055 of this chapter.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2003-997, passed 5-12-03; Am. Ord. 2005-1051, passed
11-7-05)



§ 152.416  OPEN SPACE.



   (A)   The open space required by this section must be arranged and
provided in such a manner that it is accessible and usable for the purpose
and persons intended.  Commercial agricultural pursuits do not constitute
open space as required by this section.



   (B)   Apartments must have a minimum of 50% of the total lot area
which must be devoted to open space consisting of landscaping, lawn area, or
non-commercial outdoor recreational facilities incidental to the residential
development such as private swimming pools, putting greens and tennis courts,
walkways, uncovered patio areas, and fences.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.417  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   All uses must comply with the General Performance Standards
shown in this chapter, unless specifically approved and amended by the City
Council in the development plan.



   (B)   Architectural Design.  All commercial, industrial, and
institutional structures in the PCDD District must include at least two of
the following:



      (1)   Variety in building elevations.  No wall may have an
uninterrupted length exceeding 80 feet without two of the following: changes
in plane, color, texture or material pattern; inclusion of windows; or
equivalent elements that subdivides the wall.



      (2)   A minimum of 50% of each building facade must be brick
or stone. This standard applies to all walls of a building, including walls
proposed to be removed for future expansion.



      (3)   Pitched roofs, or in the case of flat roofs, variable
roof heights.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2002-977, passed 6-24-02; Am. Ord. 2003-997, passed
5-12-03)



PUBLIC INSTITUTION DISTRICT (PI)



§ 152.430  PURPOSE.



   The Public Institution District (PI) is intended to provide for a
district for public buildings, uses and needs that otherwise may not fit into
other zoning districts because of their specialized land use needs and public
purpose.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.431  ESTABLISHMENT.



   The Public Institution District is hereby established within the City
of Brooklyn Park.  This district may be applied only to those properties
designated for public institution uses on the Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.432  SITE PLAN REVIEW.



   All proposed uses are subject to the Site Plan Review requirements
found in §§ 152.030 through 152.039.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.433  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Schools and daycares.  Includes public and private primary
and secondary schools, pre- schools, and daycares, subject to Site Plan
Review requirements of § 152.033; and public or private post-secondary
institutions like colleges, universities, junior colleges, and trade schools.



   (B)   Government buildings.  Including fire and police stations,
government office buildings, maintenance buildings, recreation facilities,
libraries, water towers or purification plants and the like.



   (C)   Religious institutions.



   (D)   Non-profit community agencies, recreation centers, or youth
centers.



   (E)   Hospitals.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2007-1070, passed 3-26-07; Am. Ord. 2009-1107,
passed 10-19-09)



§ 152.434  CONDITIONAL USES.



   No permit may be issued for construction for a building, structure or
land use considered conditional unless a Conditional Use Permit has been
granted by the City Council in accordance with §§ 152.030 through 152.039.



   (A)   Telecommunication towers as regulated by §§ 152.090 through
152.096.



   (B)   Outdoor storage of equipment, landscaping materials, etc. when
accessory to a government building or maintenance facility.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2007-1070, passed 3-26-07)



§ 152.435  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Building setbacks:



      (1)   From public rights-of-way - 10 feet.



      (2)   Side - 10 feet.



      (3)   Rear - 10 feet.



      (4)   Side or rear adjacent to a residential district - 50
feet.



   (B)   No minimum lot size is required.



   (C)   All uses must conform to the performance standards for
business districts listed as defined in §§ 152.070 through 152.182 and §§
152.300 through 152.393 where applicable.



   (D)   Maximum height is 60 feet.  For each one foot greater than 60
feet of building height, as measured from the highest adjacent grade to the
top of the roof, the required front, side and rear setbacks must be increased
one foot.



   (E)   Sites must conform to the B3 Zoning District landscaping
requirements of § 152.374.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2001-952, passed 5-14-01; Am. Ord. 2007-1070, passed
3-26-07)



§ 152.436 ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   The following accessory uses are permitted for all uses,
however are limited to 10% (each) of the total building area if they are
located within a religious institution or non-profit community agency:



      (1)   Retail sales.



      (2)   Class-I restaurants.



      (3)   Assembly halls (other than for religious worship).



      (4)   Day care.



   (B)   The following accessory uses are conditional for all uses,
however are limited to 10% (each) of the total building area if they are
located within a religious institution or non-profit community agency:



      (1)   Class-II restaurants.



      (2)   Rectories for religious institutions (either within the
principal structure or as a separate building).



(Ord. 2007-1070, passed 3-26-07)



CONSERVANCY DISTRICT (CD)



§ 152.450  PURPOSE.



   The Conservancy District (PI) is intended to provide for a district for
areas that contain valuable environmental qualities which are to be preserved
as park or open space amenities and to prevent the over-crowding of land, to
avoid undue concentration of population, a specific public purpose, and/or
alleviate the burden of development from environmentally sensitive lands. 
These areas may also have been found to be unsuitable for residential,
commercial, or industrial development due to flooding or bad drainage, slope,
adverse soil conditions, rock formations, and/or unique natural features.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.451  ESTABLISHMENT.



   The Conservancy District is hereby established within the City of
Brooklyn Park.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.452  INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   When uncertainty exists with respect to the Conservancy District
boundaries, the following rules apply:



   (A)   District boundaries along a stream are intended to represent
the high water time of a regional flood, provided, however, that along a
stream such line must not be less than 50 feet from the center of such stream.



   (B)   District boundaries in a wetland area are intended to
represent the edge of a swamp, marsh or other wetland area.  The edge is
defined as the mark delineating the highest water level which has been
maintained for a sufficient  period of time to leave evidence upon the
landscape.  The edge is commonly that point where the natural vegetation
changes from predominately aquatic to predominately terrestrial.



   (C)   District boundaries in a public park, common open space areas,
or public lands are intended to represent the property lines of such area.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.453  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Outdoor recreational uses operated by a governmental agency or
conservation group, homeowners or private association and facilities for
making the area useful to public or association.



   (B)   Open space areas connected with residential, institutional, or
business development.



   (C)   Conservation uses including drainage control, forestry,
wildlife sanctuaries and facilities for making same available and useful to
public.



   (D)   Agricultural uses.



   (E)   Nature study areas and arboretums.



   (F)   Transient produce sales.  Transient (or itinerant) produce
sales by merchants who have applied for and received permits in compliance
with all other sections of the City Code and only in the Old Town Hall Square
at Zane Avenue North and Brooklyn Boulevard.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.454  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   No permit may be issued for construction for a building,
structure or land use considered conditional unless a Conditional Use Permit
has been granted by the City Council in accordance with §§ 152.030 through
152.039.



   (B)   In addition to §§ 152.030 through 152.039, all conditional
uses in this district must be reviewed to determine if through good site and
engineering designs a development can be created which is compatible and
harmonious with the natural amenities of the Conservancy District area and
with surrounding land uses.  Applications must be accompanied by an overall
plan of the entire site showing roads, parking areas, lot lines, easements,
the location of tree cover including the designation of individual trees of
15 inches in diameter or more, the location of other natural and biological
features such as wetlands and areas of valuable wildlife habitat, and the
location of proposed structures in addition to any other information
typically required for a Conditional Use Permit. 



   (C)   The approval of an application requires a finding that:



      (1)   The development will not detrimentally effect or destroy
natural features such as ponds, streams, wetlands and forested areas, but
will preserve and incorporate such features into the developments site design.



      (2)   The location of natural features and the site’s
topography have been considered in the designing and siting of all physical
improvements.



      (3)   Adequate assurances have been received that clearing of
the site of top soil, trees and other natural features before the
commencement of building operations will not occur.  Only those areas
approved for the placement of physical improvements may be cleared.



      (4)   The development will not substantially reduce the
natural retention storage capacity of any watercourse, thereby increasing the
magnitude and volume of flood at other locations.



      (5)   The soil and subsoil conditions are suitable for
excavation and site preparation and the drainage is designed to prevent
erosion and environmentally deleterious surface runoff.



      (6)   The development will be free from offensive noise,
vibration, smoke, dust, and other particulate matter, odorous matter, fumes,
water pollution and other objectionable influences.



      (7)   The applicant will be substantially damaged by being
required to place the intended development outside the Conservancy District.



(Ord. 2000-936)



TOWN CENTER ZONING DISTRICT



§ 152.460  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The Town Center Zoning District is established to provide a
flexible framework for the creation of high quality, comprehensively designed
commercial and residential neighborhoods.  The district establishes
standards for exterior architecture and site design which are intended to
contribute to the quality, visual aesthetics, permanence, stability of the
community, and enhancement of the city's tax base.  This district may be
applied at intersections of arterial and collector streets, in either
developing or redeveloping locations.



   (B)   Multiple types of development are encouraged, with
developments designed to promote walking, bicycling and transit use.  The
placement of building edges and treatment of architecture, parking,
landscaping, sidewalks, and public spaces are to be carefully planned in
order to achieve the pedestrian oriented development envisioned for the
district. 



   (C)   All development shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan and
the 1999 Northern Area Master Plan.



(Ord. 2001-949, passed 2-26-01; Am. Ord. 2014-1180, passed 9-2-14)



§ 152.461  PERMITTED USES.



   There are no permitted land uses.



(Ord. 2001-949, passed 2-26-01)



§ 152.462  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   All land uses must conform to the Comprehensive Plan and the
1999 Northern Area Master Plan.



   (B)   The following uses are allowed with a conditional use permit.



      (1)   Residential, including detached or attached housing
units at densities which conform to the Comprehensive Plan.



      (2)   Offices.



      (3)   Retail and service businesses.



      (4)   Public parks.



      (5)   Mixed use developments which include two or more of the
uses listed above.



(Ord. 2001-949, passed 2-26-01; Am. Ord. 2014-1180, passed 9-2-14)



§ 152.463  DESIGN STANDARDS.



   All applications for development in the district shall be evaluated on
the basis of the standards described in this section.



   (A)   Residential Development.



      (1)   Variety of Design.  Specific types of attached housing
should be built in small groupings to present large complexes of one housing
type.  No more than approximately 60 units of any type of townhouse and 100
units of high density units should be built in a single area.



      (2)   Single Family House Model.  A single family housing
design vocabulary shall be used in multifamily and attached buildings.  This
will include but not be limited to identifiable front doors, pitched roofs,
architectural facades, and transitional architectural features such as
porches, and covered stoops.



      (3)   Facade Articulation.  Buildings shall address the
street with varied and articulated facades, frequent entries and windows. 
Porches and balconies are encouraged.  Facades consisting of long blank
walls are prohibited.



      (4)   Outdoor Spaces.  Outdoor spaces such as porches and
patios shall be used to increase the sense of privacy and security within the
housing unit.  The boundaries of private outdoor space should be defined
with elements such as fencing and landscaping.



   (B)   Commercial and Office Development.



      (1)   Height.  Buildings over 100 feet in length shall be at
least 12 stories in height for at least 30% of the building length.



      (2)   Entrances.  Each building along a public street shall
have a clearly identifiable entrance along the sidewalk.  Additional
entrances may be provided from parking lots on the opposite side.



      (3)   Facade Materials.  All buildings shall exhibit
variation and detail in their facades, including high-quality materials. 
Acceptable primary materials are brick, stone, stucco, EFIS, wood and
glass.  Acceptable accent materials include rock face concrete block and
architectural metal.  Other materials may be permitted at the city’s
discretion through the site plan review process if they are consistent with
the surrounding environment and the purpose of this section.



      (4)   Building Articulation.  Buildings of more than 100 feet
in width shall be divided into smaller increments through articulation of the
facade.  This can be achieved through combinations of the following
techniques, and others that meet the objective.



         (a)   Facade modulation - stepping back or extending
forward a portion of the facade.



         (b)   Vertical divisions using different textures or
materials (although materials should be drawn from a common palette).



         (c)   Division into storefronts, with separate display
windows and entrances.



         (d)   Variation in roof lines by alternating dormers,
stepped roofs, gables, or other roof elements to reinforce the modulation or
articulation interval.



         (e)   Arcades, awnings, window bays, arched windows and
balconies at intervals equal to the articulation interval.



         (f)   Providing a lighting fixture, trellis, tree or
other landscape feature with each interval.



      (5)   Plazas or Seating.  In each commercial area, there
should be some outdoor space devoted to public seating, strolling and/or
gathering.  This space should be integrated into the overall private
development, accessible by the system of public walkways, built from
long-lasting and attractive materials, usable throughout the year, and
lighted for nighttime use.



   (C)   Streets, Sidewalks, and Transit Facilities.



      (1)   Streets.  To the maximum possible extent, streets
should interconnect.  Cul-de-sacs should be avoided and only serve locations
otherwise inaccessible due to physical or other constraints.



      (2)   Sidewalks.  Sidewalks shall be provided along all
streets.  Sidewalks shall also connect individual developments within the
district.



      (3)   Streetscape Improvements.  All streets shall include
boulevard trees and, where feasible, landscaped medians.  Street lighting
shall be of a common design and be of a pedestrian scale.



      (4)   Transit.  In all developments, provisions shall be made
for transit service.  This includes bus staging areas, bus stops, passenger
shelters, and other facilities necessary for the provision of transit service.



      (5)   Bicycles.  Bicycle racks should be provided near the
entrances to commercial buildings.



   (D)   Parking.  Parking shall generally conform to the requirements
of § 152.142. Flexibility in design of parking facility shall be allowed
when part of a coordinated plan of development and when in conformance with
the following standards.



      (1)   Location.  Parking should be located to the rear of
commercial buildings, opposite the street.



      (2)   Shared.  Parking should be shared among users to the
maximum extent possible so as to reduce the amount required.



      (3)   On-Street Parking.  Each local street should include
parallel or angled parking.



      (4)   Divisions.  Commercial parking lots shall be broken by
rows of islands or plantings to the extent feasible.



      (5)   Screening.  The view to surface parking areas should be
softened by berms, low masonry walls and/or trees and shrubs.



   (E)   Signs.  Unless otherwise amended in this section, all
provisions of Chapter 150 of the City Code shall apply.



      (1)   All signs within a development must conform to a
consistent design theme.



      (2)   With the exception of area identification signs, only
monument signs shall be allowed.



(Ord. 2001-949, passed 2-26-01)



§ 152.464  SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES.



   All properties proposed for redevelopment in the district shall conform
to the submittal requirements and review procedures established in the
Planned Development Overlay District (§§ 152.562 and 152.563).



(Ord. 2001-949, passed 2-26-01)



§ 152.465  MODIFICATION OR AMENDMENTS.



   Modifications or amendments of a Development Plan shall conform to
requirements of § 152.565.



(Ord. 2001-949, passed 2-26-01)



§ 152.466  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   The requirements of § 152.564 shall apply to all land within the
district.



(Ord. 2001-949, passed 2-26-01)



§ 152.467  REVOCATION OF DEVELOPMENT PLAN.



   Revocation of the Development Plan shall follow the process established
in § 152.566.



(Ord. 2001-949, passed 2-26-01)



PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ZONE DISTRICT (PUD)



§ 152.470  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the PUD district is to allow development to occur that
is in compliance with the land use designation of the Comprehensive Plan and
to allow innovation in development standards to accomplish the following
goals:



   (A)   To promote the creation of distinct areas within the city in a
way that encourages social relationships and reduces crime.



   (B)   To allow mixed use developments in a manner that does not
follow traditional zoning requirements, but will effectively implement the
Comprehensive Plan.



   (C)   To produce developments and an environment that are equal to
or superior in quality and design than would be achieved with traditional
zoning. 



   (D)   To allow for the planning and construction of unified
developments and environment that may be phased over time and share common
elements such as a site and landscape design, complementary architectural
schemes, a roadway network, and open space and/or recreational amenities.



   (E)   To allow innovation in the creation and design of open space
and development density to create well designed developments in a manner that
does not follow traditional zoning requirements.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.471  ESTABLISHMENT.



   The Planned Unit Development District is hereby established within the
City of Brooklyn Park.  The PUD zone district applies to all parcels of land
labeled as PUD on the official zoning map. The PUD zone district requirements
do not apply to areas with the PUD overlay.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.472  SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All property zoned PUD may require the review and approval of the
following:



   (A)   Preliminary development plan.  Applicants must submit a
preliminary development plan for the entire Development Plan property. 



   (B)   Development Plan.  Applicants must submit a development plan
for the phases of the development under consideration by the Planning
Commission and City Council.  The  Development Plan must allow for the
development of the property in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan. All
land that is subject to a  Development Plan may be under single ownership to
unify control, and may be made subject to such legal restrictions or
covenants to ensure compliance with the approved  Development Plan and other
sections of City Code and requirements.  The applications for Preliminary
Development Plan review and  Development Plan review may be combined if
desired as long as all procedural requirements for each action is followed
and all information required has been submitted.



   (C)   Site Plan Review.  All proposed uses are subject to the Site
Plan Review requirements found in §§ 152.030 through 152.039.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.473  PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The review and consideration of the Preliminary Development
Plan and the Development Plan by the city must follow the procedures for the
public hearing process as defined in §§ 152.030 through 152.039.



   (B)   The City Manager must maintain copies of city policy
concerning the information required for all applications.



   (C)   Development Plan required.  No permits related to the
preparation of the site and/or the construction of the project may be issued
for a property within a PUD district unless a Development Plan has been
adopted by the City Council for the use and development of that entire phase
of the property. 



   (D)   Review.  The Planning Commission and City Council may base
their recommendations and actions regarding approval of a Preliminary
Development Plan and Development Plan on consideration of the following items:



      (1)   Conformance of the proposed Plan with the regulations of
this section and the Comprehensive Plan.



      (2)   Internal organization and adequacy of various uses or
densities, circulation and parking facilities, urban services, recreation
areas, open spaces, screening and landscaping, and the ability to demonstrate
that a viable development will be created.



      (3)   Other factors related to the project as the Planning
Commission and City Council deem relevant.  The Planning Commission and City
Council may attach such conditions to their actions as they determine
necessary or convenient to better accomplish the purposes of this section.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.474  EXPIRATION OF APPROVAL.



   The expiration of approval and the ability to apply for time extensions
is specified in §§ 152.030 through 152.039.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.475  DEVELOPMENT PLAN STANDARDS.



   The following applies to all Development Plans:



   (A)   Residential density.  The density of all residential
Development Plans and residential portions of mixed use Development Plans
must meet the density ranges of the designated land use categories contained
within the Comprehensive Plan.  The density must be calculated based upon
the amount of gross land area devoted to residential uses excluding wetlands
that are designated by federal and state agencies and those classified by the
Wetland Conservation Act.  The density ranges of this Planned Unit
Development district are defined as follows:



      (1)   Low density residential use. Not to exceed three
dwelling units per gross acre.



      (2)   Medium density residential use.  Not to exceed five
dwelling units per gross acre.



      (3)   High density residential use.  Not to exceed 13
dwelling units per gross acre.



   (B)   Uses.  Any use that is a permitted use in the residential and
business districts (§§ 152.200 through 152.293 and §§ 152.300 through
152.393) may be allowed in the Planned Unit Development district as long as
the use complies with the Comprehensive Plan designation.  Some uses have
greater restrictions than others based on their impact with surrounding land
uses, those uses are defined in §§ 152.200 through 152.293 and §§ 152.300
through 152.393. Conditional uses defined in §§ 152.200 through 152.293 and
§§ 152.300 through 152.393 are subject to the procedures defined in §§
152.030 through 152.039.



   (C)   Area.  There may be no minimum property area for the
Development Plan.  However, if a property is less than three acres in size,
the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the
property cannot be reasonably combined with adjacent properties, and that the
type and design of the development is compatible with adjacent areas and land
uses.  The total maximum property area of a  Development Plan may not
exceed 80 gross acres unless the City Council finds that due to the unique
circumstances of the property, the adjacent land uses or features; or through
innovative site planning, use of cluster development techniques, landscaping
and/or exterior architectural planning efforts, that the maximum property
area should be exceeded.



   (D)   External buffer strips.  All buildings and hardsurface areas
may be set back an additional distance from exterior adjacent right-of-way of
collector or arterial road ways (as designated in the transportation chapter
of the comprehensive plan), utility or trail corridors or other similar uses
as specified in division (E).  The setbacks must be sufficient in size for
the placement of berms, landscaping, bicycle/pedestrian paths as determined
by the city, or other design features to create cohesive residential
neighborhoods or unified non-residential development.  The purpose of these
buffer strips is to protect residents and building users from noise and other
traffic related impacts, to the extent possible.  Extra space in the rear
yards which may count as an external buffer strips do not count toward the
fulfillment of the open space requirements.



   (E)   Development envelope.  The development envelope for each
building and parking area must be specified on the  Development Plan.  The
development envelope must be large enough to accommodate the buildings and
parking area associated with the proposed use(s).  The development envelope
must demonstrate adherence to all applicable standards of this chapter.



      (1)   Lot width and depth.



         (a)   Detached single-family.



            1.   Width at setback.  80 feet.



            2.   Depth. 130 feet.  A maximum of ten percent
of lots in any Development Plan may be less than 130 feet.



         (b)   Attached two-family.



            1.   Width at setback. 120 feet.



            2.   Depth.  130 feet.



         (c)   All other residential uses.  See §§ 152.200
through 152.293.



         (d)   Commercial, industrial, or other non-residential
uses.  The width and depth must be proposed and evaluated as part of the
development plan.



         (e)   Additional lot depth or width may be required
where residential lots abut utility corridors or collector roads.



         (f)   Arterial roads.  An additional 50 feet may be
required beyond the required depth for all residential uses.



         (g)   Trail corridors.  After the effective date of
this chapter, any new residential lot created in this district must have an
additional ten feet  required for each lot, beyond the required depth, for
all residential uses adjacent to trails.



      (2)   Setbacks



         (a)   Detached single-family and attached two-family.



            1.   Front. 30 feet.



            2.   Side on a public right-of-way. 20 feet or the
front setback of adjacent lots when they front the adjacent side street.



            3.   Interior side.  10 feet.  (Garage or house)



            4.   Rear.  30 feet.



         (b)   Townhouses and multiple family dwellings.  See
§§ 152.200 through 152.293.



         (c)   Commercial, industrial, or other non-residential
buildings.



            1.   Front or right-of-way. 50 feet or the
building height, whichever is greater.



            2.   Interior side or rear.  40 feet or the
building height, whichever is greater.



            3.   Impervious surface, including, but not
limited to, driveways and parking areas, from right-or-way or residential
uses.    40 feet.



            4.   From residential areas.  Setbacks from
residential areas must be as defined in §§ 152.300 through 152.393.



   (F)   Hardsurface coverage/floor area ratio (FAR).  The hardsurface
coverage percentage and FAR includes all land within the  Development Plan
except right-of-way or roadway easements that exist or will be dedicated as
part of the subdivision of the property. The maximum hardsurface coverage
percentage and floor area ratio for a  Development Plan is as follows:



 


Figure 152.475.01
PUD Hardsurface Coverage and Floor Area Ratios




Use Designation       

 

Hardsurface Coverage

 

Floor Area Ratio






Low Density Residential

 

40%

 

.5




Medium Density Residential

 

40%

 

.5




High Density Residential

 

50%

 

1.0




Office/Limited Business

 

70%

 

1.0




Commercial

 

75%

 

.8




Industrial

 

85%

 

1.0




Quasi-Public

 

50%

 

.6





 



   Mixed use developments have the same hardsurface coverage and FAR for
each use within the development as the use designation indicated in the above
table.



   (G)   Designated open space: The provision of undeveloped or natural
areas for the enjoyment of development residents is a primary component of
the PUD District.



      (1)   Each  Development Plan that contains a residential
component must provide at least five percent of the total area of the
residential portion of the development for designated open space.  Examples
of proposals qualifying as open space include public parks, private active or
passive recreational uses, trails, nature areas, community gardens, etc. 
Landscaping and/or recreational equipment in the required designated open
space area must be sufficient to implement the purpose of the proposal as
approved in the  Development Plan by the City Council, with recommendation
from the Planning Commission.



      (2)   The provision of the designated open space may not
occupy property within the development that must be provided to accommodate
urban service requirements such as storm water holding ponds or property
preserved to meet other state or local requirements such as the provisions of
the Wetland Conservation Act, if protected by city easement, unless the area
is proposed as an open space accessible to all residents in the development.



      (3)   Incentives: The City Council may allow incentives that
modify the requirements of the zoning ordinance in exchange for the creation
of additional common open space areas above the five percent requirement. 
Incentives may include modification of density, hardsurface coverage and
floor area ratio requirements.  Requests for incentives and proposals for
additional common open space must be clearly defined in the application for
Preliminary Development Plan.



      (4)   Restrictions.  No single-family detached residential
lot may be created narrower than 75 feet wide at the front setback.  For
each single-family detached residential lot proposed less than 80 feet, a lot
must be created that is greater than 90 feet.  A maximum of five percent of
all single-family detached residential lots may be less than 80 feet wide.



      (5)   The designated open space component of the Development
Plan must be maintained on a continual basis by an association, organization
or landlord based upon reasonable standards that are prepared by the
applicant in a form acceptable to the City Attorney and approved by the City
Council prior to the recording of a development agreement with Hennepin
County. The City Council may elect to provide maintenance or fee ownership of
the undeveloped/natural area if wider community purpose is determined and
public access to the facilities is provided.



   (H)   Landscaping.  The required landscaping quantities, screening
and the like must comply with §§ 152.200 through 152.293 and §§ 152.300
through 152.393.



   (I)   Staging of development and improvements: The following
standards apply to  Development Plans that will be staged or phased over a
number of years:



      (1)   The developer must submit a plan to the city describing
the sequencing of infrastructure improvements that comply with city
requirements to safeguard health, safety and welfare of residents, employees
and patrons within the development. The developer must submit financial
security in a form acceptable to the City Attorney to assure satisfactory
completion of all infrastructure improvements as required by the city.



      (2)   When a Development Plan provides for undeveloped/natural
areas that will be staged over a period of years, a proportionate share of
open space or recreational acreage must be provided that is equal or greater
than the proportionate number of residential units  or square footage of
non-residential usage or sufficient land escrow security may be provided that
bears a proportionate relationship to the total undeveloped/natural area
space may be provided to the city in a form acceptable to the City Attorney.



   (J)   Infrastructure/utility improvements: No  Development Plan
will be approved unless municipal roads, sewer and water facilities are
available or will be available to serve the entire property at the time of
project completion. All infrastructure improvements including gas,
electricity, telephone, telecable and other similar facilities must be placed
underground.



   (K)   Platting and subdivision of property: The uniqueness of each
Development Plan requires that the general subdivision standards and
specifications for design of streets, alleys, easements, blocks, and lots; 
and other infrastructure improvements may be subject to modification from the
respective city ordinances normally governing them. The City Council may
approve the design of streets, blocks, lots, public utilities, easements and
subdivisions which are not in compliance with the specifications of the
subdivision ordinance if the city finds that strict adherence to such
specifications is not required to meet the intent of this section or meet the
health, safety or welfare requirements of the city.  In no event may the
following provisions of the city Subdivision Ordinance be waived:



      (1)   Parkland dedication requirements as provided in §
151.061(B)(1) and (2) of the City Code.



      (2)   Final Plat approval is withheld until the applicant
complies with the provisions of § 151.085 of the City Code pertaining to the
required development improvements.



   (L)   Parking: The design, construction and required number of
parking stalls within the Planned Unit Development District are subject to
the requirements found in §§ 152.140 through 152.149, §§ 152.200 through
152.293 and §§ 152.300 through 152.293.



   (M)   Signage: The placement and design of signage within the
Planned Unit Development District are regulated in Chapter 150 of the City
Code.



   (N)   Legal restrictions and covenants: The owner(s) or their
respective agents may submit restrictions or covenants of the  Development
Plan in a form acceptable to the City Attorney that assigns maintenance
responsibility to all private open space and landscaped areas, and ensures
compliance with all aspects of the  Development Plan, site and building plan
review ordinances, and conditions of approval.



   (O)   Development Plan amendments: Amendments to an approved 
Development Plan may be approved by the City Council after review by the
Planning Commission. The notification and public hearing procedure for such
amendment may be the same as for approval of the original  Development Plan.
An amendment is any change determined by the City Manager which:



      (1)   Substantially alters the location of buildings, parking
areas, or streets.



      (2)   Increases the gross floor area of non-residential uses
by more than five percent or increases the gross floor area of any individual
building by more than ten percent.



      (3)   Increases the number of floors of any building.



      (4)   Decreases the amount of open space or alters it to
change its original design or intended use.



      (5)   Creates non-compliance with any special condition
attached to the approval of the Development Plan by the city.



   (P)   Development Plan contract.  The applicant may enter into a
development contract that states the components of the  Development Plan and
any conditions imposed upon the development by the City Council. The
development agreement must be signed by the applicant and the city and
recorded with Hennepin County prior to the issuance of any grading or
building permits for the property.



(Ord. 2000-936)



VILLAGE ZONING DISTRICT



§ 152.480  PURPOSE.



   The Village Zoning District is established to implement the goals and
objectives of the Village Redevelopment Plan and to define strategies and
design standards for the implementation of the Plan.  The district is
intended to promote creative and efficient use of land within the
Redevelopment District by providing flexibility in design and to allow mixed
land uses while encouraging compact and pedestrian oriented development.



(Ord. 2001-947, passed 1-22-01; Am. Ord. 2003-991, passed 3-17-03)



§ 152.481  USES.



   All land uses within the district shall  conform to the type and
location of uses described in the Village Redevelopment Plan.  Variations
from the type and location of uses may be allowed when approved as part of a
Development Plan, provided the intent of the Village Redevelopment Plan is
met.



   (A)   Permitted Uses.  No uses are permitted by right.



   (B)   Conditional Uses.  The following uses are allowed with a
conditional use permit.



      (1)   Residential.



      (2)   Offices.



      (3)   Retail and service business.



      (4)   Public and institutional facilities.



      (5)   Mixed use developments which include two or more of the
above.



(Ord. 2001-947, passed 1-22-01)



§ 152.482  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



      The design of all sites and buildings within the district shall
conform to the design guidelines established in the Village Redevelopment
Plan.  Variations from the guidelines may be allowed when approved as part
of a Development Plan, provided the intent of the Village Redevelopment Plan
is met.  Specifically the following provisions shall apply to all areas in
the district outside of the Market Square area:



   (A)   Lot area, lot width and yard requirements.



      (1)   Setbacks for commercial structures.



         Front yard:         Build-to line (0-10 feet)



         Side yard interior:      Zero feet minimum



         Side yard corner:      Same as front



         Rear yard:         20 feet



      (2)   Setbacks for residential structures.



         Front yard:         As outlined in the Village
Master Plan



         Side yard interior:      Zero feet minimum



         Side yard corner:      Same as front



         Rear yard:         20 feet



      (3)   Setback for parking.



         Front yard:         No parking permitted unless
approved specific to  a site plan



         Side yard:         Five feet



         Side yard corner:      Five feet



         Rear yard:         Five feet unless adjacent to
residential then minimum  of 20 feet



      (4)   Front yard build-to line established.  In the village
district in the front yard, a build-to line is established which provides a
minimum and maximum front setback for buildings and other structures, from
the right-of-way or property line.  The minimum front building setback shall
be zero feet and the maximum shall be ten feet.



      (5)   At least 65% of the street frontage of any lot shall be
occupied by building facades meeting the build-to line.  Other portions of a
building beyond the 65% may be setback farther than required by the build-to
line.



      (6)   There is no minimum lot size for non-residential uses.



      (7)   Residential parcels shall maintain a lot width that is
adequate for the design of the structure.  A minimum separation of 15 feet
shall be maintained between detached units.



      (8)   Parking shall not routinely be permitted in the front
yard.  However, in site specific cases it may be permitted subject to site
plan review and parking shall be screened with a decorative wall, railing,
hedge, or a combination of these elements, to a minimum height of three feet
and a maximum height of four and one half feet above the level of the parking
lot, at the build-to line.



      (9)   Drive-through lanes.  Drive-through or drive-in lanes
are not allowed within the build-to or in front of any building; they must be
located to the side or rear of a building.  This does not pertain to
driveways providing access to a site.



   (B)   Building design and materials.



      (1)   All buildings shall be designed to accomplish the goals
and policies of the Comprehensive Plan and the Village Master Plan. Building
materials shall be attractive in appearance, durable with a permanent finish,
and of a quality that is consistent with the standards and intent of the
Master Plan.  Where appropriate, buildings shall carry over materials and
colors of adjacent buildings, with the exception of prohibited materials.



      (2)   All building designs shall be subject to the review of
an architect to assure compatibility with the intent of the city
regulations.  The architect shall be selected by the city, with the cost of
review charged to the planning escrow submitted by the applicant.



      (3)   All buildings shall include the following elements:



         (a)   Accent materials shall be provided and included on
all sides of a building and all sides shall be treated the same.



         (b)   Buildings containing office and retail uses shall
maintain 50% transparency from grade to a height of 12 feet on each first
floor front that faces a street or public open space (sidewalk or plaza).



         (c)   Complimentary major material colors.



         (d)   A combination of vertical and horizontal pattern
designs in the building facade.



   (C)   Any exterior building wall adjacent to or visible from a
public street, public open space or abutting property may not exceed 50 feet
in length without significant visual relief consisting of one or more of the
following:



      (1)   The facade shall be divided architecturally by means of
significantly different materials or textures; or



      (2)   Horizontal offsets of at least four feet in depth; or



      (3)   Vertical offsets in the roofline of at least four feet,
or fenestration at the first floor level that is recessed horizontally at
least one foot into the facade.



   (D)   Exterior commercial building materials shall be classified as
primary, secondary, or accent materials.  Primary materials shall cover at
least 60% of the facade of a building.  Secondary materials may cover no
more than 30% of the facade.  Accent materials may include door and window
frames, lintels, cornices, and other minor elements and may cover no more
than 10% of the facade.  Allowable materials are as follows:



      (1)   Primary exterior building materials may be natural or
cementious brick or stone, glass or equivalent if approved by the city's
architect.



      (2)   Secondary exterior building materials may be integrally
colored decorative block, integrally colored stucco or equivalent if approved
by the city's architect.



      (3)   A water managed Exterior Insulation Finish System (EIFS)
may be permitted as a secondary material on upper floors only.



      (4)   Accent materials may include wood or metal if
appropriately integrated into the overall building design and not situated in
areas that will be subject to physical or environmental damage.



      (5)   All materials shall be integrally colored.



      (6)   Sheet metal, corrugated metal, plain flat concrete block
(whether painted or integrally colored) are prohibited materials unless they
are approved on a specific design as accent materials.



      (7)   Lighting may be used to accent the building and site and
shall be identified at the time of site plan review.



   (E)   All residential developments are subject to the design
criteria as outlined in the Village Master Plan and require site plan
review.  Each submittal shall include architectural renderings for proposed
structures that include a variety of colors and materials.  In addition, all
residential developments shall conform to the following performance standards:



      (1)   Each unit shall include an attached garage that is a
minimum of 480 square feet in size unless a smaller size is appropriate for
the unit design.  The specific size is subject to the  approval of the city
as part of the site plan review.  The garage shall be incorporated into the
design of the structure and may not extend further towards the public street
then the front of the house.



      (2)   At least 30% of the front exterior building finish must
consist of brick, stone, or an equivalent material if approved by the city's
architect.



   (F)   Trash handling and screening.



      (1)   All trash, recyclable materials, equipment for handling
them, including compactors, shall be totally screened from eye level view
from public streets and adjacent properties, and shall be located to the side
or rear of the building.  This may be accomplished by locating within the
principal building, or stored within an accessory building constructed of the
same materials and colors and attached to the principal building.



      (2)   Loading docks:  Loading docks shall not be located in
the front yard and shall be completely screened from eye-level view of public
streets and public open spaces, by means of landscaping which is at least 80%
opaque year round within two years, or by a screen wall of the same materials
and colors as the principal building.



      (3)   All mechanical equipment, whether roof-top or located on
the ground shall be completely screened from the ground-level view of
adjacent properties and public streets, or designed to be compatible with the
architectural treatment of the principal building.



   (G)   Landscaping.



      (1)   All areas not occupied by buildings, parkways,
driveways, sidewalks, or other hard surface shall be sodded or mulched and
landscaped with approved ground cover, flowers, shrubbery and trees and shall
be irrigated.



      (2)   At least 10% of the total land area within the perimeter
of parking and driveway areas shall be landscaped.



      (3)   Parking lot islands and medians shall be a minimum of
six feet wide.



      (4)   Overstory trees shall be provided along all parking lot
perimeters and medians at a minimum of 20 feet on center.



      (5)   A landscape plan shall be created for each site and
shall include a full complement of overstory, ornamental, and evergreen
trees, shrubbery, and ground covers that are hardy and appropriate for the
locations in which they are planted, and which provide year-round color and
interest.



      (6)   The acceptable planting materials are outlined in the
Village Master Plan.  Other materials may be approved at the discretion of
the city.



   (H) Signage/awnings.  Each building proposed for development shall
submit a comprehensive sign plan that addresses the size, location, and
number of signs proposed.  The submission of a comprehensive sign plan
supersedes the city sign ordinance as may be applied in other zoning
districts because of the unique nature of the Village District.



      (1)   Wall signs shall be located in a designated area located
between 12 feet and 16 feet above grade.



      (2)   Attached wall signage shall consist of individual
letters or script logos mounted on the building.



      (3)   Box signs or cabinet signs, whether on a wall,
projecting or on canopies shall only be allowed for logo signs as approved as
part of the overall signage plan.



      (4)   Wall signs shall be flat, projecting a maximum of six
inches.



      (5)   Any illumination of signs shall be done in a manner to
complement the type of sign proposed.  Lighting shall be accomplished in
such a manner as to prevent glare.



      (6)   Freestanding signs shall be limited to monument style
signs on a solid base that are a maximum of ten feet in height and 100 square
feet in area, including the sign base.



      (7)   Awnings shall not extend more than 5 feet from the
building facade and they shall not be backlit.



(Ord. 2001-947, passed 1-22-01; Am. Ord. 2003-991, passed 3-17-03)



§ 152.483  SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES.



   All properties proposed for redevelopment in the district shall conform
to the submittal requirements and review procedures established in the
Planned Development Overlay District (§§ 152.562 and 152.563).



(Ord. 2001-947, passed 1-22-01)



§ 152.484  MODIFICATION OR AMENDMENTS.



   Modifications or amendments of a Development Plan shall conform to
requirements of § 152.565.



(Ord. 2001-947, passed 1-22-01)



§ 152.485  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   The requirements of § 152.564 shall apply to all land within the
district.



(Ord. 2001-947, passed 1-22-01)



§ 152.486  REVOCATION OF DEVELOPMENT PLAN.



   Revocation of the Development Plan shall follow the process established
in § 152.566.



(Ord. 2001-947, passed 1-22-01)



SPECIAL ZONING OVERLAYS



SPECIAL OVERLAY DISTRICTS



§ 152.490  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter of the chapter defines and establishes the overlay
districts within the city.  The following overlays are hereby established
within the City of Brooklyn Park.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.491  FLOOD HAZARD OVERLAY.



   The legislature of the State of Minnesota has, in M.S. Ch. 103F and 462
delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations
designed to minimize flood losses. The intent of the designation on a
property is to protect and preserve areas and investments on properties that
are subject to periodic inundation by flood waters.  This designation
includes Floodway (FW), Flood Fringe (FF) and General Flood Plain (FP). The
Official Zoning Map together with all materials attached thereto is hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be part of this chapter.  The attached
material includes the Flood Insurance Study for Hennepin County, Minnesota,
and Incorporated Areas, dated November 4, 2016 and the Flood Insurance Rate
Map panels enumerated as follows: 27053C0069F, 27053C0088F, 27053C0089F,
27053C0093F, 27053C0182F, 27053C0184F, 27053C0201F, 27053C0202F, 27053C0203F,
27053C0204F, 27053C0206F, 27053C0207F, 27053C0208F, 27053C0209F, dated
November 4, 2016, all prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
These materials are on file in the office of the City Clerk.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2005-1033, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 2016-1209, passed
10-10-16)



§ 152.492  MISSISSIPPI RIVER CRITICAL AREA OVERLAY (CA).



   The intent of this designation is to protect and preserve the
Mississippi River corridor as a unique and valuable natural resource for the
city, region, state and nation.  The boundaries of this overlay were
determined by the State of Minnesota in Executive Order No. 79-19 and are not
under the jurisdiction of the City of Brooklyn Park to alter.  Areas with
Critical Area designation must be maintained largely for low-density
residential and park uses.  Where development or redevelopment occurs, site
alteration and building construction may not disturb the natural state of
shoreline, slopes, and bluff and must not be readily visible from the river.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.493  HIGHWAY OVERLAY (H).



   The intent of this designation is to encourage development along
designated highway corridors that enhance the tax base of the community and
are superior in quality and design than elsewhere in the city.  Amendments
to the boundaries of this overlay may be approved at the discretion of the
City Council through the rezoning process outlined elsewhere in this chapter.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.494  PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD) OVERLAY.



   The intent of this designation is to encourage development that is
superior in quality and design than could be achieved through traditional
zoning.  The boundaries of this overlay are amended for each application as
approved through on the Development Plan through the rezoning process
outlined elsewhere in this chapter.



(Ord. 2000-936)



FLOOD HAZARD AREA OVERLAY



§ 152.510  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of these overlays includes:



   (A)   To protect areas with environmental sensitivity.



   (B)   To promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of
the city.



   (C)   To minimize losses of life, property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base
due to periodic inundation.



   (D)   To comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program codified as 44 CFR Parts 59-78, as amended, so as to
maintain the community's eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program.



   (E)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of
watercourses and flood plains in order to moderate flood and stormwater
impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and
riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic
benefits and enhance community and economic development.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2005-1033, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 2016-1209, passed
10-10-16)



§ 152.511  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   This subchapter adopts the flood plain maps applicable to the
city and includes three flood plain districts: Floodway, Flood Fringe, and
General Flood Plain.



         (1)   Where Floodway and Flood Fringe districts are
delineated on the flood plain maps, the standards in § 152.513(C) or (D)
will apply, depending on the location of a property.



      (2)   Locations where Floodway and Flood Fringe districts are
not delineated on the flood plain maps are considered to fall within the
General Flood Plain District. Within the General Flood Plain District, the
Floodway District standards in § 152.513(C) apply unless the floodway
boundary is determined, according to the process outlined in § 152.513(E).
Once the floodway boundary is determined, the Flood Fringe District standards
in § 152.513(D) may apply outside the floodway.



   (B)   Lands to which subchapter applies. This subchapter applies to
all lands within the jurisdiction of the city shown on the official zoning
map or the attachments to the map as being located within the boundaries of
the Floodway, Flood Fringe, or General Flood Plain Districts.



      (1)   The Floodway, Flood Fringe and General Flood Plain
Districts are overlay districts that are superimposed on all existing zoning
districts. The standards imposed in the overlay districts are in addition to
any other requirements in this subchapter. In case of a conflict, the more
restrictive standards will apply.



   (C)   Interpretation. The boundaries of the zoning districts are
determined by scaling distances on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.



      (1)   Where a conflict exists between the flood plain limits
illustrated on the official zoning map and actual field conditions, the flood
elevations shall be the governing factor. The Zoning Administrator must
interpret the boundary location based on the ground elevations that existed
on the site on the date of the first National Flood Insurance Program map
showing the area within the regulatory flood plain, and other available
technical data.



      (2)   Persons contesting the location of the district
boundaries will be given a reasonable opportunity to present their case to
the Planning Commission and to submit technical evidence.



   (D)   Abrogation and greater restrictions.  It is not intended by
this subchapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements,
covenants, or other private agreements. However, where this subchapter
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this subchapter prevail. 
All other ordinances inconsistent with this subchapter are hereby repealed to
the extent of the inconsistency only.



   (E)   This subchapter does not imply that areas outside a flood
hazard area will be free from flooding or flood damages.  This subchapter
does not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee
for any flood damages that result from reliance on this section or any
administrative decision lawfully made based on regulations in this section.



   (F)   Severability.  If any section, clause, provision, or portion
of this subchapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of law,
the remainder of this subchapter shall not be affected and shall remain in
full force.



   (G)   Annexations. The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted by
reference into § 152.491 above may include flood plain areas that lie
outside of the corporate boundaries of the city at the time of adoption of
this subchapter.  If any of these flood plain land areas are annexed into
the city after the date of adoption of this subchapter, the newly annexed
flood plain lands will be subject to the provisions of this subchapter
immediately upon the date of annexation.



   (H)   Detachments. The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted by
reference into § 152.491 will include flood plain areas that lie inside the
city at the time of adoption of this subchapter. If any of these flood plain
land areas are detached from the city and come under the jurisdiction of
another city after the date of adoption of this subchapter, the newly
detached flood plain lands will no longer be subject to the provisions of
this subchapter as of the date of detachment.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2005-1033, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 2016-1209, passed
10-10-16)



§ 152.512  AMENDMENTS AND ADMINISTRATION.



   All amendments to this subchapter must follow the procedures as defined
in 152.030 through 152.039.



   (A)   Designations shown on the Zoning Overlay Map may not be
removed unless an applicant provides evidence that the designation is in
error or that the area has been filled to or above the elevation of the
regulatory flood protection elevation and is contiguous to lands outside the
flood hazard area.  Special exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the
Commissioner of Natural Resources determined that, through other measures,
lands are adequately protected for the intended use. 



   (B)   All amendments, either to the text of this section or the
Zoning Overlay Map must be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of
Natural Resources prior to adoption.  Changes in the boundaries for flood
hazard area must meet the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA)
Technical Conditions and Criteria and must receive prior FEMA approval before
adoption.  The Commissioner of Natural Resources must be given ten days
written notice of all hearings to consider an amendment to this section and
said notice must include a draft of the amendment or technical study under
consideration.



   (C)   Zoning Administrator:  A Zoning Administrator or other
official designated by the city shall administer and enforce this chapter. If
the Zoning Administrator finds a violation of the provisions of this chapter
the Zoning Administrator shall notify the person responsible for such
violation in accordance with the procedures stated in § 152.522.



   (D)   Permit requirements:



      (1)   Permit required.  For that portion of the property or
structures in the floodplain, a permit issued by the Zoning Administrator in
conformity with the provisions of this subchapter shall be secured prior to
the erection, addition, modification, rehabilitation (including normal
maintenance and repair over $500), or alteration of any building, structure,
or portion thereof; prior to the use or change of use of a building,
structure, or land; prior to the construction of a dam, fence, or on-site
septic system; prior to the change or extension of a nonconforming use; prior
to the repair of a structure that has been damaged by flood, fire, tornado,
or any other source, and prior to the placement of fill, excavation of
materials, or the storage of materials or equipment within the flood plain;
relocation or alteration of a watercourse (including new or replacement
culverts and bridges), unless a public waters work permit has been applied
for; any other type of development as defined in this subchapter. Exceptions
to this requirement include dog houses, non-habitable structures such as
storage units less than 36 square fee in size, normal household storage, such
as lawn furniture or equipment storage, such as a canoe, all of which may
easily be moved if necessary and normal landscaping and maintenance, provided
no fill is placed within the Flood Hazard Overlay.



      (2)   Notifications for watercourse alterations. The Zoning
Administrator shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and
the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources prior to the
community authorizing any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. If the
applicant has applied for a permit to work in the beds of public waters
pursuant to M.S. Chapter 103G, this shall suffice as adequate notice to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources. A copy of said notification shall also be
submitted to the Chicago Regional Office of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA).



      (3)   Notification to FEMA when physical changes increase or
decrease the 100-year flood elevation.  As soon as is practicable, but not
later than six months after the date such supporting information becomes
available, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the Chicago Regional Office
of FEMA of the changes by submitting a copy of said technical or scientific
data.



   (E)   The flood plain district regulations adopted by this
subchapter will be amended to incorporate any revisions by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency to the flood plain maps adopted by § 152.491.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2005-1033, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 2016-1209, passed
10-10-16)



§ 152.513  FLOODWAY, FLOOD FRINGE AND GENERAL FLOOD PLAIN PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS AND USES.



   (A)   Districts. 



      (1)   Floodway District.  The Floodway District includes
those areas within Zones AE that have a floodway delineated as shown on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in § 152.491. For lakes, wetlands and other
basins within Zones AE that do not have a floodway delineated, the Floodway
District also includes those areas that are at or below the ordinary high
water level as defined in M.S. § 103G.005, Subd. 14.



      (2)   Flood Fringe District.  The Flood Fringe District
includes areas within Zones AE that have a floodway delineated on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map adopted in § 152.491, but are located outside of the
floodway. For lakes, wetlands and other basins within Zones AE that do not
have a floodway delineated, the Flood Fringe District also includes those
areas below the 1% annual chance (100-year) flood elevation but above the
ordinary high water level as defined in M.S. § 103G.005, Subd. 14.



      (3)   General Flood Plain District.  The General Flood Plain
District includes those areas within Zones A, AE, or AH that do not have a
delineated floodway as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in §
152.491.



   (B)   Applicability.  Within the Flood Plain Districts established
in this subchapter, the use, size, type and location of development must
comply with the terms of this subchapter and other applicable regulations. 
In no cases shall flood plain development adversely affect the efficiency or
unduly restrict the capacity of the channels or floodways of any tributaries
to the main stream, drainage ditches, or any other drainage facilities or
systems. All uses not listed as permitted uses or conditional uses in
divisions (C), (D) and (E) below are prohibited. In addition, critical
facilities, as defined in § 152.008, are prohibited in all Flood Plain
Districts.



   (C)   Floodway District (FW).



      (1)   Permitted uses.  The following uses, subject to the
standards set forth in division (C)(2) below and § 152.514, are permitted
uses if otherwise allowed in the underlying zoning district or any applicable
overlay district:



         (a)   General farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant
nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop
harvesting.



         (b)   Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking
areas, and airport landing strips.



         (c)   Open space uses, including but not limited to
private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery
ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife
and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves,
hunting and fishing areas, and single or multiple purpose recreational trails.



         (d)   Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas, and
play areas.



         (e)   Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission
lines and pipelines, provided that the Department of Natural Resources Area
Hydrologist is notified at least ten days prior to issuance of any permit.



      (2)   Standards for Floodway permitted uses.



         (a)   The use must have a low flood damage potential.



         (b)   The use must not obstruct flood flows or cause any
increase in flood elevations and must not involve structures, obstructions,
or storage of materials or equipment.



         (c)   Any facility that will be used by employees or the
general public must be designed with a flood warning system that provides
adequate time for evacuation if the area is inundated to a depth and velocity
such that the depth (in feet) multiplied by the velocity (in feet per second)
would exceed a product of four upon occurrence of the regional (1% chance)
flood.



         (d)   No on-site sewage treatment, holding tanks or
water supply systems are permitted in the floodway.



      (3)   Conditional uses.  The following uses may be allowed as
conditional uses following the standards and procedures set forth in §
152.519 and further subject to the standards set forth in division (C)(4)
below, if otherwise allowed in the underlying zoning district or any
applicable overlay district.



         (a)   Structures accessory to the uses listed in
divisions (C)(1)(a) through (c) and the uses listed in divisions (C)(3)(b)
and (c).



         (b)   Extraction and storage of sand, gravel, and other
materials.



         (c)   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves, and
water control structures.



         (d)   Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or
materials.



         (e)   Placement of fill or construction of fences that
obstruct flood flows. Farm fences, as defined in § 152.008, are permitted
uses as it relates to this section.



         (f)   Travel-ready recreational vehicles meeting the
exception standards in § 152.514(F)(2).



         (g)   Levees or dikes intended to protect agricultural
crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less than the ten-year
frequency flood event.



      (4)   Standards for Floodway conditional uses.



         (a)   All uses.  A conditional use must not cause any
increase in the stage of the 1% chance or regional flood or cause an increase
in flood damages in the reach or reaches affected.



         (b)   Fill; storage of materials and equipment:



            1.   The storage or processing of materials that
are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to
human, animal, or plant life is prohibited.



            2.   Fill, dredge spoil, and other similar
materials deposited or stored in the flood plain must be protected from
erosion by vegetative cover, mulching, riprap or other acceptable method.
Permanent sand and gravel operations and similar uses must be covered by a
long-term site development plan.



            3.   Temporary placement of fill, other materials,
or equipment which would cause an increase to the stage of the 1% chance or
regional flood may only be allowed if the City Council has approved a plan
that ensures removal of the materials from the floodway based upon the flood
warning time available. 



         (c)   Accessory structures. Accessory structures, as
identified in division (C)(3)(a) above, may be permitted, provided that:



            1.   Structures are not intended for human
habitation;



            2.   Structures will have a low flood damage
potential;



            3.   Structures will be constructed and placed so
as to offer a minimal obstruction to the flow of flood waters;



            4.   Service utilities, such as electrical and
heating equipment, within these structures must be elevated to or above the
regulatory flood protection elevation or properly floodproofed;



            5.   Structures must be elevated on fill or
structurally dry floodproofed in accordance with the FP1 or FP2 floodproofing
classifications in the State Building Code. All floodproofed structures must
be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement and
designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.



            6.   As an alternative, an accessory structure may
be internally wet floodproofed to the FP3 or FP4 floodproofing
classifications in the State Building Code, provided the accessory structure
constitutes a minimal investment and does not exceed 576 square feet in size.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or meet or exceed the following criteria: to allow for
the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there must be a minimum of two
"automatic" openings in the outside walls of the structure, with a total net
area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding; and  there must be openings on at least two sides of
the structure and the bottom of all openings must be no higher than one foot
above the lowest adjacent grade to the structure.  Using human intervention
to open a garage door prior to flooding will not satisfy this requirement for
automatic openings.



         (d)   Structural works for flood control that will
change the course, current or cross section of protected wetlands or public
waters are subject to the provisions of M.S. § 103G.245. 



         (e)   A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the
floodway must not cause an increase to the 1% chance or regional flood. The
technical analysis must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides
of a stream.



         (f)   Floodway developments must not adversely affect
the hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining flood plain of any
tributary watercourse or drainage system.



   (D)   Flood Fringe District (FF).



      (1)   Permitted uses. Permitted uses are those uses of land or
structures allowed in the underlying zoning district(s) that comply with the
standards in division (D)(2) below. If no pre-existing, underlying zoning
districts exist, then any residential or nonresidential structure or use of a
structure or land is a permitted use provided it does not constitute a public
nuisance.



      (2)   Standards for Flood Fringe permitted uses.



         (a)   Except for the structures mentioned in §
152.514(D), only non-habitable accessory structures constructed with less
than 120 square feet, fences, or docks for the personal use of the
resident(s) of the principal structure that are constructed with flood
resistant material to the regulatory flood protection elevation in accordance
with the flood proofing classification of the State Building Code may be
permitted in the flood fringe, if permitted in the underlying district.  No
accessory structure may be constructed on the property that will increase
flood elevations. All structures, including accessory structures, must be
elevated on fill so that the lowest floor, as defined, is at or above the
regulatory flood protection elevation. The finished fill elevation for
structures must be no lower than one foot below the regulatory flood
protection elevation and the fill must extend at the same elevation at least
15 feet beyond the outside limits of the structure.



         (b)   Accessory structures.  As an alternative to the
fill requirements of division (D)(2)(a) above, structures accessory to the
uses identified in division (D)(1) above may be permitted to be
internally/wet floodproofed to the FP3 or FP4 floodproofing classifications
in the State Building Code, provided that:



            1.   The accessory structure constitutes a minimal
investment, does not exceed 576 square feet in size, and is only used for
parking and storage.



            2.   All portions of floodproofed accessory
structures below the regulatory flood protection elevation must be:



               a.   Adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement and designed to equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls;



               b.   Be constructed with materials resistant
to flood damage; and



               c.   Must have all service utilities be
water-tight or elevated to above the regulatory flood protection elevation.



            3.    Designs for meeting this requirement must
either be certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed
the following criteria: to allow for the equalization of hydrostatic
pressure, there must be a minimum of two "automatic" openings in the outside
walls of the structure, with a total net area of not less than one square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; and there
must be openings on at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all
openings must be no higher than one foot above the lowest adjacent grade to
the structure. Using human intervention to open a garage door prior to
flooding will not satisfy this requirement for automatic openings.



         (c)   The cumulative placement of fill or similar
material on a parcel must not exceed 1,000 cubic yards, unless the fill is
specifically intended to elevate a structure in accordance with division
(D)(2)(a) above, or if allowed as a conditional use under division (D)(3)(c)
below.



         (d)   The storage of any materials or equipment must be
elevated on fill to the regulatory flood protection elevation.



         (e)   All service utilities, including ductwork, must be
elevated or water-tight to prevent infiltration of floodwaters.



         (f)   The storage or processing of materials that are,
in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human,
animal, or plant life is prohibited.



         (g)   All fill must be properly compacted and the slopes
must be properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other
acceptable method.



         (h)   All new principal structures must have vehicular
access at or above an elevation not more than two feet below the regulatory
flood protection elevation, or must have a flood warning or emergency
evacuation plan acceptable to the City Council.



         (i)   Accessory uses such as yards, railroad tracks, and
parking lots may be at an elevation lower than the regulatory flood
protection elevation. However, any facilities used by employees or the
general public must be designed with a flood warning system that provides
adequate time for evacuation if the area is inundated to a depth and velocity
such that the depth (in feet) multiplied by the velocity (in feet per second)
would exceed a product of four upon occurrence of the regional (1% chance)
flood.



         (j)   Interference with normal manufacturing/industrial
plant operations must be minimized, especially along streams having
protracted flood durations. In considering permit applications, due
consideration must be given to the needs of industries with operations that
require a flood plain location.



         (k)   Manufactured homes must meet the standards of §
152.514 (E) and recreational vehicles must meet the standards of §
152.514(F).



      (3)   Conditional uses.  The following uses and activities
may be allowed as conditional uses, if allowed in the underlying zoning
district(s) or any applicable overlay district, following the procedures in
§ 152.519.



         (a)   Any structure that is not elevated on fill or
floodproofed in accordance with division (D)(2) (a) and (b) above.



         (b)   Storage of any material or equipment below the
regulatory flood protection elevation.



         (c)   The cumulative placement of more than 1,000 cubic
yards of fill when the fill is not being used to elevate a structure in
accordance with division (D)(2)(a) above.



      (4)   Standards for Flood Fringe conditional uses.



         (a)   The standards listed in divisions (D)(2)(c)
through (j) apply to all conditional uses.



         (b)   Basements, as defined by § 152.008, are subject
to the following:



            1.   Residential basement construction is not
allowed below the regulatory flood protection elevation.



            2.   Non-residential basements may be allowed
below the regulatory flood protection elevation provided the basement is
structurally dry floodproofed in accordance with  division (D)(4)(c) below.



         (c)   All areas of nonresidential structures, including
basements, to be placed below the regulatory flood protection elevation must
be floodproofed in accordance with the structurally dry floodproofing
classifications in the State Building Code.  Structurally dry floodproofing
must meet the FP1 or FP2 floodproofing classification in the State Building
Code, which requires making the structure watertight with the walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the
effects of buoyancy.



         (d)   The placement of more than 1,000 cubic yards of
fill or other similar material on a parcel (other than for the purpose of
elevating a structure to the regulatory flood protection elevation) must
comply with an approved erosion/sedimentation control plan.



            1.   The plan must clearly specify methods to be
used to stabilize the fill on site for a flood event at a minimum of the
regional (1% chance) flood event.



            2.   The plan must be prepared and certified by a
registered professional engineer or other qualified individual acceptable to
the City Council.



            3.   The plan may incorporate alternative
procedures for removal of the material from the flood plain if adequate flood
warning time exists.



         (e)   Storage of materials and equipment below the
regulatory flood protection elevation must comply with an approved emergency
plan providing for removal of such materials within the time available after
a flood warning.



   (E)   General Flood Plain District (GF).



         (1)   Permitted uses.



            (a)   The uses listed in division (C)(1) above,
Floodway District permitted uses, are permitted uses.



            (b)   All other uses are subject to the
floodway/flood fringe evaluation criteria specified in division (E)(2)
below.  Division (C) above applies if the proposed use is determined to be
in the Floodway District.  Division (D) above applies if the proposed use is
determined to be in the Flood Fringe District.



         (2)   Procedures for Floodway and Flood Fringe
determinations.



            (a)   Upon receipt of an application for a permit
or other approval within the General Flood Plain District, the Zoning
Administrator must obtain, review and reasonably utilize any regional flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other
source. 



            (b)   If regional flood elevation and floodway
data are not readily available, the applicant must furnish additional
information, as needed, to determine the regulatory flood protection
elevation and whether the proposed use would fall within the Floodway or
Flood Fringe District. Information must be consistent with accepted
hydrological and hydraulic engineering standards and the standards in
division (E)(2)(c) below.



            (c)   The determination of floodway and flood
fringe must include the following components, as applicable:



               1.   Estimate the peak discharge of the
regional (1% chance) flood.



               2.   Calculate the water surface profile of
the regional flood based upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and
overbank areas.



               3.   Compute the floodway necessary to
convey or store the regional flood without increasing flood stages more than
one-half (0.5) foot. A lesser stage increase than 0.5 foot is required if, as
a result of the stage increase, increased flood damages would result. An
equal degree of encroachment on both sides of the stream within the reach
must be assumed in computing floodway boundaries.



         (d)   The Zoning Administrator will review the submitted
information and assess the technical evaluation and the recommended Floodway
and/or Flood Fringe District boundary. The assessment must include the
cumulative effects of previous floodway encroachments. The Zoning
Administrator may seek technical assistance from a designated engineer or
other expert person or agency, including the Department of Natural
Resources.  Based on this assessment, the Zoning Administrator may approve
or deny the application.



         (e)    After the Floodway and Flood Fringe District
boundaries have been determined, the Zoning Administrator must process the
permit application consistent with the applicable provisions of divisions (C)
and (D) above.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2005-1033, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 2016-1209, passed
10-10-16)



§ 152.514  STANDARDS FOR ALL FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Public utilities.  All public utilities and facilities such
as gas, electrical, sewer, and water supply systems to be located in the
flood plain must be floodproofed in accordance with the State Building Code
or elevated to the regulatory flood protection elevation.



   (B)   Public transportation facilities.  Railroad tracks, roads,
and bridges to be located within the flood plain must comply with §
152.513(C) and (D). These transportation facilities must be elevated to the
regulatory flood protection elevation where failure or interruption of these
facilities would result in danger to the public health or safety or where
such facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor
or auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where
failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the
public health or safety. None of these uses shall increase flood elevations.



   (C)   Non-habitable park shelters and other community assembly
structures when accessory to park uses shall be permitted, but shall be
constructed using flood proofing measures to the regulatory flood protection
elevation, in accordance with the State Building Code, and shall not increase
flood elevations.  Buildings over 500 square feet must be dry flood proofed
to the flood proofing standards in the State Building Code.



   (D)   On-site water supply and sewage treatment systems.  Where
public utilities are not provided:



      (1)   On-site water supply systems must be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and are
subject to the provisions in Minnesota Rules Chapter 4725.4350, as amended;
and



      (2)   New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must
be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters, they must not be
subject to impairment or contamination during times of flooding, and are
subject to the provisions in Minnesota Rules Chapter 7080.2270, as amended.



   (E)   Manufactured homes.  New manufactured home parks and
expansions to existing manufactured home parks are prohibited in any Flood
Plain District.  For existing manufactured home parks or lots of record, the
following requirements apply:



      (1)   Placement or replacement of manufactured home units is
prohibited in the Floodway District.



      (2)   If allowed in the Flood Fringe District, placement or
replacement of manufactured home units is subject to the requirements of §
152.513(D) and the following standards:



         (a)   New and replacement manufactured homes must be
elevated in compliance with § 152.513(D) and must be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to,
use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces.



         (b)   New or replacement manufactured homes in existing
manufactured home parks must meet the vehicular access requirements for
subdivisions in § 152.517(B).



   (F)   Recreational vehicles.  New recreational vehicle parks or
campgrounds and expansions to existing recreational vehicle parks or
campgrounds are prohibited in any Flood Plain District. Storage of
recreational vehicles and equipment shall be in conformance with the
regulations of the city, less than 400 square feet in size and equipment may
be temporarily stored (for a maximum period of 180 days) if permitted in the
underlying district and in compliance with all other sections of the City
Code.  Placement of recreational vehicles in existing recreational vehicle
parks or campgrounds or as storage in the flood plain must meet the exemption
criteria below or be treated as new structures meeting the requirements of
this subchapter.



      (1)   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the provisions of
this subchapter if they are placed in any of the following areas and meet the
criteria listed in division (F)(2) below:



         (a)   Individual lots or parcels of record.



         (b)   Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or
campgrounds.



         (c)   Existing condominium-type associations.



      (2)   Criteria for exempt recreational vehicles:



         (a)   The vehicle must have a current license required
for highway use.



         (b)   The vehicle must be highway ready, meaning on
wheels or the internal jacking system, attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities commonly used in campgrounds and recreational
vehicle parks.



         (c)   No permanent structural type additions may be
attached to the vehicle.



         (d)   The vehicle and associated use must be permissible
in any pre-existing, underlying zoning district.



         (e)   Accessory structures are not permitted within the
Floodway District. Any accessory structure in the Flood Fringe District must
be constructed of flood-resistant materials and be securely anchored, meeting
the requirements applicable to manufactured homes in division (E)(2) above.



         (f)   An accessory structure must constitute only a
minimal investment.



      (3)   Recreational vehicles that are exempt in (F)(2) above
lose this exemption when development occurs on the site that exceeds a
minimal investment for an accessory structure such as a garage or storage
building.  The recreational vehicle and all accessory structures will then
be treated as new structures subject to the elevation and floodproofing
requirements of § 152.513(D). No development or improvement on the parcel or
attachment to the recreational vehicle is allowed that would hinder the
removal of the vehicle should flooding occur.



   (G)   Building sites.  If a proposed building site is in a flood
prone area, all new construction and substantial improvements (including the
placement of manufactured homes) must be:



      (1)   Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to
prevent floatation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;



      (2)   Constructed with materials and utility equipment
resistant to flood damage;



      (3)   Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damage; and



      (4)   Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that
are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2005-1033, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 2016-1209, passed
10-10-16)



§ 152.515  PROCEDURESFOR SUBMISSION OF TECHNICAL DATA FOR BOUNDARY
DETERMINATION.



   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a development for a use
within a Flood Hazard Overlay, the applicant is required to furnish as is
applicable to the application as determined by the City Manager for the
determination of the regulatory flood protection elevation and whether the
proposed use is within the flood way or flood fringe.  If the proposed use
is located within the flood way, § 152.513 of this chapter applies. If the
proposed use is located in the flood fringe, § 152.514 of this chapter
applies.



      (1)   A typical valley cross-section showing the channel of
the stream, elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel,
cross-sectional areas to be occupied by the proposed development, and high
water information.



      (2)   Plan (surface view) showing the following:



         (a)   Elevations or contours of the ground.



         (b)   Pertinent structure, fill, or storage elevations.



         (c)   The size, location, and spatial arrangement of all
proposed and existing structures on the site.



         (d)   Location and spatial arrangement of all proposed
and existing structures on the site.



         (e)   The location and elevations of streets.



         (f)   Photographs showing existing land uses and
vegetation upstream and downstream.



         (g)   The soil type(s).



      (3)   Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel
or flow line of the stream for at least 500 feet in either direction from the
proposed development.



   (B)   The applicant must be responsible to submit a copy of the
above information to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency
for technical assistance in determining whether the proposed use is in the
flood way or flood fringe and to determine the regulatory flood protection
elevation.  Procedures consistent with Minnesota Rules parts 6120.5000 -
6120.6200 must be followed in this expert evaluation.  The designated
engineer or expert is strongly encouraged to discuss the proposed technical
evaluation methodology with the respective Department of Natural Resources'
Area Hydrologist prior to commencing the analysis.  The designated engineer
or expert must:



      (1)   Estimate the peak discharge of the regional flood.



      (2)   Calculate the water surface profile of the regional
flood based upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and overbank
areas.



      (3)   Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the
regional flood without increasing flood stages and providing compensation
storage volumes on a 1:1 basis below the 100-year flood elevation.  An equal
degree of encroachment on both sides of a stream within the reach must be
assumed in computing floodway boundaries.



   (C)   The City Manager must present the technical evaluation and
findings of the designated engineer or expert to the Board of Adjustment and
Appeals.  The board may formally accept the technical evaluation and the
recommended floodway and flood fringe delineations for the Flood Hazard
Overlay Area or deny the permit.  The Board, prior to official action, must
submit the application and all supporting data and analyses to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and Department of Natural Resources for review
and comment.  Once the flood way and flood fringe boundaries have been
determined, the Board will refer the matter back to the City Manager who will
process the permit application consistent with the applicable provisions of
§§ 152.030 through 152.039 of this chapter.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2005-1033, passed 2-7-05)



§ 152.516  PROCEDURESFOR SUBMISSION OF TECHNICAL DATA FOR ALL DEVELOPMENT
WITHIN A FLOOD HAZARD OVERLAY.



   In addition to the requirements of §§ 152.030 through 152.039, the
following additional requirements apply to an application for development
within all Flood Hazard Overlays.



   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a development for a use
within a Flood Hazard Overlay, the applicant is required to furnish the
following as is applicable to the application as determined by the City
Manager for the determination of the flood hazard area boundary and the
adequacy of the proposed use for the particular site:



      (1)   Plans drawn to scale showing the following information:



         (a)   The nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of
the lot.



         (b)   The existing or proposed structures, fill, or
storage of materials.



         (c)   Flood-proofing measures, and the relationship of
the above to the location of the stream channel.



         (d)   The relationship of the above to the location of
the stream channel.



      (2)   Specifications for building construction and materials,
flood-proofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of
materials, water supply and sanitary facilities.



      (3)   The applicant is required to submit certification by a
registered engineer or surveyor licensed by the State of Minnesota that the
floodproofing, finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in
compliance with the provisions of this section.



   (B)   One copy of the plans and specifications defined above must be
given to a designated engineer or other expert person or agency for technical
assistance, where necessary, in evaluating the proposed project in relation
to flood heights and velocities, the seriousness of flood damage to the use,
the adequacy of the plans for protection, and other technical matters. 
Based upon the technical evaluation of the designated engineer or expert, the
City Manager shall determine the specific flood hazard at the site and
evaluate the suitability of the proposed use in relation to the flood hazard.



   (C)   Review standards.  In addition to the review standards listed
in §§ 152.030 through 152.039. The City Council must also consider the
following in its review of any application in the Flood Hazard Overlay. 
These standards include:



      (1)   The danger to life and property due to increased flood
heights or velocities caused by encroachment.



      (2)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands
or downstream to the injury of others or they may block bridges, culverts or
other hydraulic structures.



      (3)   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the
ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary
conditions.



      (4)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner.



      (5)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community.



      (6)   The requirements of the facility for a waterfront
location.



      (7)   The availability of alternative locations not subject to
flooding for the proposed use.



      (8)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing
development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.



      (9)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and flood plain management programs for the area.



        (10)   The safety of access to the property in times of
flood for ordinance and emergency vehicles.



        (11)   The expected heights, velocity, duration rate of
rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site.



        (12)   Such other factors which are relevant to the
purposes of this chapter.



   (D)   Reasonable conditions.  The City Council shall attach any
reasonable conditions as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this
chapter. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:



      (1)   Modification of waste treatment and water supply
facilities.



      (2)   Limitations on period of use, occupancy or operation.



      (3)   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed
restrictions.



      (4)   Requirements for construction of channel modifications,
compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective measures.



      (5)   Flood proofing measures, in accordance with the State
Building Code and this chapter. The applicant must submit a plan or
documentation certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the flood proofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood
protection elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.



   (E)   State and federal permits.  Prior to granting approval for
any application for development, the City Manager shall determine that the
applicant has obtained all necessary state and federal permits.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2005-1033, passed 2-7-05)



§ 152.517  SUBDIVISION REVIEW CRITERIA.



   (A)   In general.  Recognizing that flood prone areas may exist
outside of the designated Flood Plain Districts, the requirements of this
section apply to all land within the city.



   (B)   No land shall be subdivided which is unsuitable for the reason
of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment
facilities. Manufactured home parks and recreational vehicle parks or
campgrounds are considered subdivisions for purposes of this subchapter. 
All lots within Flood Plain Districts shall be able to contain a building
site outside of the Flood Plain Districts.  All subdivisions must have water
and sewage treatment facilities that comply with the provisions of this
chapter and have road access both to the subdivision and to the individual
building sites no lower than two feet below the regulatory flood protection
elevation.  For all subdivisions in the Flood Plain, the Floodway and Flood
Fringe District boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation and the
required elevation of all access roads must be clearly labeled on all
required elevations of all access roads and must be clearly labeled on all
required subdivision drawings and platting documents.



   (C)   In the General Flood Plain Overlay, applicants must provide
the information required in § 152.515 of this chapter to determine the
100-year flood elevation, the floodway and flood fringe district boundaries
and the regulatory flood protection elevation for the subdivision site.



   (D)   Removal of special flood hazard area designation. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the
special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly
elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA's requirements
incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for
multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should be
investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of
special flood hazard area designation will be requested.



   (E)   If a subdivision proposal or other proposed new development is
in a flood prone area, any such proposal must be reviewed to assure that:



      (1)   All such proposals are consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage within the flood prone area,



      (2)   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage, and



      (3)   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure of
flood hazard.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2005-1033, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 2016-1209, passed
10-10-16)



§ 152.518  CONDITIONS FOR A VARIANCE TO THE FLOOD HAZARD OVERLAY
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Applications for variance will be reviewed in accordance with
the procedures in §§ 152.030 through 152.039.



   (B)   Any projects granted a variance to high water mark must submit
an Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan prepared by a Registered Engineer
licensed by the State of Minnesota in accordance with the guidelines of the
West Mississippi Watershed District.  This plan must be approved by the city
prior to issuance of a permit.



   (C)   Proposals for variance must be the minimum necessary to allow
for the reasonable use of the property.



   (D)   Proposals must meet the requirements defined in § 152.516 for
development in the Flood Hazard Overlay.



   (E)   All habitable structures applying for a variance and proposed
in the Flood Hazard Overlay must be constructed in accordance with the flood
plain management standards for the State of Minnesota as found in Minnesota
Rules parts 6120.5000 - 6120.6200 and the Code of Federal Regulations, 44 CFR
60.3(a)-(d). 



   (F)   No variance shall have the effect of allowing in any district
uses prohibited in that district, permit a lower degree of flood protection
than the regulatory flood protection elevation for the particular area or
permit standards lower than those required by state law.



   (G)   The City Manager must submit hearing notices for proposed
variances to the DNR sufficiently in advance to provide at least ten days
notice of the hearing. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail
to the respective DNR area hydrologist.



   (H)   Required notification.  The City Manager must notify the
applicant for a variance of the impacts of the action and must maintain a
record of such notification.  The city must maintain a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such
variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to the
Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program.  The impacts
necessitating notification include:



      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure
below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance.



      (2)   Such construction below the 100-year or regional flood
level increases risks to life and property. 



   (I)   Submittal of final decisions to the DNR.  A copy of all
decisions granting variances must be forwarded to the DNR within ten days of
such action. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the
respective DNR area hydrologist.



   (J)   The following additional variance criteria of the Federal
Emergency Management Agency must be satisfied:



      (1)   Variances shall not be issued by a community within any
designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the
base flood discharge would result.



      (2)   Variances shall only be issued by a community upon:



         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause,



         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and



         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.



      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.



   (K)   All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or
above an elevation not more than two feet below the regulatory flood
protection elevation. If a variance to this requirement is granted, the Board
of Adjustment must specify limitations on the period of use or occupancy of
the structure for times of flooding and only after determining that adequate
flood warning time and local flood emergency response procedures exist.



   (L)   Record-keeping.  The Zoning Administrator must maintain a
record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance,
and must report such variances in an annual or biennial report to the
Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program, when requested by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2005-1033, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 2016-1209, passed
10-10-16)



§ 152.519  APPROVAL OF SITE PLAN REVIEW, CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS, AND/OR
GRADING PERMITS.



   (A)   The City Council may attach conditions to the approval of Site
Plan Review or any permits on flood hazard overlay properties including, but
not limited to, the modification of the waste disposal and water supply
facilities; limiting the period of use, occupancy, and/or operation; imposing
operational controls, sureties, and deed restriction requirements; aesthetic
considerations to protect wetlands, open space or those amenities, and
requirements for construction of channel modifications, compensatory storage,
dikes, levees, and other protective measures; floodproofing measures, in
accordance with the State Building Code and this subchapter. The applicant
must submit a plan or document certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures are consistent with the
regulatory flood protection elevation and associated flood factors for the
particular area.



   (B)   In passing upon conditional use applications governed by this
subchapter, the City Council must consider all relevant factors specified in
other sections of this subchapter, and those factors identified in §
152.516(C).



   (C)   The Zoning Administrator must submit hearing notices for
proposed conditional uses to the DNR sufficiently in advance to provide at
least ten days notice of the hearing. The notice may be sent by electronic
mail or U.S. Mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist.



   (D)   Submittal of final decisions to the DNR. A copy of all
decisions granting conditional uses must be forwarded to the DNR within ten
days of such action. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail
to the respective DNR area hydrologist.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2016-1209, passed 10-10-16)



§ 152.520  NON-CONFORMITIES.



   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful
before the passage or amendment of this chapter but which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter may be continued subject to
§§ 152.050 through 152.055 and the following:



   (A)   A nonconforming use, structure, or occupancy must not be
expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way that increases its flood
damage potential or degree of obstruction to flood flows except as otherwise
provided in division (B) below. Expansion or enlargement of uses, structures
or occupancies within the Floodway District is prohibited.



   (B)   Any structural alteration or addition to a nonconforming
structure or nonconforming use which would result in increasing the flood
damage potential of that structure or use shall be protected to the
regulatory flood protection elevation in accordance with flood plain
management standards for the State of Minnesota as found in Minnesota Rules
parts 6120.5000 - 5120.6200 and the Code of Federal Regulations, 44 CFR
60.3(a)-(d).



   (C)   The cost of any structural alterations or additions to any
non-conforming structure over the life of the structure must not exceed 50%
of the market value of the structure unless the conditions of this section
are satisfied. The cost of all structural alternations and additions
constructed since the adoption of the city's initial flood plain controls
shall be calculated into today's current cost which will include all costs
such as construction material and a reasonable cost placed on all manpower or
labor.  If the current cost of all previous and proposed alterations and
additions exceeds 50% of the current market value of the structure, then the
structure must be located outside the floodway and meet the floodplain
management standards for the State of Minnesota as found in Minnesota Rules
parts 6120.5000 - 5120.6200 and the Code of Federal Regulations, 44 CFR
60.3(a)-(d).



   (D)   If any nonconforming use is discontinued for 12 consecutive
months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to this
subchapter. The Assessor shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of
instances of nonconforming uses that have been discontinued for a period of
12 months.



   (E)   If any nonconforming use or structure is substantially
damaged, as defined in § 152.008, it shall not be reconstructed except in
conformity with the flood plain management standards for the State of
Minnesota as found in Minnesota Rules parts 6120.5000 - 5120.6200 and the
Code of Federal Regulations, 44 CFR 60.3(a)-(d).



   (F)   If a substantial improvement occurs, as defined in § 152.008,
from any combination of a building addition to the outside dimensions of the
existing building or a rehabilitation, reconstruction, alteration, or other
improvement to the inside dimensions of an existing nonconforming building,
then the building addition (as required by division (B) above) and the
existing nonconforming building must meet the flood plain management
standards for the State of Minnesota as found in Minnesota Rules parts
6120.5000 - 5120.6200 and the Code of Federal Regulations, 44 CFR 60.3(a)-(d).



   (G)   If any nonconforming use or structure experiences a repetitive
loss, it must not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions
of this subchapter



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2005-1033, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 2016-1209, passed
10-10-16)



§ 152.521  RECORD OF FIRST FLOOR ELEVATION.



   The City Manager must maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all new structures and alterations or additions
to existing structures in the Flood Hazard Overlay.  The City Manager must
also maintain a record of the elevation to which structures or alterations
and additions to structures are flood-proofed.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2005-1033, passed 2-7-05)



§ 152.522  ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.



   In addition to the enforcement and penalties defined in §§ 152.020
through 152.023, other action may be taken by the city to ensure compliance
with this section, including a request to the National Flood Insurance
Program to deny flood insurance availability to the subject property.  If
the structure and/or use suspected to be in violation of this section is in
the process of construction, the City Manager must immediately order the
construction or development halted until the proper permit or approval is
granted.  The City Manager will also notify the landowner to restore the
land to the condition which existed prior to the violation.  Each day a
violation exists shall be treated as a separate offense.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2005-1033, passed 2-7-05)




MISSISSIPPI RIVER CRITICAL AREA




§ 152.530  MISSISSIPPI RIVER CORRIDOR DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   Setbacks.  Front, side and rear setbacks are determined by
the underlying zoning district of the subject property, with the following
requirements for bluff, slopes over 12% and ordinary high water level
setbacks:



      (1)   Undeveloped Properties.



         (a)   Ordinary high water level.  All buildings shall
be placed at least 100 feet from the ordinary  high water level of the
Mississippi River.



         (b)   Bluff.  All buildings, decks or other
appurtenances shall be set back 40 feet from the edge of a bluff with slopes
12% or greater.



      (2)   Properties upon which a principal structure was
constructed prior to March 26, 2001.



         (a)   The foundation footprint of an existing principal
structure, or of a new principal structure constructed to replace a principal
structure that has been damaged, destroyed or removed from the property, may
be expanded and/or reconstructed in any direction that does not encroach
further toward bluffs or the river and complies with § 152.222.



         (b)   Existing attached garages, detached accessory
structures, decks, patios, three-season porches and other residential
structures may be rebuilt or expanded or reconstructed provided that they do
not encroach further toward bluffs or the river and comply with § 152.222.



         (c)   Attached garages, detached accessory structures,
decks, patios, three-season porches and other residential structures that are
damaged, destroyed or removed from the property may be reconstructed in the
same location as previously existed and may be expanded in any direction that
do not encroach further toward bluffs and/or the river and comply with §
152.222.



(Ord. 2001-951, passed 3-26-01)



HIGHWAY OVERLAY



§ 152.540  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the overlay is to allow development to occur that is
compatible with the primary zoning district and additionally regulate uses
and performance standards as deemed in the public interest and to accomplish
the following goals:



   (A)   To produce development and an environment that is superior in
quality and design than would be achieved in the primary zoning district.



   (B)   To protect and enhance private property values.



   (C)   To allow for the planning and construction of unified
developments and environments that may be phased over time and share common
elements such as a site and landscape design, complementary architectural
schemes, a roadway network, and open space and/or recreational amenities.



   (D)   To promote master planned developments to increase the
efficiency of infrastructure design.



   (E)   To implement the land use goals of the Comprehensive Plan.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.541  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   All provisions of the Zoning Code may apply to properties in
the overlay, however, in any instance where the provisions of the overlay
zoning conflict with the provisions of a primary zoning district, the more
restrictive provisions take precedence and govern.



   (B)   Wherever a reference to increased standards due to visibility
or proximity to a  public right-of-way is made, the requirements may also
apply to those planned or future right(s)-of way as shown in the city’s or
county’s Comprehensive or  Transportation Plans.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.542  SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES.



   Applicants must submit a Development Plan for the entire property
proposed for development.  Approval of a development plan may be subject to
the procedures for submittal, notification and public hearing established by
city policy and M.S. § 15.99 except as modified in this section. No final
approvals may be granted by the city to a Development Plan until all
necessary approvals for an Environmental Impact Statement, Environmental
Assessment Worksheet, Indirect Source Permit or a Comprehensive Plan
amendment have been granted. An approved site plan is required before a
building permit will be issued.  The site plan may be reviewed and approved
by the City Council.  The City Council may attach such conditions to their
actions as they determine necessary or convenient to better accomplish the
purposes of this section.  The City Council may base its actions regarding
approval of a Development Plan on consideration of the following items:



   (A)   Compatibility of the proposed development plan with the
Comprehensive Plan and this chapter;



   (B)   Effect of the proposed plans on the neighborhood in which it
is to be located, including traffic, noise, glare, setbacks, buffers, and
environmental impacts;



   (C)   Internal organization and adequacy of various uses or
densities, circulation and parking facilities, urban services, recreation
areas, open spaces, screening and landscaping;



   (D)   Other factors related to the project as the City Council deem
relevant.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.543  TERM OF APPROVAL.



   (A)   If application has not been made for final Site Plan Review
for all or part of the property within the development plan by December 31 of
the year following the date of its approval, the development plan approval
will lapse unless the applicant requests an extension of that approval.  An
extension may be valid for one year and may be approved by the City Council.



   (B)   If no construction has occurred on the property included
within the development plan by December 31 of the year following the date of
final site plan approval, approval for the development plan will lapse unless
an extension has been approved by the City Council.  An extension may be
valid for one year and may be approved by the City Council.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.544  SITE PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   All development plans submitted for approval must reflect these
following additional performance standards applicable to the site:



   (A)   Landscaping.



      (1)   Wetlands and storm water retention ponds may count, at
half credit, toward the required open space if it is treated as an amenity
feature on the site.



      (2)   Trees and shrubs required to screen loading areas may
not count toward the total required for the site, unless approved by the City
Council.



      (3)   All existing, healthy trees on the site must be saved,
where possible, or replaced at a ratio of 2 to 1 caliper diameter inches.



      (4)   No berms may have a slope greater than a 3:1 ratio.



   (B)   Screening



      (1)   Loading docks:



         (a)   From highways - screened with walls constructed of
the same materials as the building at a height necessary to screen the entire
truck from view.



         (b)   From all other public rights-of-way or abutting
residential areas - screened from view with undulating berms to an average
height of eight feet.  An additional four feet of plant material spaced to
obscure views of trucks parked at the loading areas year round.  At a
minimum the additional four foot screening may be six foot coniferous trees
planted ten foot on center in a sawtooth pattern



      (2)   Parking areas:



         (a)   From local streets - screening includes undulating
berms for an average height of four feet and an additional two foot of plant
material spaced to partially obscure views of the parking lot.



         (b)   From collectors and arterials, and when abutting
residential - screening includes undulating berms for an average height of
six feet and an additional two foot of plant material spaced to partially
obscure views of the parking lot.



   (C)   Parking and impervious surface areas.



      (1)   Impervious surface areas may be set back according to
the following:



         (a)   From local streets - 30 feet from public
rights-of-way.



         (b)   From all highways, other arterials, collectors,
and residential areas - 60 feet from public rights-of-way.



         (c)   The above setbacks may be increased if necessary
to accommodate the screening required in this chapter.



      (2)   Landscaping.



         (a)   A minimum of ten percent of the hardsurfaced area
of the parking lot must be landscaped.



         (b)   Landscaped islands in the parking lot may not be
used to satisfy the parking lot landscape requirement or the total required
open space for the site except where islands are greater than 500 square feet
in size and have a minimum width of ten feet.



         (c)   Landscaped islands may contain a minimum of 400
square feet and may be planted with a minimum of two overstory deciduous
trees no smaller than 2½ caliper inches in diameter and eight shrubs no
smaller than 18 inch potted.



      (3)   Visitor drop-off zones and parking spaces must be
provided near visitor entrances.



      (4)   Landscape layout and design must clearly define and
direct pedestrian movement through parking areas with a direct, continuous,
five foot wide, concrete sidewalk that connects with sidewalks of abutting
properties or public right(s)-of way.



      (5)   When parking structures are proposed, the architectural
design and use of materials must be similar or compatible with the
architecture of the principal  building(s).  No parking structures may be
located between the principal buildings and a highway.



      (6)   Shared parking.  Shared parking arrangements may
qualify to reduce the required parking in §§ 152.140 through 152.146 by up
to 20%. Properties qualify for shared parking if in compliance with §
152.145 and the parking plan for the area must demonstrate required, but not
installed, parking, as well as meet all other applicable ordinances
pertaining to parking.  Demonstrated parking areas may not count toward
green space requirement.



      (7)   Driveways may be consolidated to minimize external
street congestion.



      (8)   Bicycle racks may occupy a maximum of two parking stalls
without additional parking required.



   (D)   Fences.



      (1)   The following is prohibited: chain-link fences, barbed
or concertina wire, snow fences, electric fences, wooden fences (unless
constructed with brick or masonry columns, etc.) and the like.



      (2)   Gates must match fencing in design, material, height and
color.



   (E)   Exterior storage or display of articles, goods, materials,
machinery, equipment, fleet vehicles, plants, trash, dumpsters, materials for
recycling, storage containers or similar items, are not permitted.



   (F)   Utilities.



      (1)   All permanent utilities must be underground.



      (2)   All utility appurtenances such as telephone pedestals,
meters, transformers, etc. may not be visible from abutting properties,
parking areas, public streets and pedestrian walkways. They must be screened
from view with walls that are constructed with the same materials as the
principal building and/or landscaping materials.  Transformers must be
grouped with meters whenever possible.



   (G)   Accessory structures.  Accessory structures are not
permitted, with the exception of retaining walls and other walls and fences
as mentioned previously in this section.  The prohibition on accessory
structures does not include gazebos, picnic shelters or other structures that
are typically used as landscaping accents.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.545  BUILDING PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Building orientation.



      (1)   Loading docks, and the like, may not be visible from
building entries accessible to the public, residential areas or the highway
or other public rights-of-way.  For buildings with visibility on all sides
of the building, the loading docks or areas must be placed adjacent to the
lowest classification road with screening from all the higher classification
roads. Views of such areas must be screened as defined elsewhere in this
code. The city may allow some flexibility for views from certain portions of
the overpasses and entrance/exit ramps that are significantly raised above
the average grade of the adjacent properties.  Concrete pads may be provided
at all loading and servicing bays.



      (2)   Buildings and other site elements may not be located in
strip-like arrangements on one parcel.



      (3)   Building setbacks:



         (a)   Public rights-of-way - 60 feet



         (b)   Interior property lines - 20 feet or the height of
the building whichever is greater.



         (c)   Residential property - 110 feet.



      (4)   Multiple principal buildings on a single parcel must be
designed to complement each other and must be built of similar materials. 
Emphasis on building position may be made to give visual interest.



   (B)   Building form.



      (1)   Buildings must have a highly visible entry and must
feature no fewer than two of the following: canopies, overhangs, arcades,
outdoor patios, integral planters, display windows, or other architectural
details.  Developments with multiple buildings must cluster building entries.



      (2)   Large, uninterrupted planes are not permitted.  No wall
may have an uninterrupted length exceeding 80 feet without including at least
two of the following: changes in plane; changes in color, texture, materials
or masonry pattern; windows; or an equivalent element that subdivides the
wall.



      (3)   Building height studies.  For all structures over three
stories in height, the city reserves the right to require view-shed analysis
within 1,000 feet of a development or sun-shadow studies to protect other
developments from day-time permanent shadows.



      (4)   Building Materials.  All buildings must have at least
two or more of the following facade materials in any combination on each
facade: brick, stone, glass.  Other materials, such as architecturally
textured concrete precast panels but not including smooth concrete block may
be permitted at the city’s discretion through the Site Plan Review process
if they are determined to be consistent with the surrounding environment and
the purpose of this section.  The design on facades not visible from a
public right-of-way or residential uses may be less ornamental than those
visible from public right(s)-of-way, but may still use the same materials as
the rest of the building.  Walls used for screening must use the same
building materials as the principal building(s).



   (C)   Rooftops.



      (1)   Roof surface materials and texture may be chosen
considering their effect on the views of other sites and structures.



      (2)   Roof-mounted mechanical equipment, vents, and stacks,
may be minimized and positioned so that they will not be seen from public
rights-of-way or adjacent properties.  If the equipment is visible from
public rights-of-way or adjacent properties, the equipment must be
screened.  Screening must be in the form of parapet walls constructed of the
same building materials as the principal building. Long runs of exposed
duct-work, pipes, conduits or other similar items are prohibited.



      (3)   Rooftop solar collectors, skylights, and other
potentially reflective rooftop building elements may be designed and
installed in a manner which prevents reflected glare and obstruction of views
from other sites and structures.  Screening may be in the form of walls
constructed of the same building materials as the principal building.



      (4)   In those circumstances, such as freeway overpasses,
where parapet walls would be unable to screen the equipment, screening may be
accomplished using walls constructed of one or more of the materials used on
the principal building, as approved by the City Council.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2003-997, passed 5-12-03)



§ 152.546  OTHER REQUIREMENTS.



   The City Council may apply additional requirements as necessary to
implement the purpose of this overlay.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.547  ALLOWABLE USES.



   The permitted and conditional uses allowed in the Highway Overlay shall
be the same as the underlying zoning district, with the exception that
distribution centers/warehousing uses are not permitted.



(Ord. 2001-952, passed 5-14-01)



PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD) OVERLAY



§ 152.560  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the Planned Development Overlay is to promote creative
and efficient use of land by providing design flexibility in the application
of the provisions of a primary zoning district by providing an overlay
district on top of any of the primary zoning districts.  It is the
applicant’s responsibility to demonstrate that the proposed Planned
Development is not simply for enhanced gain and accomplishes one or more of
the following:



   (A)   Introduce flexibility of site design and architecture for the
conservation of land, natural features and open space through clustering of
structures, facilities, amenities and activities for public benefit;



   (B)   Improve the efficiency of public streets and utilities through
a more efficient and effective use of land, open space and public facilities
through assembly and development of land in larger parcels;



   (C)   Provide mixed land use and land use transitions in keeping
with the character of adjacent land uses in harmony with the Comprehensive
Plan and the underlying zoning districts; and,



   (D)   Provide for the clustering of land parcels for development as
an integrated, coordinated unit as opposed to a parcel by parcel, piecemeal
approach and to maintain these parcels by central management including
integrated and joint use of parking, maintenance of open space and similar
features, and harmonious selection and efficient distribution of uses.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.561  USES.



   Within the PD overlay, the uses are determined by the underlying zoning
district and in harmony with the Comprehensive Plan.  All conditional uses
must be considered permitted to eliminate the overlapping procedural
requirements of individual conditional use provisions.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.562  SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All property with a Planned Development Overlay requires a Development
Plan.  The Development Plan shall be preceded by a Preliminary (Concept)
Plan.



   (A)   Preliminary Development Plan.  Applicants shall submit a
preliminary development plan for the affected property.  If submitted the
preliminary plan involves the entire Development Plan property.



   (B)   Development Plan.  Applicants shall submit a Development Plan
for the entire property proposed for development.  A request for a rezoning
may be included in the Development Plan materials.  Approval of a
development plan shall be subject to the procedures for submittal,
notification and public hearing defined in §§ 152.030 through 152.039,
except as modified in this section. No final approvals may be granted by the
city to a Development Plan until all necessary approvals for an EIS, EAW, ISP
or Comprehensive Plan amendment have been granted. The City Council may
attach such conditions to their actions as they determine necessary or
convenient to better accomplish the purpose of this section.



   (C)   Site Plan Review. All proposed uses shall be subject to the
Site Plan Review requirements found in §§ 152.030 through 152.039.  For
projects to be constructed in a single phase, Site Plan Review may be
combined with the process for Development Plan approval, at the discretion of
the City Manager.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2001-952, passed 5-14-01)



§ 152.563  PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The review and consideration of the Preliminary Development
Plan and the Development Plan by the city follows the procedures for the
public hearing process as defined in §§ 152.030 through 152.039.



   (B)   The City Manager must maintain copies of city policy
concerning the information required for all applications.



   (C)   Development Plan Required.  No permits related to the
preparation of the site may be issued for a property within a PD overlay
unless a Development Plan has been adopted by the City Council; No permits
for the construction of the project can be issued for a property within a PD
overlay  unless a Site Plan Review has been approved by the City Council for
the development.



   (D)   Review.  The Planning Commission and City Council shall base
their recommendations and actions regarding approval of a Preliminary
Development Plan and  Development Plan on consideration of the following
items:



      (1)   Conformance of the proposed Plan with the regulations of
this section and the Comprehensive Plan.



      (2)   Internal organization and adequacy of various uses or
densities, circulation and parking facilities, urban services, recreation
areas, open spaces, screening and landscaping, and the ability to demonstrate
that a viable development will be created.



      (3)   Other factors related to the project as the Planning
Commission and City Council deem relevant.  The Planning Commission and City
Council may attach such conditions to their actions as they determine
necessary or convenient to better accomplish the purposes of this section.



(Ord. 2000-936; Am. Ord. 2001-952, passed 5-14-01)



§ 152.564  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Maintenance requirements.  If common open space or service
facilities are provided within the PD, the PD contains provisions to assure
the continued operation and maintenance of such open space and service
facilities to a predetermined reasonable standard.  Open space and
facilities may be placed under the ownership of one of the following, as
approved by the City Council:



      (1)   Dedicated to the public, where a community-wide use is
anticipated and the City Council agrees to accept the dedication;



      (2)   Landlord control, where only use by tenants is
anticipated; or



      (3)   Property owners association, provided all of the
following conditions are met:



         (a)   Prior to the use, occupancy, sale or the execution
of contract for sale of individual buildings, units, lots, parcels, tracts or
common areas, a declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions or an
equivalent document or a document, as specified by state statute, and a set
of floor plans, as specified by state statute, must be filed with the city. 
Filing with the city is to be made prior to the filings of the declaration or
document or floor plans with the recording officers of the county.



         (b)   The declaration of covenants, conditions and
restrictions, or equivalent document to the satisfaction of the City
Attorney, may specify that deeds, leases or documents of conveyance affecting
buildings, units, lots, parcels, or tracts may subject the properties to the
terms of the declaration.



         (c)   The declaration of covenants, conditions and
restrictions may provide an owners’ association or corporation may be
formed and that all owners may be members of the association or corporation
which may maintain all properties and common areas in good repair and which
may assess individual property owners proportionate shares of joint or common
costs.  This declaration may be subject to the review and approval of the
City Attorney.  The intent of this requirement is to protect the property
values of the individual owner through establishing adequate private control.



         (d)   The declaration may additionally, among other
things, provide that in the event the association or corporation fails to
maintain properties in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations
of the city or fails to pay taxes or assessments on properties as they become
due and in the event the city incurs any expenses in enforcing its rules and
regulations, which expenses are not immediately reimbursed by the association
or corporation, then the city has the right to assess each property its pro
rata share of the expenses.  Such assessments, together with interest and
costs of collection, may be a lien on each property against which each such
assessment is made.



         (e)   Membership is mandatory for each owner, and any
successive buyer.



         (f)   The open space restrictions are permanent and not
for a limited period of years, unless specifically approved by the city.



         (g)   The association is responsible for liability
insurance, local taxes, and the maintenance of the open space facilities to
be deeded to it.



         (h)   A property owner must pay their pro rata share of
the cost of the Association by means of an assessment to be levied by the
Association which meets the requirements for becoming a lien on the property
in accordance with Minnesota Statutes.



         (i)   The Association must be able to adjust the
assessment to meet changed needs.



         (j)   The by-laws and rules of the Association and all
covenants and restrictions to be recorded must be approved by the City
Council prior to the approval of the Development Plan for the PD.



   (B)   Staging of public and common open space: When a PD provides
for common private or public open space, and is planned for a staged
development over a period of time, the total area of common or public open
space or land escrow security in any stage of development may, at a minimum,
bear the same relationship to the total open space to be provided in the
entire PD as the stages or units completed or under development bear to the
entire PD.



   (C)   Density.  The maximum residential density of a PD may not
exceed the maximum residential density permitted by the Comprehensive Plan.



   (D)   In any PD, all utilities, including telephone, electricity,
gas and cable must be provided underground.



   (E)   Sewer connections.  Where more than one unit is served by a
sanitary sewer lateral which exceeds 300 feet in length, provision must be
made for a manhole to allow adequate cleaning and maintenance of the
lateral.  All maintenance and cleaning must be the responsibility of the
property owners’ association or owner.



   (F)   Landscaping/screening/fencing.  All must conform to the
applicable provision of this chapter.



   (G)   Setbacks.



      (1)   The front, rear and side setback restrictions on the
periphery of the property to which the PD is applied may, at a minimum, be
the same as the setbacks which are common to the area and generally
consistent with this chapter.



      (2)   Non-residential buildings located along roadways that
are part of a private internal street system may be set back a minimum of 15
feet.



      (3)   No building within the project may be nearer to another
building than one-half the sum of the building heights of the two buildings.



   (H)   Subdivision of land in the Planned Development.  In the event
that land in the Planned Development is to be subdivided into lots for the
purpose of separate ownership, the subdivision may occur under the platting
procedures and according to standards contained elsewhere in the City Code. 
The preliminary plat may be processed in conjunction with the Development
Plan.  A separate action on the final plat may be processed before the final
site plan receives approval.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.565  MODIFICATIONS OR AMENDMENTS.



   Minor modifications or amendments of a Development Plan are subject to
the procedures for Site Plan Review established by this chapter. Major
modifications or amendments, including changes in land use, density,
maintenance of open space or common areas, or extensive changes to road,
utility, or open space must follow the same procedures for submittal,
notification and public hearing as the original development plan approval.



(Ord. 2000-936)



§ 152.566  REVOCATION OF THE DEVELOPMENT PLAN.



   The City Manager must review all permits issued and construction
undertaken and compare actual development with the approved development
schedule.  If the City Manager finds that development fails in any respect
to comply with the Development Plan as finally approved, the Council must be
notified immediately.  Within 30 days of such notice, the Council may either
by ordinance revoke the PD permit, and the land may thereafter be governed by
the regulations applicable in the district in which it is located; or may
take such steps as it deems necessary to compel compliance with the Final
Plans as approved; or requires the landowner or applicant to seek an
amendment of the Development Plan.  Additional revocation procedures are
also specified elsewhere in this chapter.



(Ord. 2000-936)




ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS




§ 152.570  NOISE POLLUTION CONTROL.



   The following state agency regulations are adopted by reference: 
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, Noise Pollution Control Section, 6 MCAR
4.2004 and NPC 1.



(Ord. 2001-952, passed 5-14-01)



TRANSIT ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT (TOD) ZONING



§ 152.601  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The Transit Oriented Development (TOD) zoning districts are
established to provide for the creation of mixed use, multi-modal
neighborhoods within walking distance of public transit. These districts
enhance walkability by requiring small block sizes, reduced travel lane
widths on local streets, and active frontages. These districts may be applied
around high frequency transit service stations, per district maps.



   (B)   Multiple types of development are encouraged, with
developments designed to promote walking, bicycling and transit use. The
placement of building edges and treatment of architecture, parking,
landscaping, sidewalks, and public spaces are to be carefully planned in
order to achieve the pedestrian-oriented development envisioned for the
districts.



   (C)   These districts are developed to generate income from taxes.



   (D)   All development must conform to the Comprehensive Plan and to
the adopted Brooklyn Park Subarea Stormwater Master Plan.



(Ord. 2018-1231, passed 7-9-18)



§ 152.602  TOD DISTRICTS.



   (A)   TOD-C Transit Oriented Development Center District.



      (1)   Purpose. The TOD-C TOD Center is intended to provide the
most intensive mixed-use, transit-oriented zoning district.



   (B)   TOD-C.T Transit Oriented Development Center Transition
District.



      (1)   Purpose. The TOD-C.T TOD Center Transition is intended
to provide a transition from-the higher intensity transit-oriented mixed use
to other zoning districts.



   (C)   TOD-E Transit Oriented Employment.



      (1)   Purpose. The TOD-E TOD Employment is intended to provide
walkable urbanism with complementary uses in industrial, warehousing, and
office park areas.



   (D)   TOD-E.T Transit Oriented Development Employment Transition
District.



      (1)   Purpose. The TOD-E.T TOD Employment Transition is
intended to provide large format industrial, warehousing, and office park
areas complementary to walkable urbanism, with office and showrooms facing
the street.



   (E)   TOD-G Transit Oriented Greenfield.



      (1)   Purpose. The TOD-G TOD Greenfield - High, Medium, and
Low Intensity is intended to provide standards for new walkable, mixed use
communities.



      (2)   Additional subdivision standards are applied to this
District.



(Ord. 2018-1231, passed 7-9-18)



§ 152.603  USES.



The TOD districts are subject to the requirements of § 152.604 below, where
the use notations have the following meanings in Table 5 through Table 8, and
Table 15 through Table 17.



   P      Permitted subject to standards



   NP      Not permitted



   C      Allowed with approval of a conditional



   R      Permitted with compliance to the conditions of use permit
division (B)(1) below



   (A)   Multiple uses within a single parcel or building are permitted
in TOD districts.



   (B)   Uses permitted in sections § 152.606 - § 152.610 are limited
for size or intensity as follows:



      (1)   Restrictions per use:



         (a)   Service and retail:   50,000 sq. ft. max. gross
floor area



         (b)   Institutional on-site parking may not exceed 50
surface lot spaces.



(Ord. 2018-1231, passed 7-9-18)



§ 152.604  BUILDING AND SITE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Purpose. This section regulates the development and
modification of buildings and other elements of the built environment within
the private lot, based on the following premises:



      (1)   Building regulations should equitably balance the rights
of the individual and the interests of the community as a whole.



      (2)   Building form individually and collectively defines and
supports the public realm.



      (3)   Building placement should support walkability, safe
streets, and safe public spaces, to create pedestrian-friendly neighborhoods.



   (B)   Minimum frontage buildout indicates that lots must contain
buildings along the prescribed length of property line.



      (1)   At front streets the minimum frontage buildout is a
percentage of the length of the abutting property line.



      (2)   At side streets the minimum frontage buildout is a
specified distance along the property line from the corner.



      (3)   Facades must be within the minimum and maximum setback.



      (4)   At corner lots the width of the property, for frontage
buildout calculation, may be reduced by the setback of the perpendicular lot
line as indicated by (a) in the illustration below.



   (C)   Front setback requirements of Table 5 through Table 8, and
Table 15 through Table 17 will be maintained as city easement for
right-of-way maintenance.



   (D)   Building width must meet the requirements of Table 5 through
Table 8, and Table 15 through Table 17 measured at front setback. The maximum
building width does not apply to buildings with a forecourt frontage type
where the forecourt is wider than 40 feet.



   Figure 1. Minimum Frontage Buildout Illustration







 



   (E)   Building height is limited in above ground stories according
to Table 5 through Table 8, and Table 15 through Table 17.



      (1)    Stories are measured as follows:



         (a)   Stories are measured from finished floor to
finished ceiling.



         (b)   Stories above the ground floor are limited to 14
feet in height.



         (c)   Ground floor height is subject to the following
requirements:



            1.   Ground floor height must be no less than 12
feet except in TOD-G low intensity.



            2.   Ground floor height is limited to 20 feet,
above which it counts as an additional story.



      (2)   Parking structure height is subject to the following
requirements:



         (a)   Structure height may not exceed the finished
ceiling height of the top floor of the tallest primary use building.



      (3)   Projections not used for human habitation are exempt
from building height restrictions, including the following:



         (a)   Chimneys, spires, domes, elevator shaft and stair
housings, antennae, vents, and flag poles.



   (F)   Facade types must be assigned along all streets according to
the standards of Table 1 and the following requirements:



      (1)   Buildings may include multiple facade types along their
length, each type no less than 30 feet in width.



      (2)   Functioning building entries must be provided along
street frontages as follows:



         (a)   The primary building entry must be located along a
street frontage.



         (b)   One functional entry must be provided for every 80
feet of facade, leading to habitable space.



            1.   Where a building fronts onto two or more
streets, a side street facade under 50 feet in length is exempt from the
entry requirement.



      (3)   Loading docks and service areas are restricted according
to the parking and storage setbacks of Table 5 through Table 8 and Table 15
through Table 17.



      (4)   Encroachments into the front street and side street
setbacks are permitted as follows:



         (a)   Underground parking within the setback is not
considered an encroachment provided the structure is not visible from the
sidewalk.



         (b)   Roof overhangs, cornices, window and door
surrounds and other facade decorations may encroach up to two feet but not
beyond the property line.



         (c)   Awnings may encroach into the right-of-way to
within two feet of the curb. A minimum clearance of 10 feet above the
sidewalk is required.



         (d)   Porches, stoops, balconies, bay and bow windows
may encroach a maximum of three feet, but not beyond the property line.



      (5)   Facade glazing at street frontages must meet the minimum
area requirements of Table 1 and Table 5 through Table 8 and Table 15 through
Table 17.



         (a)   Percentage glazing is calculated individually for
each facade.



         (b)   Glazing must be transparent at the first floor,
where tinted and reflective glass are prohibited.



(Ord. 2018-1231, passed 7-9-18)



 


Table 1. Facade Types





SHOPFRONT


Entry Grade
 
At sidewalk grade.
 



Requirements
 
A shopfront is required at the primary entrance.


Shopfronts must have 60% ground floor glazing.


Display windows may project into frontage setbacks no more than five feet and
not beyond the property line.


Guidelines
 
Building entries may be recessed from the facade up to six feet in depth.


If ground floor grade is above sidewalk grade, the differential should be
accommodated within the building.


Awnings may project into the setback 100% of their depth.


COMMON ENTRY


Entry Grade
 
At sidewalk grade.
 



Requirements
 
A single collective entry to a multi-tenant lobby is required at the primary
building entrance.


Canopies and awnings are permitted to encroach into frontage setbacks 100% of
their depth.


Guidelines
 
Canopies and awnings should encroach into the public right-of-way.


FORECOURT


Entry Grade
 
At sidewalk grade.
 



Requirements
 
Front court facing the street with a maximum area of 1,800 sq. ft.


Must be lined with habitable space on three sides, or on two sides at corner
lots.


Must be 50% paved. Landscaping is permitted at grade or in raised containers.


Guidelines
 
May be combined with shopfront or common entry within the court.


STOOP


Entry Grade
 
18 in. min. from sidewalk grade.
 



Requirements
 
A stoop is required at building entrances, projecting from or recessed into
the facade.


PORCH


Entry Grade
 
18 in. min. from sidewalk grade.
 



Requirements
 
A porch is required at building entrances, projecting from or recessed into
the facade.


Porches must be a minimum of six ft. deep and ten ft. wide.




(Ord. 2018-1231, passed 7-9-18)



§ 152.605  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   Parking. Off-street parking must be set back from frontages
according to Table 5 through Table 8 and Table 15 through Table 17, except
where parking is located underground.



      (1)   Location. Required vehicular parking may be fulfilled in
the following locations:



         (a)   Parking spaces provided on-site, or between
multiple connected sites with a recorded shared use parking agreement.



         (b)   Parking spaces provided along a parking lane
on-street corresponding to the site frontages.



      (2)   Access. Parking access must meet the following
requirements:



         (a)   Driveways are limited to 20 feet in width.



         (b)   Sites with alley access must use the alley for
ingress and egress.



         (c)   Pedestrian access to off-street parking must be
provided from frontages with walkways a minimum of six feet in width.



      (3)   Screening.  Parking areas must be screened from public
streets, sidewalks and paths by a masonry wall or evergreen hedge. The height
of the screen must be a minimum of 36 inches and a maximum of 48 inches in
height.



      (4)   Structured parking. The ground floor of any parking
structure abutting a public street must have habitable space for a depth of
30 feet facing the street. METRO parking structures may be eligible for a
waiver from this requirement if a façade that limits vehicle visibility is
provided.



         (a)   Upper floors must be designed and detailed in a
manner consistent with adjacent buildings.



         (b)   Entrances must minimize conflict with pedestrian
movement.



      (5)   Required parking. Parking minimums and maximums do not
apply to TOD zones.



   (B)   Streetscape improvements. The provisions of this section apply
to all streetscape improvements in TOD-C, TOD-T, and TOD-E.



      (1)   Streetscape improvements including sidewalks,
boulevards, furniture zones, lights and trees must meet the requirements of
Table 2.



      (2)   Improvements must transition to existing conditions at
adjacent properties to preserve pedestrian access and safety.



 

Table 2.  Streetscape Requirements



 

WITHIN 1/4 MILE OF STATION

 

GREATER THAN 1/4 MILE OF STATION



Zoning district
 
TOD-C, TOD-C.T
 
TOD-C, TOD-E, TOD-E.T


Streetscape illustration
 

 



(1) Sidewalk width
 
10 ft. min. including boulevard width and furniture zone.
 
6 ft. min. including boulevard width and furniture zone.


Boulevard size
 
5 ft. min. square or 4 ft. by 6 ft. min.
 
5 ft. by 14 ft. min.


Tree spacing
 
Adjusted to accommodate shopfront needs
 
30 - 40 ft. on center



 



      (3)   Curb return radius must meet the standards of Table 3.



 

Table 3.  Curb Return Radius



EFFECTIVE RETURN RADIUS

 

PARKING LANE ON BOTH STREETS

 

PARKING LANE ON ONE STREET

 

NO PARKING LANES






 

 

 




Minimum Required Curb Return Radius



Local street to local street:

   25 ft.
 
5 ft. min.
 
17 ft. min.
 
25 ft. min.


Local street to primary street:

   30 ft.
 
5 ft. min.
 
22 ft. min.
 
30 ft. min.


Primary local to primary local:

   35 ft.
 
8 ft. min.
 
27 ft. min.
 
35 ft. min.


Primary local to

arterial

   40 ft.
 
13 ft. min.
 
32 ft. min.
 
40 ft. min.


Arterial to arterial:

   55 ft.
 
28 ft. min.
 
47 ft. min.
 
55 ft. min.


Bike lane reduction
 
Curb return radius may be further reduced by the width of the bike facility
when present.




 



      (4)   New frontage lanes adjacent to existing arterials may
use the Table 4 street sections in TOD zoning districts.



 


Table 4.  Frontage Lane Sections






FRONTAGE LANE FL 33-17

 

ILLUSTRATION



Functional class
 
Local street
 



Right-of-way
 
35 ft. min.


Design, target speed
 
15 - 20 mph



TRAVELED WAY



(TL) Vehicle lanes
 
1


Vehicle lane width
 
9 ft.


Movement
 
One-way


(Pk) parking lanes
 
1


Parking lane width
 
8 ft.


(BL) bicycle facility
 
n/a
 



Bicycle facility width
 
n/a


(Md) median
 
6 ft. min.


Turning lanes
 
n/a



STREETSCAPE



(SW) Sidewalk width
 
5 ft. min.


(BV) Boulevard width
 
5 ft. min.


Boulevard type
 
Long tree well, 5 ft. x 14 ft. min.


Tree spacing
 
30 ft. on center



FRONTAGE LANE FL 42-26

 



Functional class
 
Local


Right-of-way
 
  ft. min.


Design, target speed
 
15 - 20 mph



TRAVELED WAY



(TL) Vehicle lanes
 
2


Vehicle lane width
 
9 ft.


Movement
 
Two-way


(PK) Parking lanes
 
1


Parking lane width
 
8 ft.


(BL) Bicycle facility
 
n/a
 



Bicycle facility width
 
n/a


(MD) Median
 
6 ft. min.


Turning lanes
 
n/a



STREETSCAPE



(SW) Sidewalk width
 
5 ft. min.


(BV) Boulevard width
 
5 ft. min.


Boulevard type
 
Long tree well, 5 ft. x 14 ft. min.


Tree spacing
 
30 ft. on center




 



   (C)   Drive-through facilities.



      (1)   Drive-through facilities are prohibited for new
construction after date of passage in TOD-C and TOD-G.



      (2)   Drive-through facilities and lanes must be located
behind the principal building.



      (3)   Queuing lanes must not interfere with pedestrian
circulation.



      (4)   Drive-through canopies and other structures, where
present, must be constructed from the same materials as the primary building,
and with a similar level of architectural quality and detailing.



   (D)   Outdoor dining areas. Outdoor seating is permitted within any
setback area and temporary seating may be permitted with rights-of-way,
provided the sidewalk remains clear to a width of five feet.



   (E)   Landscaping requirements. All open areas of any site, except
for that portion used for parking, driveways, and storage, must be landscaped
and incorporated in a landscape plan, per the following requirements:



      (1)   The required landscaped area must be planted with trees,
ground cover, low shrubs or flowering plants.



   (F)   Signs. Signs in TOD-G Medium and High Intensity must comply
with the following:



      (1)   Type.



         (a)   An establishment may erect wall signs or
projecting signs, or a combination thereof as regulated by divisions (2) and
(3).



         (b)   Roof signs are prohibited.



         (c)   Freestanding or pylon signs, permanent or
temporary, are prohibited, except for joint or shared parking uses and public
transit message center signs and monument signs. Monument signs may not
exceed five feet in height.



         (d)   Mural scenes or designs painted directly on an
exterior building wall that are intended as decorative or ornamental features
are permitted with the prior approval of the City Manager. Murals that
include text, numbers, trademarks, logos or other forms of business
advertisement are considered painted wall signs and must comply with the
regulations of this code. Murals that are not painted wall signs are not
regulated by divisions (2) and (3).



         (e)   Sandwich board signs, one per business
establishment, are permitted provided that they are located on the sidewalk
in front of the business establishment and do not block pedestrian use of the
sidewalk. Each side of the sandwich board sign must not exceed nine square
feet. Sandwich board signs are not regulated by divisions (2) and (3).



      (2)   Number. An establishment may erect any number of wall
signs provided that the total area does not exceed the total permitted area
established in division (3).



      (3)   Size and materials.



         (a)   The maximum total area of all wall signs must not
exceed three square feet per one lineal foot of business establishment
frontage. Window signs are not included in the above calculation and may not
exceed one-third of the glazed area of the window. Signs may be illuminated.
Signs must be placed on the building so as not to obscure architectural
features and detail.



         (b)   The maximum area of any individual wall sign must
not exceed two square feet per one lineal foot of business establishment
frontage. The maximum area of any projecting sign must not exceed six square
feet.



(Ord. 2018-1231, passed 7-9-18)



§ 152.606  TOD-C TRANSIT ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT CENTER DISTRICT.



   (A)   Standards.  All parcels in TOD-C must meet the standards of
Table 5 below.



 

Table 5.  TOD-C Building and Site Standards










BUILDING SETBACKS

 

PARKING AND STORAGE SETBACKS



a.  Front street
 
1 ft. min. - 12 ft. max.
 
Front street
 
30 ft. min.


b.  Side street
 
2 ft. min. - 12 ft. max.
 
Side street
 
30 ft. min.


c.  Side property line
 
0 ft. min. or 6 ft. max.
 
Side property line
 
0 ft. min. if shared; or 5 ft.


d.  Rear property line
 
3 ft. min.
 
Rear property line
 
0 ft. min. if shared; or 5 ft.



MINIMUM FRONTAGE BUILDOUT

 

LOT COVERAGE AND BUILDING WIDTH



Front street
 
80% min.
 
Lot coverage by buildings
 
100% max.


Side street
 
50 ft. min. from front street
 
Building width
 
200 ft. max.



MINIMUM GLAZING

 

FACADE TYPES



Front street
 
60% min.
 
Shopfront
 
Common entry


Side street
 
30% min.
 
Forecourt
 
Stoop


Upper floors
 
15% min.
 

 









BUILDING HEIGHT



6 stories max.
 
Parking structure height
 
1 story less than building


Building height of 8 stories is available with a conditional use permit upon
initiation of construction of the METRO station, Building height may not
exceed one story more than an adjacent single- family district within 50 ft.
of residential parcels.



USES




RESIDENTIAL

 

COMMERCIAL



P
 
Multiple dwelling
 
P
 
Retail and service



 

 
P
 
Office


P
 
Care facility, convalescent home
 
P
 
Medical and dental clinics



INSTITUTIONAL

 
P
 
Veterinary and animal services


NP
 
Religious assembly
 
P
 
Child and adult day care


NP
 
Schools
 
P
 
Restaurants, brewpubs, theatres and entertainment



OTHER

 
C
 
Parking as a principal use


P
 
Wireless communication facilities as accessory uses located on a building
 
NP
 
Gasoline sales



 
NP
 
Drive-through facilities


NP
 
Self-storage facilities, sexually oriented businesses, impound lots, vehicle
sales




 



(Ord. 2018-1231, passed 7-9-18)



§ 152.607  TOD-C.T TRANSIT ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT CENTER TRANSITION DISTRICT.



   (A)   Standards.  All parcels in TOD-C.T must meet the standards of
Table 6 below.



 

Table 6.  TOD-C.T Building and Site Standards










BUILDING SETBACKS

 

PARKING AND STORAGE SETBACKS



a.  Front street
 
1 ft. min. - 16 ft. max.
 
Front street
 
30 ft. min.


b.  Side street
 
2 ft. min. - 16 ft. max.
 
Side street
 
15 ft. min.


c.  Side property line
 
0 ft. min. or 6 ft. max.
 
Side property line
 
5 ft. min., 0 if shared


d.  Rear property line
 
3 ft. min.
 
Rear property line
 
5 ft. min., 0 if shared



MINIMUM FRONTAGE BUILDOUT

 

LOT COVERAGE AND BUILDING WIDTH



Front street
 
70% min.
 
Lot coverage by buildings
 
80% max.


Side street
 
40 ft. min. from front street
 
Building width
 
100 ft. max.



MINIMUM GLAZING

 

FACADE TYPES



Front street
 
60% min.
 
Shopfront
 
Common entry


Side street
 
30% min.
 
Forecourt
 
Stoop


Upper floors
 
15% min.
 

 









BUILDING HEIGHT



4 stories max.
 
Parking structure height
 
1 story less than building


Building height of 6 stories is available with a conditional use permit upon
initiation of construction of a  METRO station. Building height must match
height of adjacent single-family within 50 ft. of residential parcels.



USES




RESIDENTIAL

 

COMMERCIAL



P
 
Townhouse
 
R
 
Retail and service


P
 
Multiple dwelling
 
P
 
Restaurants and brewpubs


P
 
Care facility, convalescent home
 
P
 
Office



INSTITUTIONAL

 
P
 
Lodging


NP
 
Religious assembly
 
P
 
Medical clinic


NP
 
Schools
 
P
 
Child care


R
 
Libraries
 
P
 
Adult day care


R
 
Museums
 
P
 
Parking



OTHER

 
C
 
Gasoline sales


C
 
Wireless communication facilities
 
C
 
Breweries and micro- distilleries


P
 
Drive-through as an accessory use
 
C
 
Taprooms and cocktail rooms



 

 
NP
 
Self-storage facilities, adult entertainment and retail, impound lots,
vehicle sales




 



(Ord. 2018-1231, passed 7-9-18)



§ 152.608  TOD-E TRANSIT ORIENTED EMPLOYMENT DISTRICT.



   (A)   Standards. All parcels in TOD-E must meet the standards of
Table 7. This district requires buildings to have an urban form to
accommodate commercial, retail, office, and accommodations or other general
mixed-use activity in the front of buildings where proximity to high
frequency transit service stations expects active, pedestrian-oriented
streetscapes to occur. TOD-E.T must meet the standards of Table 8.



 

Table 7.  TOD-E Building and Site Standards










BUILDING SETBACKS

 

PARKING AND STORAGE SETBACKS



a.  Front street
 
2 ft. min. - 16 ft. max.
 
Front street
 
30 ft. min.


b.  Side street
 
2 ft. min. - 16 ft. max.
 
Side street
 
12 ft. min.


c.  Side property line
 
0 ft. min. or 6 ft. max.
 
Side property line
 
0 ft. min.


d.  Rear property line
 
3 ft. min.
 
Rear property line
 
3 ft. min.



MINIMUM FRONTAGE BUILDOUT

 

LOT COVERAGE AND BUILDING WIDTH



Front street
 
70% min.
 
Lot coverage by buildings
 
80% max.


Side street
 
40 ft. min. from front street
 
Building width
 
200 ft. max.



MINIMUM GLAZING

 

FACADE TYPES



Front street
 
60% min.
 
Shopfront
 
Common entry


Side street
 
30% min.
 
Forecourt
 



Upper floors
 
15% min.
 

 









BUILDING HEIGHT



4 stories max.
 
Parking structure height
 
1 story less than building


Building height of 6 stories is available with a conditional use permit upon
initiation of construction of the 93rd Ave.  METRO station.



USES




RESIDENTIAL

 

COMMERCIAL



NP
 
Townhouse
 
P
 
Retail and service


NP
 
Multiple dwelling
 
P
 
Restaurants and brewpubs


NP
 
Care facility,

convalescent home
 
P
 
Office



INSTITUTIONAL

 
P
 
Lodging


NP
 
Religious assembly
 
P
 
Medical clinic


NP
 
Schools
 
P
 
Parking


NP
 
Libraries
 
P
 
Manufacturing and assembly


NP
 
Museums
 
P
 
Warehousing as an accessory use



OTHER

 
P
 
Child care


C
 
Wireless communication facilities
 
C
 
Adult day care


P
 
Drive-through as an accessory use
 
C
 
Gasoline sales


NP
 
Distribution
 
C
 
Breweries and micro- distilleries



 

 
C
 
Taprooms and cocktail rooms



 

 
NP
 
Self-storage facilities, adult entertainment and retail, impound lots,
vehicle sales




 



(Ord. 2018-1231, passed 7-9-18)



§ 152.609  TOD-E.T TRANSIT ORIENTED EMPLOYMENT TRANSITION DISTRICT.



   (A)   Standards. All parcels in TOD-E.T must meet the standards of
Table 8. This district is intended to provide transition in building scale
from the core area of commercial, retail, office, and accommodations or other
general mixed-use activity into large format industrial, warehousing, and
office park areas with office and showrooms facing the street.



 

Table 8.  TOD-E.T Building and Site Standards










BUILDING SETBACKS

 

PARKING AND LOADING SETBACKS



a.  Front street
 
5 ft. min. - 20 ft. max.
 
Front street
 
40 ft. min.


b.  Side street
 
5 ft. min. - 20 ft. max.
 
Side street
 
20 ft. min.


c.  Side property line
 
10 ft. min.
 
Side property line
 
10 ft. min.


d.  Rear property line
 
10 ft. min.
 
Rear property line
 
10 ft. min.



MINIMUM FRONTAGE BUILDOUT

 

LOT COVERAGE AND BUILDING WIDTH



Front street
 
60% min.
 
Lot coverage by buildings
 
70% max.


Side street
 
40 ft. min. from front street
 
Building width
 
No max.



MINIMUM GLAZING

 

FACADE TYPES



Front street
 
30% min.
 
Shopfront
 
Common entry


Side street
 
20% min.
 
Forecourt
 
 


Upper floors
 
n/a
 
 
 
 








BUILDING HEIGHT



4 stories max.
 
Parking structure height
 
1 story less than building



USES




RESIDENTIAL

 

COMMERCIAL



NP
 
Townhouse
 
P
 
Retail and service


NP
 
Multiple dwelling
 
P
 
Restaurants


NP
 
Care facility, convalescent home
 
P
 
Brewpubs



INSTITUTIONAL

 
P
 
Office


P
 
Adult training facilities
 
P
 
Lodging


NP
 
Schools
 
P
 
Medical clinic


NP
 
Religious assembly
 
P
 
Parking


NP
 
Museums
 
C
 
Child care



OTHER

 
C
 
Adult day care


C
 
Wireless communication facilities
 
C
 
Gasoline sales


 
 
 
 
C
 
Breweries and micro- distilleries


 
 
 
 
C
 
Taprooms and cocktail rooms


 
 
 
 
NP
 
Self-storage facilities, adult entertainment and retail, impound lots,
vehicle sales




 



(Ord. 2018-1231, passed 7-9-18)



§ 152.610  TOD-G TRANSIT ORIENTED GREENFIELD DISTRICT - HIGH, MEDIUM AND
LOW INTENSITIES AND GREENFIELD NEIGHBORHOOD STRUCTURE AND PUBLIC REALM
STANDARDS.



   (A)   Purpose and applicability. The structure of the TOD-G district
provides the city and future development groups with the regulations and
guidelines needed to develop a comprehensive, resilient and
pedestrian-oriented TOD. The subdivision regulations in division (D) provide
the following:



      (1)   A network of connected streets and blocks that reflect
an approved station area plan;



      (2)   General block sizes and configurations that support
zoning and land use goals;



      (3)   Maximum block perimeters that foster attractive, safe
and walkable environments, while enhancing circulation through the site;



      (4)   Guidance on meeting regional stormwater requirements as
detailed in the Brooklyn Park Subarea Stormwater Master Plan.



   (B)   Regulating plan.  The TOD-G district is implemented through a
regulating plan, approved with the rezoning to TOD-G, which includes a
combination of at least two of the three intensities described below and
regulated by Table 9 and § 152.601. TOD-G areas must be divided into
neighborhoods by the introduction of a primary thoroughfare network, and then
into blocks by the completion of the streets and open spaces. As the area is
subdivided to generate blocks, parcels and individual building sites, the
regulating plan assigns intensities that may be refined with approval by the
City Manager according to § 152.021. Regulating plans, consisting of one or
more maps, must show the following:



      (1)   District boundaries;



      (2)   Existing infrastructure including streets, parks and
open space;



      (3)   Thoroughfare network according to division (D) with
thoroughfare assignments according to Table 11 or Table 12;



      (4)   Civic area according to Table 9, with types and
boundaries according to Table 13.



   (C)   Intensities. TOD-G intensities are comprised of:



      (1)   Low intensity. Consists of medium density residential
areas, with a mix of uses, home occupations, and accessory buildings. It
contains a wide range of building types - houses, courtyard housing,
townhouses, duplexes, triplexes, small apartment buildings, and neighborhood
commercial uses. This area must be more than 1,500 feet from a high frequency
transit service station.



      (2)   Medium intensity. Consists of a mix of uses but is
primarily medium to high density residential and neighborhood commercial uses.



      (3)   High intensity. Consists of high density mixed-use
buildings that accommodate retail, offices, institutions, and multi-family
housing.



 

Table 9.  Regulating Plan Requirements



AREA IN ACRES

 

CIVIC SPACE

 

INTENSITY % OF AREA




40 min.

 

Percentage of Area

 

Low

 

Medium

 

High




5 - 10%

 

20% max.

 

50 - 70%

 

10 - 30%




 



   (D)   Subdivision regulations. The provisions of this section will
be used upon re-zoning to Transit Oriented Greenfield (TOD-G) and subdivision
within any TOD zoning district.



      (1)   The thoroughfare network must be laid out according to
Table 10 and comply with the standards of division (D)(1)(a) below.



 


Table 10.  Subdivision and Block Standards




BLOCK DIMENSIONS

 

DIMENSIONS



Block length
 
400 ft. max


Block perimeter
 
1,600 ft. max.


Alley width
 
16 ft. min.



MID-BLOCK PEDESTRIAN PASSAGES



Pedestrian passage width
 
12 ft. min., 24 ft. max.



 



         (a)   Thoroughfare standards.



            1.   All thoroughfares must connect to other
thoroughfares, forming a network.



               a.   New thoroughfares must connect wherever
possible to thoroughfares on adjacent sites. Cul-de-sacs may only be
permitted by approval of the City Manager to accommodate specific site
conditions.



               b.   New thoroughfares must implement the
approved Station Area Plan Street Network and use street section options from
Table 11.



               c.   A section may be chosen according to
right-of-way width and functional classification. New thoroughfare sections
may be created using the standards in Table 12.



            (b)   Block dimensions.



               1.   Block length and perimeter may be
adjusted up to 20% with approval from the City Manager due to topography,
existing development conditions, or if the block is at the perimeter of the
TOD regulating plan. Block lengths up to 800 feet may be approved if a
mid-block pedestrian passage is provided.



            (c)   Mid-block pedestrian passages.



               1.   In areas with adequate vehicular
capacity, pedestrian-only connections may be used mid-block and will count as
a new edge in block perimeter calculations.



            (d)   Parking lot layout.



               1.   In addition to the parking regulations
of § 152.605(A), parking lots in TOD-G must be laid out as blocks per Table
10, with utilities located in the drive aisles. Drive aisles must have
adequate width to redevelop with rights-of-way required by one or more of the
thoroughfare sections in Table 11.



 

Table 11.  Thoroughfare Sections





STREET ST 98 - 72

 

ILLUSTRATION



Functional class
 
Arterial
 



Right-of-way
 
98 ft. min.


Design, target speed
 
30 - 35 mph



TRAVELED WAY



(TL) Vehicle lanes
 
3


Vehicle lane width
 
10 ft.1


Movement
 
Two-way


(PK) Parking lanes
 
2


Parking lane width
 
8 ft.


(BL) Bicycle facility
 
Buffered lane
 



Bicycle facility width
 
6 ft. + 3 ft. buffer


(MD) Median
 
n/a


Turning lanes
 
At arterial intersections only



STREETSCAPE



(SW) Sidewalk width
 
8 ft. min.


(BV) Boulevard width
 
5 ft. min., 7 ft. max.


Boulevard type
 
Long tree well, 5 ft. x 14 ft. min.


Tree spacing
 
30 ft. on center


1 Subject to MNDOT approval.



STREET ST 70 - 46

 



Functional class
 
Primary, local, local street


Right-of-way
 
74 ft. min. primary local

70 ft. min. local street


Design, target speed
 
25 mph



TRAVELED WAY



(TL) Vehicle lanes
 
2


Vehicle lane width
 
10 ft.2


Movement
 
Two-way


(PK) Parking lanes
 
2


Parking lane width
 
8 ft.


(BL) Bicycle facility
 
Lane (local street), buffered lane (primary local)
 



Bicycle facility width
 
6 ft. + 2 ft. buffer (primary local)


(MD) Median
 
n/a


Turning lanes
 
n/a



STREETSCAPE



(SW) Sidewalk width
 
7 ft. min.


(BV) Boulevard width
 
5 ft. min., 7 ft. max.


Boulevard type
 
Long tree well, 5 ft. x 14 ft. min.


Tree spacing
 
30 ft. on center


2 Subject to MNDOT approval.



STREET ST 58 - 30

 



Functional class
 
Primary local, local street


Right-of-way
 
60 ft. min. primary local

58 ft. min. local street


Design, target speed
 
25 mph



TRAVELED WAY



(TL) Vehicle lanes
 
2


Vehicle lane width
 
10 ft. primary local3


Movement
 
Two-way


(PK) Parking lanes
 
2


Parking lane width
 
8 ft.


(BL) Bicycle facility
 
sharrow optional
 



Bicycle facility width
 
n/a


(MD) Median
 
n/a


Turning lanes
 
n/a



STREETSCAPE



(SW) Sidewalk width
 
8 ft. min.


(BV) Boulevard width
 
6 ft. min., 7 ft. max.


Boulevard type
 
Long tree well, 6 ft. x 14 ft. min.


Tree spacing
 
30 - 35 ft. on center


3 Subject to MNDOT approval.



STREET ST 49 - 27

 



Functional class
 
Local street


Right-of-way
 
49 ft. min.


Design, target speed
 
20 mph



TRAVELED WAY



(TL) Vehicle lanes
 
2


Vehicle lane width
 
10 ft.4


Movement
 
Two-way


(PK) Parking lanes
 
1


Parking lane width
 
8 ft.


(BL) Bicycle facility
 
sharrow optional
 



Bicycle facility width
 
n/a


(MD) Median
 
n/a


Turning lanes
 
n/a



STREETSCAPE



(SW) Sidewalk width
 
6 ft. min.


(BV) Boulevard width
 
5 ft. min., 7 ft. max.


Boulevard type
 
Long tree well, 5 ft. x 14 ft. min.


Tree spacing
 
30 ft. on center


4 Subject to MNDOT approval.




 



 

Table 12. Street Design Criteria



CRITERIA

 

LOCAL STREET

 

PRIMARY LOCAL

 

ARTERIAL





Sidewalk
 
5 ft. min. plus boulevard width
 
6 ft. min. plus boulevard width
 
8 ft. min. plus boulevard width


Boulevard
 
6 ft. wide by 6 ft. long min.
 
7 ft. wide by 14 ft. long min.
 
7 ft. wide by 14 ft. long min.


Parking lane width
 
8 ft. min.
 
8 ft. min.
 
8 ft. min.


Parking lanes required
 
0 - 2
 
2 min.
 
0 - 2


Travel lane width
 
9 ft. min., 10 ft. max.
 
10 ft. min., 11 ft. max.
 
10 ft. min., 11 ft. max.


Travel lanes required
 
1 - 2
 
2 - 4
 
4+ median


Movement types
 
one-way, two-way
 
two-way
 
two-way


Median
 
n/a
 
optional, 8 ft. min
 
optional, 10 ft. min.


Design speed, target speed
 
20 mph
 
25 mph
 
30 mph


Bike facility required
 
optional
 
required
 
required


Bike facility type
 
sharrow, lane, route
 
buffered lane, protected lane
 
buffered lane, protected lane


Bike lane width
 
5 ft. min.
 
6 ft. min.
 
6 ft. min.


Bike lane buffer
 
n/a
 
2 ft. min.
 
3 ft. min.




 



      (2)   Civic standards.



         (a)   The minimum and maximum percentage of land to be
dedicated and deeded as civic space is shown in Table 13. Civic spaces must
be designed according to Table 13.



 

Table 13.  Civic Space Types




SQUARE


Size in acres
 
0.25 - 2.5
 



Proportion (a:b)
 
1:5 max.


Edge condition
 
Thoroughfares on a minimum of two non-adjacent sides


Surface
 
50% maximum paved; pervious paving allowed


Landscape
 
1 tree with mature canopy over 25 ft. per 800 sq. ft. of area min.


PLAZA


Size in square feet
 
5,000 - 20,000
 



Proportion (a:b)
 
1:5 max.


Edge condition
 
Thoroughfares on a minimum of two sides


Surface
 
50% minimum paved; pervious paving allowed; bituminous pavement prohibited


Landscape
 
1 tree with mature canopy over 25 ft. per 1,000 sq. ft. of area min.


POCKET PARK


Size in square feet
 
1,000 - 5,000
 



Proportion (a:b)
 
1:4 max.


Edge condition
 
1 side minimum along a thoroughfare or pedestrian passage


Surface
 
May be paved or landscaped


Landscape
 
1 tree with mature canopy over 20 ft. per 600 sq. ft. of area min.


PEDESTRIAN PASSAGE


Width
 
12 ft. min., 24 ft. max.
 



Edge condition
 
Active frontages required in high intensity blocks


Walkway width
 
6 ft. min.


Landscape
 
3 ft. minimum landscape edge in medium and low intensity blocks




 



      (3)   Lot standards.



         (a)   Lots must have minimum and maximum widths
according to Table 14.



         (b)   Each lot must have a primary frontage along a
vehicular thoroughfare, except up to 20% of the parcels in a regulating plan
may front a civic space or pedestrian passage.



         (c)   Where lots have multiple frontages, one frontage
line must be designated as primary and any other frontage lines must be
designated as secondary.



 

Table 14.  Lot Width



LOW INTENSITY

 

MEDIUM INTENSITY

 

HIGH INTENSITY



20 ft. min., 100 ft. max. except single-family lots may not exceed 50 ft.
 
20 ft. min., 180 ft. max.
 
20 ft. min., 300 ft. max.



 



   (E)   Standards. All parcels in TOD-G must meet the standards of
Table 15 through Table 17 according to the requirements of § 152.601.



 

Table 15.  TOD-G High Intensity Building and Site Standards








BUILDING SETBACKS

 

PARKING AND STORAGE SETBACKS



a. Front street
 
1 ft. min. - 12 ft. max.
 
Front street
 
30 ft. min.


b. Side street
 
2 ft. min. - 12 ft. max.
 
Side street
 
12 ft. min.


c. Side property line
 
0 ft. or 6 ft. min.
 
Side property line
 
0 ft. min.


d. Rear property line
 
3 ft. min.
 
Rear property line
 
3 ft. min.



MINIMUM FRONTAGE BUILDOUT

 

LOT COVERAGE AND BUILDING WIDTH



Front street
 
80% min.
 
Lot coverage by building
 
80% max


Side street
 
50 ft. min. from front street
 
Building width
 
200 ft. max.



MINIMUM GLAZING

 

FACADE TYPES



Front street
 
60% min.
 
Shopfront
 
Common entry


Side street
 
30% min.
 
Forecourt
 
 


Upper floors
 
15% min.
 
 
 
 






BUILDING HEIGHT



8 stories max.
 
Parking structure height
 
1 story less than building


Building height of 12 stories is available with a conditional use permit upon
initiation of construction of the Oak Grove METRO station.  Building height
must match height of adjacent single-family within 50 ft. of residential
parcels.



USES




RESIDENTIAL

 

COMMERCIAL



P
 
Multiple dwelling
 
P
 
Retail and service


P
 
Care facility and convalescent home
 
P
 
Restaurants and brewpubs



INSTITUTIONAL

 
P
 
Office


NP
 
Religious assembly
 
P
 
Medical clinics


NP
 
Schools
 
P
 
Child care


P
 
Libraries
 
P
 
Adult day care


P
 
Museums
 
P
 
Parking



OTHER

 
C
 
Breweries and micro-distilleries


C
 
Wireless communication facilities
 
C
 
Taprooms and cocktail rooms


 
 
 
 
NP
 
Drive-through facilities


 
 
 
 
NP
 
Gasoline sales


 
 
 
 
NP
 
Self-storage facilities, adult entertainment and retail, impound lots,
vehicle sales




 



 

Table 16.  TOD-G Medium Density Building and Site Standards








BUILDING SETBACKS

 

PARKING AND STORAGE SETBACKS



a. Front street
 
1 ft. min - 16 ft. max.
 
Front street
 
30 ft. min.


b. Side street
 
2 ft. min - 16 ft. max.
 
Side street
 
12 ft. min.


c. Side property line
 
0 ft. or 6 ft. min.
 
Side property line
 
0 ft. min.


d. Rear property line
 
3 ft. min.
 
Rear property line
 
3 ft. min.



MINIMUM FRONTAGE BUILDOUT

 

LOT COVERAGE AND BUILDING WIDTH



Front street
 
70% min.
 
Lot coverage by buildings
 
80% max.


Side street
 
40 ft. min. from front street
 
Building width
 
100 ft. max.



MINIMUM GLAZING

 

FACADE TYPES



Front street
 
60% min.
 
Shopfront
 
Common entry


Side street
 
30% min.
 
Forecourt
 
Stoop


Upper floors
 
15% min.
 
 
 
 








BUILDING HEIGHT



4 stories max.
 
Parking structure height
 
1 story less than building


Building height of 6 stories is available with a conditional use permit upon
initiation of construction of the Oak Grove METRO station. Building height
must match height of adjacent single-family within 50 ft. of residential
parcels.



USES




RESIDENTIAL

 

COMMERCIAL



P
 
Townhouse
 
R
 
Retail and service


P
 
Multiple dwelling
 
P
 
Restaurants and brewpubs


P
 
Care facility , convalescent home
 
P
 
Office



INSTITUTIONAL

 
P
 
Lodging, not to exceed 50 rooms


NP
 
Religious assembly
 
P
 
Medical clinic


NP
 
Schools
 
P
 
Child care


R
 
Libraries
 
P
 
Adult day care


R
 
Museums
 
C
 
Taprooms and cocktail rooms



OTHER

 
C
 
Breweries and micro-distilleries


C
 
Wireless communication facilities
 
NP
 
Parking as primary use


 
 
 
 
NP
 
Gasoline sales


 
 
 
 
NP
 
Self-storage facilities, adult entertainment and retail, impound lots,
vehicle sales




 



 

Table 17.  TOD-G Low Intensity Building and Site Standards










BUILDING SETBACKS

 

PARKING AND STORAGE SETBACKS



a. Front street
 
8 ft. min. - 20 ft. max.
 
Front street
 
24 ft. min.


b. Side street
 
5 ft. min. - 20 ft. max.
 
Side street
 
12 ft. min.


c. Side property line
 
0 ft. or 6 ft. min.
 
Side property line
 
5 ft. min.


d. Rear property line
 
3 ft. min.
 
Rear property line
 
5 ft. min.



MINIMUM FRONTAGE BUILDOUT

 

LOT COVERAGE AND BUILDING WIDTH



Front street
 
60% min.
 
Lot coverage by building
 
70% max.


Side street
 
40 ft. min. from front street
 
Building width
 
80 ft. max.



MINIMUM GLAZING

 

FACADE TYPES



Front street
 
15% min.
 
Shopfront
 
Common entry


Side street
 
15% min.
 
Stoop
 
Porch


Upper floors
 
n/a
 
 
 
 






BUILDING HEIGHT



3 stories or 40 feet max.



USES




RESIDENTIAL

 

COMMERCIAL



P
 
Single-family, two-family
 
R
 
Retail and service


P
 
Townhouse
 
P
 
Restaurants, not to exceed 40 seats


P
 
Multiple dwelling
 
P
 
Brewpubs, not to exceed 40 seats


P
 
Care facility, convalescent home
 
P
 
Office, not to exceed 5,000 sq. ft.



INSTITUTIONAL

 
P
 
Lodging, not to exceed 12 rooms


NP
 
Religious assembly
 
P
 
Child care


NP
 
Schools
 
C
 
Medical clinic, not to exceed 5,000 sq. ft.


R
 
Libraries
 
C
 
Adult day care


R
 
Museums
 
NP
 
Parking as primary use



OTHER

 
NP
 
Gasoline sales


C
 
Wireless communication facilities
 
NP
 
Breweries and micro-distilleries


 
 
 
 
NP
 
Taprooms and cocktail rooms


 
 
 
 
NP
 
Self-storage facilities, adult entertainment and retail, impound lots,
vehicle sales




 



(Ord. 2018-1231, passed 7-9-18)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 153:  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT



Section



   153.01   Title



   153.02   Purpose



   153.03   Scope



   153.04   Severability



   153.05   Incorporation by reference



   153.06   Definitions



   153.07   Stormwater management plan



   153.08   Erosion control plan



 



   153.99   Penalty



§ 153.01  TITLE.



   Chapter 153 of the Brooklyn Park City Code shall be known and may be
referred to as the "Stormwater Management Ordinance" or the "Stormwater
Management Chapter."  When referred to herein it shall be known as "this
chapter."



(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)



§ 153.02 PURPOSE.



   This chapter is established to promote, preserve and enhance natural
resources within the City of Brooklyn Park and protect them from adverse
effects occasioned by poorly sited development or incompatible activities by
regulating land disturbing or development activities that would have an
adverse and potentially irreversible impact on water quality and unique or
fragile environmentally sensitive land. This chapter minimizes conflicts and
encourages compatibility between land disturbing and development activities
and environmentally sensitive lands.  By requiring detailed review standards
and procedures for land disturbing or development activities proposed for
such areas, this chapter achieves a balance between urban growth and
development and the protection of water and natural resources within the city.



(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)



§ 153.03 SCOPE.



   (A)   Applicability.



      (1)   Every applicant for subdivision approval, conditional
use permit, or a grading permit to allow land disturbing activities must
submit a stormwater management plan to the Engineering Department. The
stormwater management plan shall be submitted with the building permit,
grading permit application, or as directed by the Engineering Department. 
No subdivision approval or grading permit will be issued until approval of
the stormwater management plan or a waiver has been obtained in conformance
with the provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   Every applicant for subdivision approval or a grading
permit that involves wetland disturbing activities or work near wetlands must
submit a wetland assessment and delineation report to the Engineering
Department.  The wetland assessment and delineation report shall be
submitted with the grading permit application, or as directed by the
Engineering Department.  No subdivision approval, or grading permit will be
issued until approval of the wetland replacement plan application or a
Certificate of Exemption has been obtained in conformance with the provisions
of this chapter and the Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act of 1991, M.S. §§
103G.222 - .2373 ("WCA").



   (3)   Every applicant for a building permit, subdivision approval,
conditional use permit, or a grading permit must submit an application for an
erosion control plan to the Engineering Department. The erosion control plan
shall be submitted with the building permit application, land use
application, grading permit application, or as directed by the Engineering
Department.  No grading permit or building permit will be issued until
approval of the erosion control plan has been obtained in conformance with
the erosion control measures, standards and specifications contained in the
MPCA's Minnesota Stormwater Manual, or as otherwise approved by the City
Engineer.



   (B)   Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to:



      (1)   Any part of a subdivision if a preliminary plat for the
subdivision that has been approved by the City Council on or before the
effective date hereof.



      (2)   Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric
poles and other kinds of posts or poles.



      (3)   Excavations or land moving activities involving less
than 50 cubic yards of soil.



      (4)   Emergency work to protect life, limb, or property.



   (C)   Waiver. The Engineering Department, may waive any of the
requirements of this chapter upon making a finding that compliance with the
requirement will involve an unnecessary hardship and the waiver of such
requirement will not adversely affect the water quality and natural resources
of the city or adversely impact environmentally sensitive land. The
Engineering Department may require as a condition of the waiver that the
applicant dedicates easements or construct certain facilities as it deems
necessary.



(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)



§ 153.04 SEVERABILITY.



   Every section or subdivision of this chapter is declared separable from
every other section or subdivision.  If any section or subdivision is held
to be invalid by competent authority, no other section or subdivision shall
be invalidated by such action or decision.



(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)



§ 153.05 INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   The following are hereby incorporated into this chapter by
reference:



      (1)   The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
Permit, MN R100001 (NPDES Construction General Permit) issued by the MPCA,
August 1, 2013, as amended. The NPDES Construction General Permit.



      (2)   The city's Surface Water Management Plan. These
standards shall serve as the official guide for principles, methods, and
practices for proposed development activities.



(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)



§ 153.06  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT. The owner, their agent, or representative having interest in
land where an application for city review of any permit, use or development
is required by this chapter.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP). Practices to reduce the volume of
runoff, and improve water quality, to prevent pollution of waters of the
state. BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES are designed to reduce stormwater runoff
volume, peak flows, and/or nonpoint source pollution through
evapotranspiration, infiltration, detention, and filtration, and may include
activities, prohibitions of practices, treatment requirements, operating
procedures, and other management practices.



   CHANNEL. A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.



   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Any disturbance to the land that results in a
change in the topography, existing soil cover, or the existing soil
topography that may result in accelerated stormwater runoff, including
clearing, grading, filling, and excavating.



   CONTROL MEASURE. A practice or combination of practices to control
erosion and attendant pollution.



   DETENTION FACILITY. A permanent natural or human-made structure,
including wetlands, for the temporary storage of runoff which contains a
permanent pool of water.



   FLOOD FRINGE.   All the land in a flood plain not lying within a
delineated flood way.  Land within a floodway fringe is subject to
inundation by relatively low velocity flows and shallow water depths.  The
flood fringe includes at a minimum, the areas designated as zone AE on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map outside of the floodway, except as modified on the
Zoning Overlay Map.



   FLOOD PLAIN, GENERAL.  A 100-year flood plain area shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map where flood way and flood fringe boundaries and/or
100-year flood elevations have not been determined.  These areas include
areas designated as Zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate Map and zone AE areas
where a floodway is not shown.



   FLOODWAY. The channel of a natural stream or river and portions of the
flood plain adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the flood water or flood flow of any natural stream or river. The
floodway, at a minimum, includes the floodway areas shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map and as depicted on the Zoning Overlay Map.



   HYDRIC SOILS. Soils that are saturated, flooded, or ponded long enough
during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part.



   HYDROPHYTIC VEGETATION. Macrophytic plant life growing in water, soil,
or on a substrate that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a
result of excessive water content.



   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Any surface that prevents absorption of water into
the ground.  Examples of impervious surfaces include, but are not limited
to, cement, asphalt, and paving brick.



   LAND DISTURBING OR DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES. Any change of the land
surface including removing vegetative cover, excavating, filling, grading,
and the construction of any structure.



   MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT. A document recorded against the property which
provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater treatment practices.



   NEW DEVELOPMENT. Any construction activity that is not defined as
redevelopment.



   NEW IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Any newly constructed surface area that changes
the infiltration rate from a pervious surface to that of an impervious
surface.



   PERSON.   Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, franchisee,
and association.



   PERVIOUS SURFACE. Any surface area that allows infiltration of all or
the majority of the precipitation that falls on it.  Pervious surfaces
include turfgrass, rain gardens, planting beds, and other infiltration BMPs.



   PLAN.  A stormwater management plan governed by this chapter.



   PUBLIC WATERS. Waters of the state as defined in M.S. § 103G.005,
Subd. 15, as it may be amended from time to time.



   REDEVELOPMENT.  Any construction activity where, prior to the start of
construction, the areas to be disturbed have 15% or more of impervious
surface.



   REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood which is representative of large floods known
to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what
can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the
100-year recurrence interval. REGIONAL FLOOD is synonymous with the term BASE
FLOOD used in the Flood Insurance Study.



   RETENTION FACILITY. A permanent natural or human-made structure that
provides for the storage of storm water runoff by means of a permanent pool
of water.



   SEDIMENT.  Solid matter carried by water, sewage, or other liquids.



   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT. The use of structural or non-structural
practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads,
discharge volumes, and/or peak discharge rates.



   STORMWATER TREATMENT PRACTICES. Measures, either structural or
nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective and practical
means of preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint-source pollution
inputs to stormwater runoff and waterbodies.



   STRUCTURE. Anything manufactured, constructed, or erected which is
normally attached to or positioned on land, including portable structures,
earthen structures, roads, parking lots, and paved storage areas.



   WATERCOURSE. A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water,
either natural or fabricated, which gathers or carries surface water.



   WATERSHED. The total drainage area contributing runoff to a single
point.



   WETLAND. Poorly drained, environmentally sensitive lands as designated
by M.S. § 103G.221 et seq. known as the Wetland Conservation Act, or any
other state or federal agency.



(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)



§ 153.07 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.



   (A)   Approval procedures.



      (1)   Application. A written application for stormwater
management plan approval, along with a proposed stormwater management plan
and maintenance agreement, shall be filed with the Engineering Division of
the Operations and Maintenance Department.  The application shall include a
statement indicating the grounds upon which the approval is being requested,
that the proposed use is permitted by right or as an exception in the
underlying zoning district, and adequate evidence showing that the proposed
use will conform to the standards set forth in this chapter and the City Code.



      (2)   Required plan submittals.



         (a)   Two sets of clearly legible blue or black lined
copies of drawings, electronic copy of drawings, and required information
shall be submitted to the Engineering Division of the Public Works Department
along with the process and approval fee. The plans shall be drawn at a
minimum scale of one inch equals 100 feet and shall contain the following
information:



            1.   Existing site map. A map of existing
conditions showing the site and immediately adjacent areas within 200 feet of
the site, including:



               a.   The name and address of the applicant,
the section, township and range, north point, date and scale of drawing and
number of sheets.



               b.   The location of the property by showing
an insert map at a scale sufficient to clearly identify its location and
giving such information as the name and numbers of adjoining roads,
railroads, utilities, subdivisions, cities, townships and districts or other
landmarks.



               c.   The existing topography with a contour
interval appropriate to the topography of the land but in no case having a
contour interval greater than two feet.



               d.   A delineation of all ponds,
infiltration features, streams, rivers, public waters and wetlands located on
and immediately adjacent to the site, including the depth of the water, the
normal water level (NWL), the 100-year high water level (HWL), the ordinary
high water level (OHW), a description of all vegetation which may be found in
the water, a statement of general water quality and any classification given
to the water body or wetland by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources
(MnDNR), the MPCA or the United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE).



               e.   The location and dimensions of existing
stormwater drainage systems and natural drainage patterns on and immediately
adjacent to the site delineating in which direction and at what rate
stormwater is conveyed from the site, identifying the receiving stream,
river, public water, or wetland, and setting forth those areas of the
unaltered site where stormwater collects.



               f.   A description of the soils of the site,
including a map indicating soil types of areas to be disturbed as well as a
soil report containing information on the suitability of the soils for the
type of storm water system proposed and describing any remedial steps to be
taken by the applicant to render the soils suitable.



               g.   The location and description of any
vegetative cover and a clear delineation of any vegetation proposed for
removal.



               h.   The location of 100-year floodplains,
flood fringes and floodways.



               i.   The locations of any existing overhead
or underground utilities.



               j.   The locations of property lines and
easements.



               k.   A city approved benchmark listing
location and elevation.



      (3)   Site construction plan. A site construction plan
including:



         (a)   Locations and dimensions of all proposed land
disturbing activities and any phasing of those activities.



         (b)   Total site area.



         (c)   Total area disturbed.



         (d)   Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil or
dirt stockpiles.



         (e)   Locations and dimensions of all construction site
erosion control measures necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter.
A schedule of the anticipated start and completion date of each land
disturbing activity including the installation of construction site erosion
control measures needed to meet the requirements of this chapter.



         (f)   Provisions for maintenance of the construction
site erosion control measures during construction.



      (4)   Plan of final site conditions.  A plan of final site
conditions on the same scale as the existing site map showing the proposed
site changes, including:



         (a)   Finished grading shown at contours at the same
interval as provided above or as required to clearly indicate the
relationship of proposed changes to existing topography and remaining
features.



         (b)   A landscape plan, drawn to an appropriate scale,
including dimensions and distances and the location, type, size and
description of all proposed landscape materials which will be added to the
site as part of the development.



         (c)   A drainage plan of the developed site delineating
in which direction and at what rate stormwater will be conveyed from the site
and setting forth the areas of the site where stormwater will be allowed to
collect.



         (d)   The proposed size, alignment and intended use of
any structures to be erected on the site.



         (e)   A clear delineation and tabulation of all areas
which will be paved or surfaced, including a description of the surfacing
material to be used.



         (f)   Any other information pertinent to the particular
project which, in the opinion of the applicant or the Engineering Department,
is necessary for the review of the project.



         (g)   Proposed normal water level (NWL), 100-year high
water level (HWL), ordinary high water level (OHW) of any ponds, infiltration
facilities, streams, rivers, public waters, or wetlands on or downstream from
the site.



         (h)   Building elevations including low floor elevations
and low building opening elevations.



         (i)   Overland emergency overflow routes and their
elevations.



      (5)   Stormwater calculations. Calculations demonstrating the
following data shall be provided, according to the method established by the
Engineering Department:



         (a)   Drainage maps that show the site, land that drains
onto the site, and land that the site drains onto for existing and proposed
conditions.  Delineated drainage areas for ponds, wetlands, or other
relevant waters should be indicated on these maps.



         (b)   A stormwater model conforming to Engineering
Department standards that includes drainage areas, cover types, pond and
wetland sizes, pond and wetland outlets, and natural or piped conveyance
systems.



         (c)   Peak runoff rates from the site before and after
development demonstrating that the proposed conditions conform to the
policies outlined in the city's Surface Water Management Plan and this
chapter's design criteria.



         (d)   Volume of runoff from the site before and after
development.



         (e)   National Urban Runoff Program ("NURP") volume
below the normal outlet required and provided in each pond.



         (f)   Infiltration calculations for proposed conditions.



         (g)   A narrative summarizing the calculations and
demonstrating that proposed drainage alterations do not unreasonably burden
upstream or downstream land.



         (h)   Soil borings, if requested by the Engineering
Department.



      (6)   Maintenance agreement. The applicant shall enter into a
maintenance agreement with the city that documents all responsibilities for
operation and maintenance of long-term stormwater treatment practices. Such
responsibility shall be documented in a maintenance plan and executed through
a maintenance agreement. All maintenance agreements must be approved by the
city and recorded at the Hennepin County recorder's office prior to final
plan approval. At a minimum, the maintenance agreement shall describe the
following inspection and maintenance obligations:



         (a)   The responsible party who is permanently
responsible for maintenance of the structural and nonstructural measures.



         (b)   Pass responsibilities for such maintenance to
successors in title.



         (c)   Allow the city and its representatives the right-
of-entry for the purposes of inspecting all permanent stormwater management
systems.



         (d)   Allow the city the right to repair and maintain
the facility, if necessary maintenance is not performed after proper and
reasonable notice to the responsible party of the permanent stormwater
management system.



         (e)   Include a maintenance plan that contains, but is
not limited to the following:



            1.   Identification of all structural permanent
stormwater management systems.



            2.   A schedule for regular inspections,
monitoring, and maintenance for each practice. Monitoring shall verify
whether the practice is functioning as designed and may include, but is not
limited to quality, temperature, and quantity of runoff.



            3.   Identification of the responsible party for
conducting the inspection, monitoring and maintenance for each practice.



            4.   Include a schedule and format for reporting
compliance with the maintenance agreement to the city.



         (f)   The issuance of a permit constitutes a
right-of-entry for the community or city, its contractors, and agents to
enter upon the construction site. The applicant shall allow the community
city, its contractors, agents and any their authorized representatives, upon
presentation of credentials, to:



            1.   Enter upon the permitted site for the purpose
of obtaining information, examination of records, conducting investigations
or surveys.



            2.   Bring such equipment upon the permitted
development as is necessary to conduct such surveys and investigations.



            3.   Examine and copy any books, papers, records,
or memoranda pertaining to activities or records required to be kept under
the terms and conditions of the permit.



            4.   Inspect the stormwater pollution control
measures.



            5.   Sample and monitor any items or activities
pertaining to stormwater pollution control measures.



            6.   Correct deficiencies in stormwater and
erosion and sediment control measures.



   (B)   Stormwater management plan review procedure.



      (1)   Process.  Stormwater management plans and maintenance
agreements meeting the requirements of this chapter shall be submitted to the
Engineering Department for review and approval. The Engineering Division
shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the
stormwater management plan and maintenance agreement to the Planning
Commission.  Following Planning Commission review, the stormwater management
plan and maintenance agreement shall be submitted to the City Council for its
review along with the Planning Commission's recommendation.



      (2)   Duration. Approval of a stormwater management plan and
maintenance agreement submitted under the provisions of this chapter shall
expire two years after the date of approval by the City Council unless
construction has commenced in accordance with the plan.  However, if prior
to the expiration of the approval, the applicant makes a written request to
the Engineering Department for an extension of time to commence construction
setting forth the reasons for the requested extension, the City Council may
grant one extension of not greater than one single year.



      (3)   Revisions.  A stormwater management plan and
maintenance agreement may be revised. All revised plans must contain all
information required by this chapter and must be reviewed and approved by the
Engineering Department.



      (4)   Conditions.  A stormwater management plan and
maintenance agreement may be approved by the City Council subject to
compliance with conditions that are necessary to ensure that the requirements
contained in this chapter are met.  Such conditions may, among other
matters, limit the size, kind or character of the proposed development;
require the construction of structures, drainage facilities, storage basins
and other facilities; require replacement of vegetation; establish required
monitoring procedures; require that the work be staged over time; require
alteration of the site's design to ensure buffering; or require the
conveyance to the city or other public entity of certain lands or interests
therein.



      (5)   Agreement. Upon approval of the stormwater management
plan and maintenance agreement by the City Council, the applicant shall enter
into an agreement with the city to ensure that any required improvements are
constructed, any required easements are granted or dedicated and that there
is compliance with any conditions imposed by the City Council. The agreement
shall guarantee completion and compliance with the conditions within a
specific time, which time may be extended by the City Council. The agreement
shall be in a form acceptable to the city.



      (6)   Financial guarantee. Upon approval of the stormwater
management plan and maintenance agreement by the City Council, the applicant
shall submit a letter of credit, or cash escrow, to cover 125% of the amount
of the established cost of complying with the stormwater management plan.
This financial guarantee shall be in a form acceptable to the city and may be
incorporated into the financial guarantee provided for grading activities
and/or the financial guarantee provided for street and utility activities.



      (7)   Fees. All applications for stormwater management plan
and maintenance agreement approval shall be accompanied by a processing and
approval fee as set by the most recent edition of the city's adopted Fee
Schedule.



   (C)   Stormwater management plan approval and implementation
standards.



      (1)   Compliance with standards. No stormwater management plan
which fails to meet the standards contained in this section shall be approved
by the City Council.



      (2)   All stormwater management plans must be submitted to the
City Engineer prior to the start of construction activity. At a minimum all
applicants shall meet the criteria set forth below and observe the standards
established in NPDES Construction General Permit requirements.



      (3)   The city adopts the MPCA's Minnesota Stormwater Manual
as its stormwater runoff design standards.



      (4)   All stormwater management plans must address erosion and
sediment control requirements of this chapter.



      (5)   Stormwater management requirements for permanent
facilities.



         (a)   An applicant shall install or construct, on or for
the proposed land disturbing or development activity, all stormwater
management facilities necessary to meet the criteria of the NPDES
Construction General Permit.  No private stormwater facilities will be
approved by the city unless a maintenance agreement and maintenance plan are
provided that defines who will conduct the maintenance, the type of
maintenance and intervals of the maintenance to be performed. In the
alternative, or in partial fulfillment of this requirement and upon approval
of the Engineering Department, an applicant may make an in-kind or monetary
contribution to the development and maintenance of regional stormwater
management facilities designed to serve multiple land disturbing and
development activities undertaken by one or more persons, including the
applicant.



         (b)   Proposed stormwater management plans shall
incorporate volume control, water quality control, and rate control as the
basis for stormwater management in the proposed development plan on sites
without restrictions.  All proposed projects shall be in conformance with
the most current requirements of the MPCA's Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
Systems (MS4) Permit and the Shingle Creek and West Mississippi Watershed
Management Commissions, as applicable.



            1.   Volume control.



               a.   New development projects less than one
acre in size.



                  i.   The applicant shall provide a
detailed plan and/or narrative describing the BMPs that will be incorporated
in the development to reduce runoff volume and improve water quality.



                  ii.   There shall be no net increase
from pre-project conditions (on an annual average basis) of:



                     1)   Stormwater discharge
volume, unless precluded by the stormwater management limitations as defined
by the MPCA's MS4 Permit.



                     2)   Stormwater discharges of
total suspended solids (TSS).



                     3)   Stormwater discharges of
total phosphorus (TP).



               b.   New development. For new, nonlinear
developments, stormwater runoff volumes will be controlled and the
post-construction runoff volume shall be retained on site for 1.0 inches of
runoff from all impervious surfaces on the site that result in a net increase
of impervious of one acre or greater.



               c.   Redevelopment.  For redevelopment
projects, stormwater runoff volumes will be controlled and the
post-construction runoff volume shall be retained on site for 1.0 inches of
runoff from the new impervious surfaces created by the project. There shall
be a net reduction from pre-project conditions (on an annual average basis)
of:



                  i.   Stormwater discharge volume,
unless precluded by the stormwater management limitations as defined by the
MPCA's MS4 permit.



                  ii.   Stormwater discharges of TSS.



                  iii.   Stormwater discharges of TP.



            2.   Water quality control.



               a.   New development. Water quality
treatment is required to meet NURP guidelines and to result in no net
increase from pre-project conditions (on an annual average basis) of
stormwater discharges of TSS and TP for projects that result in a net
increase of impervious of one acre or greater.



               b.   Redevelopment. Water quality treatment
is required to meet NURP guidelines and to result in a net reduction in
pre-project conditions (on an annual average basis) of stormwater discharges
of TSS and TP for projects that have construction activity that is one acre
or greater in size.



            3.   Rate control.  Rate control measures are
required on new development and redevelopment  projects to meet this
chapter's design criteria, the Minnesota Stormwater Manual and Shingle Creek
and West Mississippi River Watershed Management Commissions requirements.



         (c)   The applicant shall reduce the need for stormwater
treatment practices by incorporating the use of natural topography and land
cover such as wetlands, ponds, natural swales and depressions as they exist
before development to the degree that they can accommodate the additional
flow of water without compromising the integrity or quality of the wetland or
pond.



         (d)   The following stormwater management practices
shall be investigated by the applicant in developing a stormwater management
plan in the following descending order of preference, and the results of that
investigation shall be provided to the city in written form as a part of the
application:



            1.   Natural infiltration of precipitation on-site.



            2.   Flow attenuation by use of open vegetated
swales and natural depressions.



            3.   Green infrastructure by use of rain gardens,
bioswales, constructed wetlands, and other constructed infiltration practices.



            4.   Stormwater retention facilities.



            5.   Stormwater detention facilities.



         (e)   A combination of stormwater treatment practices
may be used to achieve the applicable minimum control requirements specified
in the subsection above.  Justification shall be provided by the applicant
for the method selected.



         (f)   Pond design standards. Stormwater detention
facilities constructed in the city shall be designed according to standards
established by the Engineering Division of the Operations and Maintenance
Department, and shall contain, at a minimum, the following design factors:



            1.   A permanent pool ("dead storage") volume
below the principal spillway (normal outlet) which shall be greater than or
equal to the runoff from a 2.5-inch, 24-hour  storm over the entire
contributing drainage area assuming full development.



            2.   A permanent pool average depth (basin
volume/basin area) of four to ten feet.



            3.   An emergency overflow (emergency outlet)
adequate to control the 100-year frequency critical duration rainfall event.



            4.   Basin side slopes below the 100-year high
water level should be no steeper than 4:1, and preferably flatter.  A basin
shelf with a minimum width of ten feet and one foot deep below the normal
water level is recommended to enhance wildlife habitat, reduce potential
safety hazards, and improve access for long-term maintenance.



            5.   To prevent short-circuiting, the distance
between major inlets and the normal outlet shall be maximized.



            6.   A flood pool ("live storage") volume above
the principal outlet spillway shall be adequate so that the peak discharge
rate from the 1-, 10- and 100-year frequency critical duration storm is not
greater than the peak discharge for a similar storm and predevelopment
watershed conditions.



            7.   Effective energy dissipation devices which
reduce outlet velocities to four feet per second or less shall consist of
riprap, stilling pools or other such measures to prevent erosion at all storm
water outfalls into the basin and at the detention basin outlet.



            8.   Consideration for aesthetics and wildlife
habitat should be included in the design of the pond.



            9.   A skimming device must be provided to deter
floatable pollutants from discharging out of pond.



            10.   Pond NWL elevations shall be established
above the OHW of adjacent MnDNR water bodies, except where topography of the
site, floodplain mitigation activities, or other design considerations are
determined to be unfavorable for these conditions to occur.  This
determination shall be performed by an engineer, provided by the applicant,
and approved by the Engineering Division of the Operations and Maintenance
Department.



            11.   All constructed ponds shall have a
maintenance access bench sufficient to provide access to all inlets and
outlets. The maintenance bench shall be located within a designated outlot or
within a permanent easement. The maintenance bench shall extend from the
outlet elevation to one foot above the outlet elevation and its cross slope
shall be no steeper than 10:1. The maintenance bench shall connect to the
maintenance access.



            12.   All constructed ponds shall be provided a
maintenance access from an adjacent roadway.  The maintenance access shall
be provided in the form of an easement no narrower than 20 feet.  The
maintenance access shall have a longitudinal slope no steeper than 6:1 and
minimal cross slope.  Maintenance access routes, due to their extra width,
also serve well as emergency overflow (EOF) routes.



         (g)   Infiltration requirements.  BMPs will be required
to the maximum extent practical as determined by the Engineering Division of
the Operations and Maintenance Department or its designee.



            1.   Maximum extent practical shall be the
infiltration of runoff from the 100-year, 24-hour rainfall event within 48
hours.  The maximum extent practical may be less than this if the
Engineering Division of the Operations and Maintenance Department determines
that one or more of the following conditions apply:



               (a)   Infiltration characteristics of soils
on site are not favorable for infiltration of stormwater.



               (b)   The site's drainage course is to
regional infiltration or detention facilities controlled by the city that
reduce runoff volumes.



               (c)   When the site's impervious areas are
not increased due to development.



               (d)   Other site conditions that make
infiltration of stormwater impractical on the site as determined by the
Engineering Division of the Operations and Maintenance Department.



               (e)   If one or more of these conditions
apply, the Engineering Division of the Public Works Department shall quantify
infiltration that will be deemed as the maximum extent practical for the site.



            2.   Infiltration will be prohibited where the
infiltration BMP will be constructed in any of the following areas:



               a.   Where documented past, present, or
anticipated future land uses have resulted in or may result in contamination
coming in contact with stormwater runoff.



               b.   With less than three feet of separation
distance from the bottom of the infiltration system to the elevation of the
seasonally saturated soils or the top of bedrock.



               c.   Where vehicle fueling and maintenance
occur.



               d.   Where industrial facilities are not
authorized to infiltrate industrial stormwater under and NPDES/SDS Industrial
Stormwater Permit issued by the MPCA.



            3.   Infiltration will be restricted and subject
to additional city review where the infiltration BMP will be constructed in
any of the following areas:



               a.   Within 1,000 feet up-gradient, or 100
feet down-gradient of active karst features.



               b.   Where drinking water supply management
areas are present, as defined by Minn. Rules 4720.51000, subp.13, unless
precluded by a local unit of government with an MS4 permit.



               c.   Soils are predominately Hydrologic Soil
Group D (clay) soils.



               d.   Soil infiltration rates are more than
8.3 inches per hour unless soils are amended to slow the infiltration rate
below 8.3 inches per hour.



            4.   Stormwater runoff shall be treated in a
stormwater pond or by other means prior to entering an infiltration facility.



            5.   The minimum infiltration requirements for any
region of the city will be the requirements of the Shingle Creek and West
Mississippi River Watershed Management Commissions' policies that govern that
region.  Shingle Creek and West Mississippi River Watershed Management
Commissions' standards may be met through the use of regional or downstream
systems prior to discharge of runoff to waters of the state.



            6.   Infiltration systems must not be excavated to
final grade until the contributing drainage area has been constructed and
fully stabilized. When the infiltration feature is excavated to final grade,
rigorous erosion prevention and sediment control BMPs must be implemented to
keep sediment and runoff completely away from the infiltration area.



            7.   To prevent clogging of the infiltration
system, a pretreatment device must be used to settle particles before the
stormwater discharges into the infiltrations system.



            8.   Per the stormwater management requirements
for permanent facilities section of this chapter, the infiltration system
must provide a water quality volume (calculated as an instantaneous volume)
of one inch of runoff (or one inch minus the volume of stormwater treated by
another system on the site) from the new impervious surfaces created by the
project.



            9.   The applicant must ensure filtration systems
with less than three feet of separation from seasonally saturated soils or
from bedrock are constructed with an impermeable liner.



            10.   A minimum maintenance access of 12 feet is
required.



         (h)   Mitigation.



            1.   Where construction projects cannot meet the
TSS and/or TP reduction requirements for new or development projects on the
site of original construction, all methods must be exhausted prior to
considering alternative locations where TSS and TP treatment standards can be
achieved. If the City has determined that all methods have been exhausted,
the permittee will be required to identify alternative locations where TSS
and TP treatment standards can be achieved. Mitigation projects will be
chosen in the following order of preference:



               a.   Locations that yield benefits to the
same receiving water that receives runoff from the original construction
activity.



               b.   Locations within the same MnDNR
catchment area as the original construction activity.



               c.   Locations in the next adjacent MnDNR
catchment area up-stream.



               d.   Locations anywhere within the City of
Brooklyn Park.



            2.   In addition, mitigation projects must also
meet the following criteria:



               a.   Mitigation projects shall involve the
establishment new structural stormwater BMPs or the retrofit of existing
structural stormwater BMPs, or the use of a properly designed regional
structural stormwater BMP.



               b.   Previously required routine maintenance
of structural stormwater BMPs cannot be considered mitigation.



               c.   Mitigation projects must be finished
within 24 months after the original construction activity begins.



               d.   A maintenance agreement specifying the
responsible party for long-term maintenance shall be identified.



         (i)   Stormwater and infiltration facilities must be
located at least 50 feet away from the top of bluff.



         (j)   Watershed management plans/groundwater management
plans. Stormwater management plans shall be consistent with the Shingle Creek
and West Mississippi River Watershed Management Commissions requirements and
groundwater management plans prepared in accordance with Minnesota Board of
Water and Soil Resources in accordance with state law.



         (k)   Easement.  If the stormwater management plan
involves direction of some or all runoff off of the site, it shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to obtain from adjacent property owners any
necessary easements or other property interests to permit the flow of water
across the property.



         (l)   Low floor/building opening elevations.



            1.   Any new development or redevelopment shall
maintain a minimum building opening elevation of at least three feet above
the anticipated 100-year high water elevation as a standard practice. 
However, if the applicant demonstrates that this requirement would be a
hardship, the standard may be reduced to two feet if all of the following can
be demonstrated:



               a.   That, within the two-foot freeboard
area, stormwater storage is available which is equal to or exceeds 50% of the
storm water storage currently available in the basin below the 100-year
elevation.



               b.   That a 25% obstruction of the basin
outlet over a 24-hour period would not result in more than one foot of
additional bounce in the basin.



               c.   That an adequate overflow route from
the basin is available that will provide one foot of freeboard for the
proposed low building opening.



            2.   Basement floor elevations must be set to an
elevation that meets all of the following criteria:



               a.   The lowest floor elevation must be at
least four feet above the currently observed groundwater elevations in the
area.



               b.   The lowest floor elevation must be at
least two feet above the elevation of any known historic high groundwater
elevations for the area.  Information on historic high groundwater
elevations can be derived from any reasonable sources including piezometer
data, soil boring data, percolation testing logs, etc.



               c.   The lowest floor elevation must be at
least two feet above the 100-year high surface water elevation for the area
unless it can be demonstrated that this standard creates a hardship.  If the
two-foot standard is determined by the City Council to constitute a hardship,
the standard shall be at least one foot above the highest anticipated
groundwater elevation resulting from a 100-year critical duration rainfall
event.  The impact of high surface water elevations on groundwater
elevations in the vicinity of the structure should take into consideration
the site's distance from the floodplain area, the soils, the normal water
elevation of surface depressions in the area, the static groundwater table
and historic water elevations in the area. This information shall be provided
by a registered engineer or soil scientist.



         (m)   Impervious surface coverage of each lot must not
exceed the impervious surface coverage allowed under the Zoning Ordinance.



         (n)   Storm sewers shall be designed to accommodate
discharge rates associated with a 10-year, 24-hour rainfall event.



(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)



§ 153.08  EROSION CONTROL PLAN.



   (A)   Applicability.



      (1)   Application. An erosion control plan shall be submitted
to the Engineering Division of the Operations and Maintenance Department when
required by this chapter along with a grading permit application. All
applications for a grading permit shall be accompanied by a processing and
approval fee as set by the city's Fee Schedule.



      (2)   Required plan submittals. The erosion control plan shall
contain all of the following with respect to conditions existing on site
during construction and after final structures and improvements have been
completed.



         (a)   A description of and specifications for sediment
retention and settling devices.



         (b)   A description of, specifications for, and detail
plates for surface runoff and erosion control devices.



         (c)   A description of vegetative measures.



         (d)   A detailed timetable for restoring all disturbed
areas.



         (e)   A graphic representation of the location of all
specified erosion and sediment control devices.



         (f)   An implementation schedule for installing and
subsequently removing devices described above.



         (g)   A maintenance schedule for all sediment and
erosion control devices specified.



         (h)   An estimate of the costs to implement all final
and temporary erosion and sediment control measures.



         (i)   An Information sheet on the parties responsible
for constructing and maintaining the erosion control measures as shown on the
erosion control plan.  The information sheet should contain the phone
numbers and addresses of at least two persons and indicate how they can be
contacted at all times (days, nights, weekends, etc.) regarding repairing and
maintaining the erosion control measures.



         (j)   The erosion control plan must contain details to
specify which erosion and sediment control facilities are permanent and which
are temporary.



         (k)   If required, a NPDES Construction General Permit
must be obtained from the MPCA prior to commencing construction activities.
The associated stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) should be
included in the erosion control plan and approved by the Engineering Division
of the Operations and Maintenance Department prior to construction.  A copy
of the NPDES Construction General Permit must be provided to the city prior
to construction.



      (3)   Application review and inspection fees.



         (a)   The City of Brooklyn Park shall charge an
application review fee for the review of the building permit application and
the erosion control plan.  As part of this review, the city will review the
permittee's as-built survey submitted after the completion of grading
activities to ensure that it conforms to the overall erosion control plan for
the area.  The application fee shall be set by the city's Fee Schedule.



         (b)   An inspection fee will be charged for any
inspections of the site by the city that are needed to review corrective
erosion control work or to follow up on previously incomplete work. This
inspection fee will be deducted from the financial security.  The amount
will be set by the city's Fee Schedule.  If this fee is not paid within 45
days, the fee may be taken from the financial security provided by the
applicant.



   (B)   Implementation of erosion control plan. Prior to the start of
any earthwork activities, the permittee must have in place and functional
erosion and sediment controls as outlined on the approved erosion control
plan and/or SWPPP.  Additional erosion control measures may be required as
directed by the Engineering Division of the Operations and Maintenance
Department or its designee.



      (1)   No earthmoving activities shall commence until the
erosion controls have been field inspected and approved by the Engineering
Division of the Operations and Maintenance Department.



      (2)   At a minimum, the permittee shall meet the
specifications set forth below and observe the standards established in the
NPDES Construction General Permit requirements:



         (a)   Soil stabilization. Soil stabilization shall be
completed in a time period as specified by the NPDES Construction General
Permit and the city's general specifications and standards. The City of
Brooklyn Park may require the site to be reseeded or a nonvegetative option
employed.



         (b)   Seeding. Seeding shall be in accordance with
seeding specifications. All seeded areas shall be fertilized, mulched, and
disc anchored as necessary for seed retention.



         (c)   Soil stockpiles. Soil stockpiles which shall be
inactive for a period of 14 or more days must be stabilized or covered at the
end of each workday. Stockpiles shall include perimeter sediment controls and
must not be placed in natural buffers or surface waters, including stormwater
conveyance systems.



         (d)   90% coverage. The entire site must be stabilized
at a 90% coverage, using a heavy mulch layer or another method that does not
require germination to control erosion, at the close of the construction
season.



         (e)   Site development sediment controls. Site
development sediment controls practices shall include those identified in the
city's general specifications including, but not limited to:



            1.   Settling basins, sediment traps, or tanks.



            2.   Protection for adjacent properties by the use
of a vegetated buffer strip in combination with perimeter controls.



            3.   Perimeter control including machine sliced
silt fence or other city approved BMP, which shall be in place before, during
and after grading of the site. Fencing shall be removed only after 70%
stabilization.



            4.   Designated as a temporary construction
staging area.



         (f)   Temporary sediment basins. For sites that have
more than ten acres of disturbed soil that drains to a common location (or,
five or more acres for special or impaired waters), one or more temporary
sediment basins shall be constructed. Use of temporary basins is encouraged
when construction projects will impact steep slopes or when highly erodible
soils are present. The basin shall provide treatment to the runoff before it
leaves the construction site or enters surface waters. The temporary sediment
basins must be designed and constructed as follows:



            1.   Provide live storage for a calculated volume
of runoff from a two-year, 24-hour storm from each acre drained to the
basin.  All basins shall provide at least 1,800 cubic feet of live storage
from each acre drained or more.



            2.   For basins where the calculation in §
153.08(B)(2)(f)1 has not been performed, a temporary sediment basin providing
3,600 cubic feet of live storage from each acre drained to the basin shall be
provided for the entire drainage area of the temporary basin.



            3.   The outlet structure must be designed to
withdraw water from the surface in order to minimize the discharge of
pollutants.



            4.   The basin outlet shall be designed to prevent
short-circuiting and the discharge of floating debris.



            5.   Ensure the basin can be completely drawn down
to conduct maintenance activities.



            6.   Include energy dissipation on the outlet of
the basin and a stabilized emergency overflow to prevent failure of pond
integrity.



            7.   Be located outside of surface waters or any
buffer zone, and be designed to avoid draining water from wetlands unless
appropriate approval from the USACE and the MnDNR is obtained.



            8.   If installation of a temporary sediment basin
is infeasible equivalent sediment controls such as smaller sediment basins,
and/or sediment traps, silt fences, vegetative buffer strips, or any
appropriate combination of measures are required for all down-slope
boundaries of the construction area and for side-slope boundaries where
appropriate. Determination of infeasibility shall be documented in the
erosion and sediment control plan.



         (g)   Individual construction site sediment controls.
Individual construction site sediment controls shall include:



            1.   Rock construction entrance (driveway).



            2.   Perimeter controls including silt fence
in-place before, during and after grading of the site. Fencing shall be
removed only after proper turf establishment.



         (h)   Waterway and watercourse protection. Waterway and
watercourse protection requirements shall include stabilization of the
watercourse channel before, during and after any in-channel work consistent
with the city's general specifications.



            1.   A temporary stream crossing must be installed
and approved by the local government unit and regulating agency if a wet
watercourse will be crossed regularly during construction.



            2.   The watercourse channel shall be stabilized
before, during, and within 24 hours after any in-channel work.



            3.   No in-water work shall be allowed in public
waters during the MnDNR's work exclusion dates.



            4.   Prior to placement of any equipment into any
waters, all equipment must be free of aquatic invasive species.



            5.   All on-site stormwater conveyance channels
designed according to the criteria outlined in this document. Stabilization
adequate to prevent erosion located at the outlets of all pipes and paved
channels is required.



         (i)   Site dewatering. Site dewatering shall be
conducted pursuant to the NPDES Construction General Permit. Water pumped
from the site shall be treated by temporary sediment basins, grit chambers,
sand filters, or other controls as appropriate to ensure adequate treatment
is obtained and that nuisance conditions will not result from the discharge.
Discharges from the site shall not be released in a manner that causes
erosion, scour, sedimentation or flooding of the site to receiving channels
or wetlands.



         (j)   Waste and material disposal. All waste and unused
building materials (including garbage, debris, cleaning wastes, wastewater,
toxic materials or hazardous materials) shall be properly disposed of
off-site and not allowed to be carried by runoff into a receiving channel or
storm sewer system.



            1.   Solid waste. All unused building materials
and waste (including, but not limited to: collected sediment, asphalt and
concrete millings, floating debris, paper, plastic, fabric, etc.) must be
disposed of accordingly and shall comply with disposal requirements set forth
by the MPCA.



            2.   Hazardous/toxic waste. Paint, gasoline, oil
and any hazardous materials must be properly stored, including secondary
containment, to prevent spills, leaks or other discharges. Access to the
storage areas must be restricted to prevent vandalism. Storage and disposal
of hazardous or toxic substance must be in compliance with the requirements
set forth by the MPCA.



            3.   Liquid waste. All other non-stormwater
discharges (including, but not limited to, concrete truck washout, vehicle
washing or maintenance spills) produced during the construction activity
shall not be discharged to any surface waters.



            4.   External washing of equipment and vehicles.
All external washing activities shall be limited to a designated area of the
site. All runoff must be contained and wastes from external washing
activities must be disposed of properly. No engine degreasing shall be
allowed on the site.



            5.   Wastes generated by concrete and other
washout operations. All liquid and solid wastes generated by any concrete or
other washout operations must be contained in a leak proof facility or
impermeable liner. Concrete waste must not come into contact with the ground.
Concrete waste must be disposed of properly and in compliance with applicable
MPCA regulations.



         (k)   Drain inlet protection. All storm drain inlets
shall be protected during construction until all sources with potential for
discharging to the inlet have been stabilized. Inlet protection measures must
meet the city's standards and specifications.



         (l)   Energy dissipation. Pipe outlets must have
temporary or permanent energy dissipation within 24 hours of connection to a
surface water.



         (m)   Tracking. Vehicle tracking BMPs (including, but
not limited to: rock pads, mud mats, slash mulch, concrete or steel wash
racks, or similar systems) must be installed to minimize track out of
sediment from the construction site. If vehicle tracking BMPs are not
actively preventing sediment from being tracked into the street, the
applicant must utilize street sweeping to contain sediment.



         (n)   Final stabilization. Final stabilization is not
complete until the following criteria are met:



            1.   All land disturbing activities must be
finished and all soils shall be stabilized by a uniform perennial vegetative
cover with a density of 70% or greater of its expected final growth density
over the entire pervious surface area, or other equivalent means necessary to
prevent soil failure under erosive conditions.



            2.   The permanent stormwater management system is
constructed, meets all of the required design parameters and is operating as
designed.



            3.   All temporary synthetic and structural
erosion prevention and sediment control BMPs (such as silt fence) have been
removed. BMPs designed to decompose on site may be left in place.



            4.   For residential construction only, individual
lots are considered finally stabilized if the structure(s) are finished and
temporary erosion protection and down gradient perimeter control has been
completed and the residence has been sold to the homeowner.



            5.   For construction projects on agricultural
land the disturbed land has been returned to its preconstruction agricultural
use.



      (3)   The permittee must maintain the erosion and sediment
control measures on the site to the satisfaction of the City Engineer
throughout the entire construction process.  If erosion and sediment control
is not being maintained to the City Engineer's satisfaction, the city may
perform remedial work on the site as outlined in this section.



      (4)   All erosion control systems must be maintained by the
permittee in an acceptable condition until turf is established or structural
surfaces are constructed to protect the soil from erosion.



   (C)   Inspection of erosion control plan. The city will make
periodic inspections of the site to ensure compliance with the erosion
control plan. The permittee or his/her agent shall ensure that a trained
person will regularly inspect the construction site at least once every seven
days until final stabilization and within 24 hours of a rainfall event of
one-half inch or greater in a 24-hour period. All inspection and maintenance
activities conducted on the site during construction must be recorded in
writing and retained within the erosion control plan. Records of each
inspection and maintenance activity shall include the following:



      (1)   Date and time of inspection.



      (2)   Name of person(s) conducting the inspection.



      (3)   Findings of inspections, including recommendations for
corrective actions.



      (4)   Corrective actions taken, including the dates, times and
the name of the party completing the corrective action.



      (5)   Date and the amount of rainfall events that are greater
than one-half inch in a 24- hour period.



      (6)   Documentation of any changes made to the erosion and
sediment control plan.



   (D)   Site and BMP maintenance. Prior to any construction, the
developer shall provide the City Engineer with a schedule for erosion and
sediment control inspection and maintenance, including schedules for street
cleaning, and street sweeping. All site and BMP maintenance activities must
comply with the requirements of the NPDES construction general permit. The
applicant shall investigate and comply with the following BMP maintenance
requirements:



      (1)   Perimeter control. All perimeter controls must be
repaired, replaced or supplemented when they become nonfunctional or the
sediment reaches one-half of the height of the fence. Repairs shall be made
by the end of the next business day after discovery or as soon as field
conditions allow access.



      (2)   Temporary sediment basins. Temporary sedimentation
basins must be drained and the sediment must be removed when the depth of the
sediment collected in the basin reaches one half the storage volume. Drainage
and removal must be completed within 72 hours of discovery or as soon as
field conditions allow access.



      (3)   Surface waters and conveyance systems. Surface water,
including drainage ditches and conveyance systems, must be inspected for
visible signs of sediment being deposited by erosion. The applicant must
remove all sediment deposited in surface waters, including drainage ways,
catch basins, and other drainage systems and must restabilize the areas of
exposed soil as a result of sediment removal. The removal and stabilization
must take place within seven days of discovery unless legal, regulatory or
physical access constraints prevent remediation. In the event of an access
constraint, the applicant shall use all reasonable efforts to obtain access.
If access is precluded, removal and stabilization must take place within
seven calendar days of obtaining access. The applicant is responsible for
contacting all local, regional, state and federal authorities and obtaining
any required permits prior to conducting any work.



      (4)   Streets and impervious surfaces. Where vehicle traffic
leaves any part of the site, the exit locations must be inspected for visible
signs of off-site sediment tracking onto impervious surfaces. Tracked
sediment must be removed from all off-site impervious surfaces as soon as
possible or within 24 hours of discovery.



      (5)   General maintenance. The applicant shall be responsible
for the operation and maintenance of temporary and permanent water quality
management BMPs, as well as erosion prevention and sediment control BMPs for
the duration of the construction work on the site. The applicant remains
responsible until another party has assumed control over all areas of the
site that have not established final stabilization and a notice of
termination (NOT) has been submitted to the MPCA.



      (6)   Infiltration areas. All infiltration areas must be
inspected to ensure that no sediment from ongoing construction activities is
reaching the infiltration area and these areas are protected from compaction
caused by construction equipment driving across the infiltration area.



   (E)   Notification of failure of erosion control plan. The city
shall notify the permittee of the failure of the erosion control measures
that have been constructed.  The notification will be by phone or written
correspondence to the parties listed on the information sheet required by
this section.  The city, at its discretion, may begin remedial work within
48 hours after notification has been provided.



   (F)   Erosion off-site. If erosion breaches the perimeter of the
site, the permittee shall immediately develop a cleanup and restoration plan,
obtain a right-of-entry from the adjoining property owner, and implement the
cleanup and restoration plan within 48 hours of obtaining the adjoining
property owner's permission.  In no case, unless written approval is
received from the Engineering Division of the Operations and Maintenance
Department, may more than seven calendar days pass without any corrective
action being taken.  If at the discretion of the city, the permittee does
not repair the damage caused by the erosion, the city may perform the
remedial work required, after notice is provided to the permittee.



   (G)   Erosion into streets, wetlands, or other surface waters. If
eroded soils enter, or entrance appears imminent into streets, wetlands, or
other surface waters, cleanup and repair shall be immediate. The permittee
shall provide all traffic control and flagging required to protect the public
during the cleanup operations.  If at the discretion of the city, the
permittee does not repair the erosion and sedimentation, the city may perform
the remedial work required, after notice is provided to the permittee.



   (H)   Failure to complete corrective work. When a permittee fails to
conform to any provision of this section within the time stipulated, the city
may take the following actions:



      (1)   Issue a notice of violation. When the city determines
that an activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements
of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of
the property.  The notice of violation shall contain:



         (a)   The name and address of the owner or applicant.



         (b)   The address when available or a description of the
land upon which the violation is occurring.



         (c)   A statement specifying the nature of the violation.



         (d)   A description of the remedial measures necessary
to bring the development activity into compliance with this chapter and a
time schedule for the completion of such remedial action.



         (e)   A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall
or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed.



         (f)   A statement that the determination of violation
may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 15
days of services of the  notice of violation. Service may be accomplished by
mail or by personal delivery of the notice.



      (2)   Withhold the scheduling of inspections.



      (3)   Withhold the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.



      (4)   Issue a stop work order.



      (5)   Direct the correction of the deficiency by city forces
or separate contract. The issuance of an erosion control permit constitutes a
right-of-entry for the city or its contractor to enter upon the construction
site for the purpose of correcting deficiencies with respect to erosion and
sediment control.  All costs incurred by the city in correcting erosion and
sediment control deficiencies, including administrative expenses, shall be
reimbursed by the permittee.  If payment is not made within 30 days after an
invoice is issued, the city may draw from the financial security.  If the
financial security is of an insufficient amount, the city may assess the
remaining amount against the property. As a condition of the permit, the
owner shall waive notice of any assessment hearing to be conducted by the
city, concur that the benefit to the property exceeds the amount of the
proposed assessment, and waive all rights by virtue of M.S. § 429.081 to
challenge the amount or validity of assessment.



(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)



§ 153.99  PENALTY.



   A person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties imposed by
Minnesota Statutes for misdemeanor offenses.



(Ord. 2017-1217, passed 7-10-17)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



      Table



         I.   FRANCHISES



         II.   STREET NAME CHANGES



TABLE I:  FRANCHISES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1982-383(A)
 
3-22-82
 
Granting a franchise to Northern Cablevision Northwest Inc.


1983-430(A)
 
- -
 
Granting a franchise to Minnegasco.


1987-575(A)
 
- -
 
Granting a franchise to Northern States Power.


2003-1006
 
10-27-03
 
Granting a franchise to Centerpoint Energy Minnegasco.


2007-1082
 
12-3-07
 
Granting a franchise to Northern States Power Company for an electric
distribution system and transmission lines.


2015-1200
 
11-23-15
 
Implementing electric service franchise fee on Northern States Power Company
for providing electric service within the city.


2015-1201
 
11-23-15
 
Requiring a gas franchise fee from Centerpoint Energy for providing gas
service within the city.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE II:  STREET NAME CHANGES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1977-233(A)
 
1-10-77
 
West 82nd Avenue from approximately Hampshire Avenue North to Zane Avenue
shall be renamed Candlewood Drive.


1977-233(A)
 
1-10-77
 
82nd Court shall be renamed Candlewood Court.


1977-233(A)
 
1-10-77
 
78th Avenue from Lee Avenue North to Kyle Avenue North shall be renamed 80th
Avenue North.


1977-233(A)
 
1-10-77
 
75th Court from Newton Avenue westerly to end of cul-de-sac shall be renamed
76th Court.


1977-233(A)
 
1-10-77
 
74th Avenue from Newton Avenue easterly to Morgan Avenue, and Morgan Avenue
northeasterly to 75th Avenue, and 75th Avenue from where it joins Morgan
Avenue easterly to the east edge of Holsten's Meadowwood Subdivision shall
all be renamed Meadowwood Drive.


1977-233(A)
 
1-10-77
 
In Men Riv Riverdale 2nd Addition 75th Circle shall be renamed 75th Court;
Morgan Avenue North from Meadowwood Drive north to the end of the cul-de-sac
shall be renamed North Meadowwood Court; and 74th Circle running easterly
from Meadowwood Drive to the end of the cul-de-sac shall be renamed South
Meadowwood Court.


1977-233(A)
 
1-10-77
 
In Stonybrook 3rd Addition Florida Circle both north and south of Candlewood
Drive shall be renamed Florida Court and Douglas Circle both north and south
of Candlewood Drive shall be renamed Douglas Court.


1977-233(A)
 
1-10-77
 
In the Parkland West Subdivision 81st Lane from Wyoming easterly to 82nd
Avenue shall be renamed 81st Avenue North.


1979-283(A)
 
2-26-79
 
Meadow Brook Drive between Boone Avenue and Cavell Avenue shall be renamed
North Brook Avenue.


1979-283(A)
 
2-26-79
 
Meadow Brook Circle between North Brook Avenue (as set forth above) and
Cavell Avenue shall be renamed North Brook Circle.


1979-283(A)
 
2-26-79
 
Bass Creek Drive from Boone Avenue to the westerly Cavell Avenue shall be
renamed Bass Creek Avenue.


1980-337(A)
 
10-14-80
 
Pennsylvania Avenue from the junction of Trunk Highway 52; north to the
junction of C.S.A.H. 30 shall be renamed West Broadway.


1980-342(A)
 
10-27-80
 
Utah Avenue North from 83rd Avenue North 135 feet north to be renamed 83rd
Court.


1980-342(A)
 
10-27-80
 
74½ Avenue North from County Road 103 (commonly known as West Broadway) to
75th Avenue North be changed to 74th Way.


1980-348(A)
 
12-15-80
 
69th Avenue from Boone Avenue westerly to C.S.A.H #18 shall be renamed
Erickson Court.


1981-369(A)
 
11-9-81
 
73½ Avenue North from Aldrich Avenue North 640 feet east be renamed 73 Way.


1981-369(A)
 
11-9-81
 
70th Avenue from Boone Avenue North 930 feet to the west be renamed Northland
Drive.


1981-369(A)
 
11-9-81
 
Boone Circle and Boone Court be renamed Northland Circle and Northland Court,
located on the east side of Boone Avenue North at the 70th Avenue alignment.


1982-377(A)
 
1-25-82
 
63½ Avenue from Zane Avenue west 400 feet be renamed Zane Court.


1982-378(A)
 
1-25-82
 
77th Avenue North from Zane Avenue North westerly to C.S.A.H. 18 shall be
renamed Brooklyn Boulevard.


1984-452(A)
 
5-29-84
 
South Park Lane from Boone Avenue North to Mount Curve Boulevard shall be
renamed Mount Curve Boulevard.


1984-452(A)
 
5-29-84
 
Aldrich Court, starting at the intersection of Meadowwood Drive and Aldrich
Avenue North easterly approximately 400 feet shall be named Meadowwood Drive.


1984-454(A)
 
6-4-84
 
Queen Avenue, beginning at Brookdale Drive south approximately 410 feet be
renamed Brookdale Court.


1985-493(A)
 
9-23-85
 
Former CSAH 18 from 81st Avenue to the south city limits of Osseo and the
current T.H. 169 from the north city limits of Osseo to 109th Avenue be named
Jefferson Highway.


1986-543(A)
 
9-22-86
 
Formerly 80½ Avenue North from Yates Avenue North to Toledo Avenue North
shall be renamed 81st Avenue.


1986-543(A)
 
9-22-86
 
Formerly Kentucky Avenue (cul-de-sac directly south of 85th Avenue North)
shall be renamed Kentucky


2003-1003
 
9-22-03
 
Former France Avenue North between 101st and 103rd Avenues North shall be
renamed Fallgold Parkway North; former Lakeside Drive North shall be renamed
Welcome Avenue North; part of former Oxbow Commons Boulevard running
east-west east of Zane Avenue shall be renamed 100th Avenue North; part of
former Oxbow Commons Boulevard running north-south north of 97th Avenue shall
be renamed Xenia Avenue North; former Oxbow Lake Place shall be renamed 99th
Avenue North; and former Oxbow Way North shall be renamed Xenia Avenue North.


2003-1009
 
11-17-03
 
Former 105th Avenue North between Noble Parkway and Winnetka Avenue shall be
renamed Oxbow Creek Drive.


2006-1062
 
8-7-06
 
That roadway commonly referred to as 97th Avenue North between Noble Parkway
and West Broadway with future extension to Highway 169, platted as 97th
Avenue in the plats of Deerhaven Estates, Noble Office Park, Woodland
Elementary Addition, Saint Gerards Addition, Saint Gerards Manor, Oxbow
Commons, Target Park 2000, and platted as Liberty Parkway in the plats of
Liberty Oaks and Park Place Promenade shall be renamed Oak Grove Parkway.


2009-1105
 
9-8-09
 
That roadway commonly referred to as Brookdale Court North with an address
range of 2701 to 2745 serving the plat of Parkhaven Villas between Xerxes
Avenue and Newton Avenue North shall be renamed Parkhaven Court North.


 
 









APPENDIX:  FEE RESOLUTION




RESOLUTION 2018-161
CITY OF BROOKLYN PARK
COUNTY OF HENNEPIN
STATE OF MINNESOTA




 




A RESOLUTION AMENDING FEE RESOLUTION NO. 2000-202 ADOPTING A SCHEDULE OF FEES
AND CHARGES FOR
VARIOUS SERVICES, LICENSES AND PERMITS FOR THE CITY OF BROOKLYN PARK,
MINNESOTA




Now Therefore, the City Council of the City of Brooklyn Park, Minnesota,
resolves:



TABLE OF CONTENTS BY TITLE OF TABLE



 


Title of Table

 

Reference






Abatement Fees

 

—




Administrative Fee Schedule

 

§ 90.23




Administrative Penalty Schedule

 

—




Animal Licensing Fees

 

§§ 92.27 and 92.38




Business License and Permit Fees

 

§ 110.37. References to specific sections are contained in the body of the
table.




Building Permit Administrative Fee for Residential Contractors

 

§ 103.01(C)(2)




Building Permit Fees

 

§§ 103.01(C) and 103.02




City Services and Supplies

 

—




Demolition and Moving of Buildings

 

§ 103.02




Fire Hydrants

 

§§ 100.59 and 100.64




Fire Protection and Prevention Service Fees

 

§ 93.09




Fire Suppression Systems/Alarm Systems Fees

 

§§ 93.09 and 103.02




Gas Fees

 

§ 103.02




Hearing Officer Fee Schedule

 

—




Mechanical Permit Fees

 

§ 103.02




Plumbing Fees

 

§ 103.02




Private Sewer System Permit Fees

 

§§ 99.81 and 99.82




Pool License Fees

 

§ 105.02




Sanitary Sewer Rates and Charges

 

§§ 99.75 to 99.80, 103.02




Storm Sewer Rates and Charges

 

§ 108.04




Street/Signal Lighting Rates and Changes

 

§ 109.03




Subdivision and Zoning Fees and Charges

 

§ 151.041




Water Access Charges

 

§ 100.63




Water Rates and Charges

 

§§ 100.55(A) through (D), 100.57, 100.58




Water Maintenance and Fire Protection Charges

 

§ 100.55(E)




Water Meters

 

§§ 100.60 and 100.61










TABLE OF CONTENTS BY CODE SECTION



 


Section(s) of Code

 

Title of Table





§ 71.49
 

Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Traffic Rule)



§ 90.23
 

Administrative Fee (All Vehicle Impounds)



§§ 92.37 and 92.38
 
Animal Licensing Fees


§ 93.09
 

Fire Protection and Prevention Service Fees Fire Suppression Systems/Alarm
System Fees



§ 93.13
 

Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Health and Safety)



§ 93.25
 

Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Annual Consumer Permits)



§§ 93.25 et seq.
 

Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Fire Protection and Prevention)



§ 96.43
 

Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Streets and Sidewalks)



§§ 98.06 and 98.15
 

Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Garbage and Refuse)



§ 99.66
 

Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Sewers)



§§ 99.75 to 99.80
 

Sanitary Sewer Rates and Charges



§§ 99.81 and 99.82
 

Private Sewer System Permit Fees



§§ 100.55(A) through (D), 100.57, 100.58
 

Water Rates and Charges



§ 100.55(E)
 

Water Maintenance and Fire Protection Charges



§§ 100.60 and 100.61
 

Water Meters



§§ 100.59 and 100.64
 

Fire Hydrants



§ 100.63
 

Water Access Charges



§§ 103.01(C) and 103.02
 

Building Permit Administrative Fees



§ 103.02
 

Plumbing Fees      Table 1-C Plumbing Permit Fees
Gas Fees      Table 1-B Mechanical Permit Fees
Demolition and Moving of Buildings
Mechanical Permit Fees  Table 1-B Mechanical Permit Fees
Fire Suppression Systems/Alarm Systems Fees
Building Permit Fees     Table 1-A Building Permit Fee Schedule



§§ 93.34, 93.36, 103.02, 103.04, and 110.37
 

Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Building Code)



Ch. 105
 

Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Swimming Pools)



§ 105.02
 

Pool License Fees



§ 110.37
 

Business License and Permit Fee Schedule



Ch. 111
 

Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Adult Oriented Businesses)



§§ 112.015, 112.036, 112.059, 112.061, 112.062, 112.097
 

Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Alcoholic Beverages and
Establishments)



113.43
 

Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Amusements and Theatrical
Entertainment)



§§ 114.04 and 114.05
 

Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Food Establishments)



117.30, 117.40 and 117.45
 

Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Lodging and Housing Establishments)
(Rental Establishment Fees)



§ 117.52
 

Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Building Code)



§ 118.04
 

Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Excavations and Earth Moving)



§§ 119.30 et seq.
 

Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Pawnbrokers and Peddlers)



§ 120.03
 

Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Sauna)



§§ 121.06 and 121.09
 

Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Taxicabs)



Ch. 122
 

Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Tobacco Regulations)



Ch. 150
 

Business License and Permit Fee Schedule (Signs)



§ 151.041
 

Subdivision and Zoning Fees and Charges










 



FEE RESOLUTION



Section 1. All fees and charges in effect as of the date of the adoption of
the city code for the city shall remain in effect unless otherwise modified
by the provisions of this resolution. All citations below are to various
sections of the city code unless otherwise indicated.



Section 2.  The following are the fees and charges for the permits, licenses
and services listed below which are referenced to the section of the city
code which authorizes their establishment:



ABATEMENT FEES



 


Abatement Costs

 

Fee



$0 - $999
 

$150



$1,000 - $4,999
 

$400



$5,000 - $9,999
 

$750



$10,000 - $14,999
 

$1,250



$15,000 or more
 

$1,500




Abatement of Inoperable/Junk Vehicle

 

$150









ADMINISTRATIVE FEE SCHEDULE



 


Violation

 

Fee



Administrative costs incurred by city for certification of delinquent charges
 

$15 when notification letter is mailed
$35 when certified to county



Lawful gambling investigation fee
 

$250



All vehicle impounds
 

$10



Easement vacation
 

$150




 



ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY SCHEDULE



 


Violation Description

 

Administrative Penalty Amount





1
 
All violations of parking codes, except as otherwise noted
 

$55



2
 
Management of garbage and refuse for storage and collection (i.e. trash can
in view)
 

$55



3
 
No visible address numbers on the house
 

$55



4
 
Snow and ice removal (i.e. sidewalk shoveling)
 

$55



5
 
All violations of animal control regulations, except otherwise noted
 

$200



6
 
Parking on unapproved surfaces, overweight vehicles, ext. storage, firewood
 

$200



7
 
Parking within 10 feet of a hydrant
 

$200



8
 
Fencing setbacks and maintenance
 

$200



9
 
Telecommunication permit
 

$200



10
 
Earth material storage and excavations
 

$200



11
 
Excavations within public right-of-way
 

$200



12
 
Zoning Code violations
 

$200



13
 
Weight restrictions/transportation permits
 

$200



14
 
Junk vehicles
 

$200



15
 
Snow removal restrictions, parking restrictions
 

$200



16
 
Sign ordinance violations
 

$200



17
 
Nuisance - junk and debris violations
 

$200





 



 


Violation Description

 

Administrative Penalty Amount





18
 
Failure to obtain a rental license
 

0 - 10 days after notification -      $250



11 - 20 days after notification -    $500


21 - 30 days after notification -    $1,000


30+ days after notification -        $2,000


19
 
Any violation not specifically described herein
 

$200



20
 
Animals without current rabies vaccination
 

$200



21
 
Animal at large
 

$200



22
 
Failure to obtain required license (i.e. food)
 

$200



23
 
Accessory structures
 

$200



24
 
Lodging violations
 

$200



25
 
Home occupation
 

$200



26
 
Non-critical property maintenance
 

$200



27
 
Non-critical swimming pool violations
 

$200



28
 
Non-critical food inspection violations
 

$200



29
 
Long grass
 

$200



30
 
Critical unsafe conditions
 

$500



31
 
Abandonment/failure to redeem animals from pound
 

$500



32
 
Critical property maintenance
 

$500



33
 
Critical food inspection violations
 

$500



34
 
Critical swimming pool violations
 

$500



35
 
Repeat violations within 24 months
 

Double the amount of the scheduled fine for the previous violation, up to a
maximum of $2,000



36
 
Continuing violations
 

A fine for that can be imposed by the hearing officer for each day the
violation continues.





 



ANIMAL LICENSING FEES



(See §§ 92.37 and 92.38 of the Code)



 


Licenses

 

Fees





Apiary registration
 

$75



Spayed or neutered animals *
 

$10 per year



Animals not spayed or neutered *
 

$20 per year



Off leash dog exercise area daily fee (on site)
 

$3



Late license fee
 

$2



Duplicate tag, if lost or stolen
 

$1



Board fee for each day an animal is impounded **
 

$31



Impounding fee **
 

$20




   Second impounding fee for an impoundment within a 12 month period **

 

$30




   Third impounding fee for an impoundment within a 12 month period **

 

$40



   Fourth and subsequent impounding fee within a 12 month period
 

$50



Registration of dangerous dog
 

$200



Registration of potentially dangerous dog
 

$50



Appeal of dangerous dog/potentially dangerous dog designation
 

$50



Warning sign
 

$15



Warning tag
 

$5



*All annual animal licensing fees are for the duration of rabies vaccine
effectiveness.


** All impound and board fees shall be paid in cash.




 



BUSINESS LICENSES AND PERMITS FEE SCHEDULE



 


Business License and Permit Fee Schedule




Code Section

 

Type of License

 

Conditions and Terms

 

Amount



Adult Oriented Businesses




Ch. 111
 
Adult only entertainment business
 
Annual license
 
$5,000


Alcoholic Beverages and Establishments


112.061
112.062
 
Beer
 
On sale, annual
 
$300


Off sale, annual
 
$100


Club, limited one week
 
$20


Club, annual
 
$200


112.015
 
Liquor (see also beer)
 
Bottle club, annual
 
$300


112.036
 
Liquor (see also beer)
 
Off-sale, annual
 
$300


On-sale, Class A annual
 
$8,000


On-sale, Class B annual
 
$8,000


Sunday sale, annual
 
$200


Club, on-sale (M.S.A. 340:11-7) annual
 
$200


112.059
 
Liquor
 
On-sale to bona fide clubs requires a payment to the general fund of the city
 
$10


112.097
 

On-sale wine

 

On-sale, annual
2018
2019
2020

 


$1,200
$1,600
$2,000




112.201

 
Brewer taproom
 
On-sale, annual
 
$300



112.210

 
Brewpub
 
On-sale, annual
 
$300



112.401

 
Cocktail room
 
On-sale, annual
 
$300


Amusements and Theatrical Entertainment


113.43
 
Motion picture establishments
 
Indoor theater
 
$225


Outdoor theater
 
$450


Payable in advance on or before July 1 of each year, all licenses to expire
June 30 of each year
 


 
 
Per year
 
$225



Annual Consumer Permits



93.25
 
Annual retail fireworks permits
 
Fireworks only vendors
 
$350


All other vendors
 
$100


93.25
 
Indoor fireworks permit
 
Per event
 
$150



Body Art Establishments



123.13A
 
License fee
 
Annual license, establishment only
 
$250


123.13B
 
Late fee
 
One to 15 days late
Sixteen to 30 days late
 
50% license fee
100% license fee


123.13A
 
Plan review
 
100% of license fee
 
$250



Building Code



103.04
 
Parking lot permits
 
Permit fee
 
$125


93.34
103.02
 
Permit for the installation, alteration, maintaining, repairing or removal of
underground liquid storage systems
 
Permit fee
 
Table 1-A Building Permit Fee Schedule


93.36
110.37
 
Installation, alteration, maintaining, repairing or removal of underground
liquid storage systems
 
Annual license
 
$100



Excavations and Earth Moving



118.04
 
Land reclamation, excavation, storage
 
Permit fee
 


200-1,000 cubic yards
 
$50


1,000-10,000 cubic yards
 
$75


10,000-100,000 cubic yards
 
$250


Over 100,000 cubic yards
 
$600



Fire Protection and Prevention



93.25 et seq.
 
Hood cleaning permit
 
Includes one inspection
 
$50


93.25 et seq.
 
Open burning permit
 
Per burn day - not to exceed 14 days
 
$60


Food Establishments


114.05
 
Food Type I - High level of food preparation, diverse menus, large amounts of
potentially hazardous foods, holding foods for long periods of time, or
complex food processing.
 
Full service/sit down restaurants, full menu cafeterias, buffet restaurants,
catering kitchens, and similar.
 
$695


114.05
 
Food Type II - Moderate level of food preparation, moderate menu, limited
potentially hazardous foods, or foods held and served for a limited time.
 
Fast food, take out, pizza delivery, delis, drive-ins, ice cream shops, donut
shops, limited or catered cafeterias, bakeries, and similar.
 
$580


114.05
 
Food Type III - Limited food preparation, simple menus, little or no
potentially hazardous foods, or foods only served for a short period of time.
 
Coffee carts and coffee-only shops, bars, concession stands, snack stands,
continental breakfasts, and similar.
 
$415


114.05
 
Food Grocery - Pre-packaged foods or the sale of foods to be consumed
off-site.
 
Large Grocery - Larger grocery store.
 
$995


Small Grocery - Smaller grocery stores, convenience stores, markets, and
similar.
 
$345


Limited Pre-packaged - Video stores, gift shops, candy racks, and similar.
 
$90


Vending Machines.
 
$25


Nuts Only.
 
$10


114.05
 
Food Institution - Churches,  day cares, and preschools.
 
Full Operation - Full kitchen.
 
$445


[Note:  No charge for places of worship and non-profit organizations.]
 
Limited Operation - Catered or limited preparation.
 
$235


Pre-Packaged.
 
$120


114.05
 
Food Institution - Schools
 
Full Operation - Full kitchen.
 
$495


Limited Operation - Catered or snacks only.
 
$250


114.05
 
Additional Food Facility - A separate area of food or beverage preparation. 
May include bars, receiving areas, catering activities, or additional food
establishments. 
 

Per additional Type I, Type II or Large Grocery facility.

 
$200



[The higher-rate facility is considered the main facility and each other type
is an additional facility.]

 

Per additional Type III or Small Grocery facility.

 

$100



114.05
 
Seasonal Food - Establishment continuously open for 6 business months or less
in a calendar year.
 

The fee will be one-half the regular license fee (minimum $85).

 
½ license fee


114.05
 
Itinerant Food - Each stand, booth, cart, or table.
 

First day.

 
$75



[Note: No charge for places of worship and non-profit organizations if
complete application materials submitted more than 7 days prior to event.]

 

Prepackaged foods only.

 
$50



Each additional day.

 
$15



Additional stand(s) by the same owner at the same event.

 
$45


114.05
 
Mobile Food Unit - A self-contained food service operation, located in a
readily movable motorized wheeled or towed vehicle, used to store, prepare,
display or serve food intended for individual portion service that is readily
movable without disassembling.
 
Full operation - Food preparation, includes cooking facilities.
 
$160


Limited operation - Moderate food preparation, includes warming or holding
units.
 
$115


Pre-packaged - pre-packaged foods.
 
$95


Additional vehicle.
 
$75


114.06
 
Plan Review - Fee collected for reviewing construction documents for a new or
remodeled food establishment.
 
New.
 
150% of license fee


Remodeled.
 
100% of license fee


114.05
 
Additional Inspection Fee
 
More than one reinspection.
 
$125



Garbage and Refuse



98.06
 
Garbage and refuse collectors
 
Per annum, first vehicle
 
$115


For each additional vehicle
 
$55


98.15
 
Incinerators
 
Per annum
 
$150



Health and Safety



93.13
 
Fireworks display
 
For each display
 
$30


For annual inspection required for Fire Prevention Code
 
$35



Itinerant Produce Merchant



119.40
 
Itinerant produce merchant
 
Per week
 
$8


Per month
 
$20


Per season
 
$75


Lodging and Housing Establishments


117.30
 
Lodging - An establishment where sleeping accommodations are let out to the
public
 
Base fee
 
$160


Per unit fee (maximum of $1,300)
 
$5


117.25 - 117.30
 
Plan Review - Fee collected for reviewing construction documents for a new or
remodeled bed and breakfast or lodging facility
 
New
 
150%of license fee


Remodeled
 
100%of license fee


 
 
Home occupation
 
 
 
$40


Massage Therapy


124.06A
 
License fee
 
Massage enterprise license
 
$200


Massage therapist license
 
$100


124.06A
 
Late fee
 
One to 15 days late
 
50% license fee


Sixteen to 30 days late
 
100% license fee


124.07A
 
Background check
 
Massage enterprise
 
$200


Massage therapist
 
$200


Rental Establishments


117.45
 
Rental Establishment Fees
 
Annual license
 


 
(General housing unit)
 


 
   Single-family attached
 
$150


 
   Single-family detached
 
$150


 
   Double (one side)
 
$150


 
   Double (two side)
 
$150 per unit


 
   Condominium
 
$150


 
   Townhome
 
$150


 
   Triplex
 
$150 per unit


 
   Small apartments (4 - 15 units)
 
$200 plus $25 per unit


Rental Establishment Fees (One or Two inspections)
 
Annual renewal license
 


 
(General housing unit)
 


 
   Single-family attached
 
$150


 
   Single-family detached
 
$150


 
   Double (one side)
 
$150


 
   Double (two side)
 
$150 per unit


 
   Condominium
 
$150


 
   Townhome
 
$150


 
   Triplex
 
$150 per unit


Rental Establishment Fees (Three inspections)
 
Annual renewal license
 


 
(General housing unit)
 


 
   Single-family attached
 
$200


 
   Single-family detached
 
$200


 
   Double (one side)
 
$200


 
   Double (two side)
 
$200 per failed unit


 
   Condominium
 
$200


 
   Townhome
 
$200


 
   Triplex
 
$200 per failed unit


Rental Establishment Fees (Four inspections)
 
Annual renewal license
 


 
(General housing unit)
 


 
   Single-family attached
 
$300


 
   Single-family detached
 
$300


 
   Double (one side)
 
$300


 
   Double (two side)
 
$300 per failed unit


 
   Condominium
 
$300


 
   Townhome
 
$300


 
   Triplex
 
$300 per failed unit


Rental Establishment Fees (Five inspections)
 
Annual renewal license
 


 
(General housing unit)
 


 
   Single-family attached
 
$500


 
   Single-family detached
 
$500


 
   Double (one side)
 
$500


 
   Double (two side)
 
$500 per failed unit


 
   Condominium
 
$500


 
   Townhome
 
$500


 
   Triplex
 
$500 per failed unit


Rental Establishment Fees (Six or more inspections)
 
Annual renewal license
 


 
(General housing unit)
 


 
   Single-family attached
 
$1,000


 
   Single-family detached
 
$1,000


 
   Double (one side)
 
$1,000


 
   Double (two side)
 
$1,000 per failed unit


 
   Condominium
 
$1,000


 
   Townhome
 
$1,000


 
   Triplex
 
$1,000 per failed unit


Apartment Annual License
 
Thereafter, the fee will be payable annually on July 1 at the rate of $25 per
unit
 

$25.00 per unit



117.485
 
Point of Conversion Fee
 
Beginning July 1, 2008 a conversion fee of $750 will be charged for all owner
occupied single family, double (one side) and double (two side, each side)
rental properties.
 
$750


117.52(C)(4)(a)
 
Reinspection Fee
 
 
 

$100 per failed unit



Pawnbrokers and Peddlers/Solicitors



119.30

 
Peddler/Solicitor
 
Background check
 
$200


30-day license
 
$100


Six-month license
 
$200


Annual license
 
$300


Duplicate license
 
$50


119.05
 
Pawnbroker
 
Annual
 
$12,000


Investigation fee per applicant/manager
 
$1,500


Transaction fee
 
$1.50



Sauna



120.03
 
Sauna
 
Calendar year
 
$10,000



Sewers



99.66
 
Scavengers
 
Dumping fees
 
$2/1,000

$5 min.



Signs



Ch. 150
 
Temporary - each (limits apply)
 
 
 
$75


 
Nonresidential zoning districts
 
 


Wall sign
 
 


Free standing, Monument
 
 
$90


Residential zoning districts
 
 
$150


Wall sign
 
 
$90


Free standing, monument
 
 
$150


 
Sign storage/retrieval fee
 
Less than 5 sq. ft.
 
$15


5 sq. ft. or more
 
$40


 
 
Failure to obtain sign permit
 
 
 
Fee doubled


150.10
 
Sign contractor
 
Annual license for one year or any portion thereof ending December 31
following the effective date of the license
 
$75



Streets and Sidewalks



96.43
 
Street excavation
 
For each location as set forth in § 650.12
 
$25



Swimming Pools



Ch. 105
 
Public Pools - Pools, hot tubs, spas, wading pools, special purpose pools,
and similar.
 
First pool, indoor.
 
$380


First pool, outdoor.
 
$290


Additional pool in the same room or fenced area, indoor.
 
$345


Additional pool in the same room or fenced area, outdoor.
 
$235


Taxicabs


121.09
 
Taxicab drivers
 
Annual license - for one year or any portion thereof ending December 31
following the  effective date of the license
 
$10


121.06
 
Taxicabs
 
Annual license - for each vehicle, for one year or any portion thereof ending
December 31 following the effective date of the license
 
$455



Tobacco Regulations



Ch. 122
 
Tobacco
 
Annual fee
 
$200


 
Tobacco background check
 
 
 
$200



Traffic Rule



71.49
 
Street use
 
Special permits
 
$15


Job
 
$36


Annual
 
$120


Annual refuse compactor
 
$60



Miscellaneous



 
Plats
 
See § 345:08
 



Basis of fees:  (1) For the purpose of this computation, any period of seven
calendar days or less shall be considered one week; any period for more than
seven calendar days shall be treated as a year; (2) The annual fees herein
provided for shall be assessed on a calendar year basis and on and after July
1 the amount of the fee for such annual licenses shall be one-half the amount
stipulated for the remainder of the year; (3) All annual licenses issued
under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on December 31 in the year
when issued. Other than annual license shall expire on the date specified in
the license.





 



BUILDING PERMIT ADMINISTRATION FEES



 


Reason for Change

 

Amount of Charge

 

Reference




Permit fee for residential work for administration and review of residential
contractor licenses

 

$5 per permit

 

§ 103.01(E)(1)




Copies of permits and documents

 

As established by Council resolution

 

§ 103.02(B)




Building Permit Fees

 

As established by Council resolution

 

§ 103.01(C)




 



TABLE 1-A BUILDING PERMIT FEES CITY OF BROOKLYN PARK



 


Total Valuation

 

Fee





$1.00 to $1,200.00
 
$51.50


$1,201.00 to $2,000.00
 
$51.50 for the first $1,200.00 plus $3.37 for each additional $100.00, or
fraction thereof, to and including $2,000.00


$2,001.00 to $25,000.00
 
$78.46 for the first $2,000.00 plus $15.86 for each additional $1,000.00, or
fraction thereof, to and including $25,000.00


$25,001.01 to $50,000.00
 
$443.24 for the first $25,000.00 plus $11.44 for each additional $1,000.00,
or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000.00


$50,001.00 to $100,000.00
 
$729.24 for the first $50,000.00 plus $7.93 for each additional $1,000.00, or
fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00


$100,001.00 to $500,000.00
 
$1,125,74 for the first $100,000.00 plus $6.34 for each additional $1,000.00,
or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00


$500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00
 
$3,661.74 for the first $500,000.00 plus $5.39 for each additional $1,000.00,
or fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000.00


$1,000,001.00 and up
 
$6,356.74 for the first $1,000,000.00 plus $4.14 for each additional
$1,000.00, or fraction thereof


Use ICC and State Building Codes & Standards Division square foot cost of
construction for determining building valuation and state surcharge fees.


Other Inspections and Fees:


1.
 
Inspections outside of normal business hours ...........................
 
$51.50 per hour (minimum charge-two hours)


2.
 
Reinspection fee assessed under provisions of Section 1300.0210 ..
 
$51.50 per hour


3.
 
Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated .................
 
$51.50 per hour (minimum charge-one hour)


4.
 
When submittal documents are required by Section 1300.0130, a plan review fee
must be paid ...............................................
 
The plan review fee shall be 65% of the building permit fee


5.
 
Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revisions to plan
..........................................................................
 
$51.50 per hour (deferred submittals)


6.
 
Shell only buildings
..........................................................
 
80% of valuations




 



 

Maintenance Permits
 
Fee




Roofing/tear off
 
$2,000 valuation


Roofing/layover
 
$1,500 valuation


Re-side
 
$2,500 valuation


Replacement windows
 
$2,500 valuation


Annual permit
 
Determined by Building Official


Residential water heater
 
$25


Residential water softener
 
$25


Residential lawn irrigation
 
$25


Accessory Structures
 
Fixed Fee


Pools
 
$3,000 valuation


Residential decks
 
$15 per square foot


Covered decks
 
$25 per square foot


Sheds
 
$20 per square foot


Carports
 
$16 per square foot


Garage
 
$22 per square foot


Screen porch
 
$35 per square foot


Three season porch
 
$55 per square foot


Basement finish with bathroom
 
$12 per square foot


Basement finish without bathroom
 
$9 per square foot


Steel storage racks (commercial)
 
$10,000 valuation


Miscellaneous
 
Fee


Temporary certificate of occupancy
 
Initial issuance/$100


 
 
First 30-day extension/$300


 
 
Second 30-day extension/$600


 
 
Third and final 30-day extension/$1,200


Expired permit renewal
 
Renewal within 180 days of expiration/one-half original fee


 
 
Renewal after 180 days of expiration/full permit fee


Expedited permit and phased permits
 
Twice the building permit fee*


Mechanical contractor license
 
$100/year


Reinspection fee
 
$51.50 per hour (minimum one hour)


Investigation fee
 
Twice the building permit fee


* When an applicant demonstrates the existence of extraordinary circumstances
or other unique factors relating to the proposed development, the Building
Official may authorize expediting or phasing of the permit and/or submittal
documents.


Fees Fixed By State Statute
 
Fee


Minnesota Rule 1300.0160 similar plans
 
Maximum 25% plan review


Utility Taps
 
 


Sanitary sewer
 
$150 (was $75)


Water main
 
$150 (was $75)


Storm sewer
 
$150 (was $75)


Street Permits
 
 


Street cut
 
$85 (was $25)


Curb cut
 
$85 (was $25)


Small Utility Permits
 
 


Administration fee
 
$200


Excavation in the boulevard
 
$25


Excavation in the street
 
$50


Underground trenching of lines (per LF)
 
$0.50


Overhead placement of lines (per LF)
 
$0.20


Grading/Excavating
 
 


200 - 1,000 cubic yards
 
$200 (was $50)


1,001 - 10,000 cubic yards
 
$350 (was $75)


10,001 - 100,000 cubic yards
 
$750 (was $250)


100,001 + cubic yards
 
$1,200 (was $600)




 



   Fee Refunds



   The Building Official may authorize refunding not more than 80% of the
permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in
accordance with the code.



   The Building Official may authorize refunding not more than 80% of the
plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review
has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review is done.



 


Stormwater Review Fee



153.07
 
Administration Fee
 

$150




 



CITY SERVICES AND SUPPLIES



 

Services and Supplies
 

Fee





Accident report
 

$.25 per page



Aerial maps
 

$2



Audited financial reports
 

$15



Booking fees for outside agencies includes first day of cell
 

$100



Breathalyzer test to other departments
 

$25



Canned printout
 

$20 plus $.25 per first 100 pages



Certified photocopies
 

$1



City Charter
 

$.25 per page



City Code of 1972
 

$70



City maps, large
 

$4



City maps, small
 

$2



Color booking photos
 

$5



Comprehensive plan
 

$10



Comprehensive plan map
 

$4



Copies of the reports
 

$10



EDC Brochure
 

$.50



Environmental assessment
 

—



Fingerprinting
 

$10



Holding cell, each additional day or fraction
 

$20



Notary services
 

$5



Ozalid printing
 

$1.50



Photocopies
 

$.25 per page



Photographs
 

$10 per request plus actual cost



Police reports
 

$.25 per page



Returned check charge (for whatever reason)
 

$30



Special assessment search
 

$12 plus actual reprint costs



Topo maps
 

$25/acre



Utility maps
 

$3



Video tapes
 

$25



Wage assignment recording
 

$5



Waste dumping charge
 

$1.25 per 1,000 gallons



Zoning maps, large
 

$10



Zoning maps, small
 

$5



Zoning Ordinance
 

$10




Database requests:
Set up charge - covers cost of staff time for initial conference, layout,
approvals and phone contracts, plus, per record charge - covers cost of
computer time, output, operator time, and other output costs necessary to
generate the report plus, development charge - covers costs to create report
program, execute search, and/or manual search time by staff to assemble
report. Costs include salaries, benefits, supervision and overhead
Note: Fees not to exceed labor costs (wages/salary plus benefits) of the
lowest-paid employee who could complete the task.

 

$50
$.05 first 100 parcels





 



DEMOLITION AND MOVING OF BUILDINGS FEES



 

Reason for Fee
 

Amount of Fee

 

Reference






Demolition of any minor building

 

$50

 

§ 103.02(B)




Demolition of any building not classified as a minor building

 

$150

 

§103.02(B)




For holding up, raising or moving any building or structure on the same lot

 

$50

 

§103.02(B)




For moving any minor building as defined herein to a different lot within the
city over city streets

 

$50

 

§ 103.02(B)




For moving a manufactured home as defined by State Building Code Chapter 1350
Manufactured Homes, to a lot within the city or from outside of the city to a
lot within the city

 

$75

 

§ 103.02(B)




For moving any building or structure non-stop through the city upon city
streets (see exception - Section 446:15(e), County Roads and State Highways
Exempt)

 

$75

 

§ 103.02(B)




For moving any building or structure out of the city

 

$75

 

§ 103.02(B)




For moving any building or structure, except any minor building, from one lot
to another lot within the city

 

$250

 

§ 103.02(B)




For moving any building or structure, including any minor building, from
outside of the city to a lot within the city

 

$250

 

§ 103.02(B)










FIRE HYDRANTS



 

Reason For Charge
 

Amount of Fee

 

Reference




Annual maintenance fee:

 


 

§ 100.59



one to three hydrants
 

$75 per hydrant

 


each additional hydrant
 

$50 per hydrant

 


Meter deposit and rental fee
 

Deposit of $750 and a $5 per day charge for rental during the first 30 days
and $10 per day thereafter, with a minimum rental of $25

 

§ 100.64




 



FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION SERVICE FEES



 


Reason for Fee

 

Amount of Fee

 

Reference





Daycare license fire inspection
 

$50

 

§ 245A.15



Fire modification fines
 

$250 first offense

 




 

$500 second offense

 




 

$1,000 third offense

 




Gas line encroachment
 

$1,000 per response

 

§§ 366.011 and 415.01



 


 

§ 93.09



Hazardous materials
 

$300 per engine (each)

 

§§ 366.011 and 415.01



 

$400 per aerial/ladder (each)

 

§ 93.09



and
 


 




Other responses
 

$150 per utility (each)

 




 

Firefighters @$15 per hour (each)

 




Apparatus rates are for two hours; After two hours, rates are per hour
 

Senior Chief officers @$50 per hour (each)

 




 

Inspectors @$30 per hour (each)

 




 

Disposables @cost + 10% (each)

 











FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS/ALARM SYSTEM FEES



 


Reason for Fee

 

Amount of Fee

 

Reference



Permit for the installation and/or alteration of all fire suppression systems
and/or alarm systems and all associated components thereof, including
standpipes, water supply pipes, pumps, special suppression systems and dip
tanks
 

Table 1-A Building Permit Fee Schedule

 
§ 103.02(B)


General fire/safety inspections
 
Initial Inspection   $0
 
§ 93.09


 
1st follow-up      $0
 


 
2nd follow-up      $100
 


 
3rd follow-up      $150
 


 
4th follow-up      $200
 



 



 


Reason for Fee

 

Amount of Fee

 

Reference





Public school inspections
 

Initial inspection and two follow-up inspections $0.014/building sq. ft.

 
§ 299F.47


 
Third or more follow-up inspections, each $0.005/building sq. ft.
 
§ 93.09


 
Inspections are every three years.
 


Charter school inspections
 

Initial inspection and two follow-up inspections $100

 
§ 299F.47


 
Third or more follow-up inspections, each $ 50
 
§ 93.09


 
Inspections are every three years.
 


Hotel/motel inspections
 
Initial inspection and one follow-up inspection $435 each facility, plus:
 
§ 299F.46


 
A per room charge:
 
§ 93.09


 
1-18 rooms Exempt
 


 
19-35 rooms $6 each room
 


 
36-100 rooms $7 each room
 


 
Over 100 rooms $8 each room
 


 
Second or more follow-up inspections, each $225
 


 

Inspections are every three years.

 




 



GAS FEES



 


Reason for Fee

 

Amount of Fee

 

Reference



Gas Piping


Installation of gas piping
 

As established by Council resolution

 

103.02(A) and (B)




 



HEARING OFFICER FEE SCHEDULE



 


Hearing Officer Fee Schedule



Per session (4 hour max.)
 

$150



Each time they are required to act upon a request for a subpoena or other
such action involved in the process
 

$10




 



TABLE 1-B  MECHANICAL PERMIT FEES



CITY OF BROOKLYN PARK 2003



 


Total Valuation

 

Fee





New single-family home heating and cooling
 
$200.00


$1.00 to $2,500.00
 
$50.00


$2,501.00 to $50,000.00
 
2% of valuation


$50,001.00 and up
 
$1,000 plus 1% of valuation in excess of $50,000.00


Other Inspections and Fees:


1.
 
Inspections outside of normal business hours ..............................
 
$50.00 per hour (minimum charge-two hours)


2.
 
Reinspection fee assessed under provisions of Section 1300.0210 ....
 
$50.00 per hour


3.
 
Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated  ...................
 
$50.00 per hour (minimum charge-one hour)


4.
 
When submittal documents are required by Section 1300.0130, a plan review fee
must be paid  ................................................
 
The plan review fee shall be 10% of the mechanical permit fee.


5.
 
Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revision to plan
...............................................................................
.
 
$50.00 per hour (deferred submittals)




 



MECHANICAL PERMIT FEES



 


Value of Work

 

Fee

 

Reference



Per Table 1-B
 

Per Table 1-B

 

§ 103.02(A) and (B)




 



PLUMBING FEES



 


Reason for Fee

 

Amount of Fee

 

Reference



For installation of plumbing work
 

As established by Council resolution

 

§ 103.02(A) and (B)



Water Service, Supply and Distribution System


Permit and inspection fee made at the time of applying for water services
 

$75

 

§§ 100.57 and 103.02



Making taps for all service pipes
 

$100

 

§ 100.58




 



TABLE 1-C PLUMBING PERMIT FEES



CITY OF BROOKLYN PARK 2003



 


Total Valuation

 

Fee





New single-family home heating and cooling
 

$200.00



$1.00 to $2,500.00
 

$50.00



$2,501.00 to $50,000.00
 

2% of valuation



$50,001.00 and up
 

$1,000 plus 1% of valuation in excess of $50,000.00



Other Inspections and Fees:


1.
 
Inspections outside of normal business hours ..............................
 
$50.00 per hour (minimum charge-two hours)


2.
 
Reinspection fee assessed under provisions of Section 1300.0210 ....
 
$50.00 per hour


3.
 
Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated  ...................
 
$50.00 per hour (minimum charge-one hour)


4.
 
When submittal documents are required by Section 1300.0130, a plan review fee
must be paid  ................................................
 
The plan review fee shall be 10% of the plumbing permit fee.


  5.
 
Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revision to plan
...............................................................................
.
 
$50.00 per hour (deferred submittals)




 



PRIVATE SEWER SYSTEM PERMIT FEES



 


Type of Work

 

Fee

 

Reference



New installation
 

$75

 

§ 99.81



Pumping
 

$15

 

§ 99.81



Abandonment or removal
 

$15

 

§ 99.81



Repair or modification
 

$75

 

§ 99.81



System inspection (i.e. review for mortgage, and the like)
 

$75

 

§ 99.81



Reinspection for private sewer systems and sump pumps and other clean water
discharge devices
 

§ 30

 

§ 99.81




 



RECREATION AND PARK FEES



 


Recreation and Parks Fees

 
2019




Picnic Pavilions


150 person capacity
 
$200 + tax resident


$225 + tax non-resident


60 person capacity
 
$100 + tax resident


$125 + tax non-resident


Refundable damage deposit $300


50 person capacity
 
$50 + tax resident


$90 + tax non-resident


Refundable damage deposit $200


40 person capacity
 
$25 + tax resident


$50 + tax non-resident


Refundable damage deposit  $100


Park Activity Buildings


50 person capacity
 
$100 + tax resident


$125 + tax non-resident


Refundable damage deposit  $300


20 person capacity
 
$50 + tax resident


$80 + tax non-resident


Refundable damage deposit  $100


Athletic Fields:


Soccer/Lacrosse Field
 
$35 game, $125/day - local youth athletic association


$60 game, $240/day + tax- other groups


Softball/Baseball Field Events
 
$25 game, $100/day - local youth athletic association


$60 game, $240/day + tax - other groups


CAC Event & Meeting space: Gardenview Room
 
$350 + tax resident
$400 + tax non-resident


(Sunday - Thursday)
 
Damage Deposits:


250 person capacity
 
Catered event - $350


Potluck (less than 150 people) - $300


Potluck (150 people or more) - $600


CAC Event & Meeting space: Gardenview Room
 
$700 + tax resident
$850 + tax non-resident


(Fri. - 10 a.m. - 12:30 a.m.)
 
Damage Deposits:


250 person capacity
 
Catered event - $350


Potluck (less than 150 people) - $300


Potluck (150 people or more) - $600


CAC Event & Meeting space: Gardenview Room
 
$800 + tax resident
$950 + tax non-resident


(Sat. - 10 a.m. - 12:30 a.m.)
 
Damage Deposits:


250 person capacity
 
Catered event - $350


Potluck (less than 150 people) - $300


Potluck (150 people or more) - $600


CAC Event & Meeting space: Community Room & Gazebo
 
$1025 + tax resident
$1250 + tax non-resident


(Sat. - 10 a.m. - 12:30 a.m.)
 
Damage Deposits:


250 person capacity
 
Catered event - $350


Potluck (less than 150 people) - $300


Potluck (150 people or more) - $600


CAC Event & Meeting space: Grand Room (3 rooms)
 
$600 + tax resident
$700 + tax non-resident


(Sunday - Thursday)
 
Damage Deposits:


375 person capacity
 
Catered event - $350


Potluck (less than 150 people) - $300


Potluck (150 people or more) - $600


CAC Event & Meeting space: Grand Room (3 rooms)
 
$800 + tax resident
$950 + tax non-resident


(Fri. - 10 a.m. - 12:30 a.m.)
 
Damage Deposits:


375 person capacity
 
Catered event - $350


Potluck (less than 150 people) - $300


Potluck (150 people or more) - $600


CAC Event & Meeting space: Grand Room (3 rooms)
 
$900 + tax resident
$1100 + tax non-resident


(Sat. - 10 a.m. - 12:30 a.m.)
 
Damage Deposits:


375 person capacity
 
Catered event - $350


Potluck (less than 150 people) - $300


Potluck (150 people or more) - $600


CAC Event & Meeting space: Grand Room 1 and 2 (2 rooms)
 
$130/hr + tax
$200/hr + tax non-resident


250 person capacity
 
Damage Deposits:


Catered event - $350


Potluck (less than 150 people) - $300


Potluck (150 people or more) - $600


CAC Event & Meeting space: Grand Room 1  (1 room)
 
$60/hr + tax resident
$80/hr + tax non-resident


120 person capacity
 
Damage Deposits:


 
Catered event - $100


 
Potluck (less than 150 people) - $150


 
Potluck (150 people or more) - $300


CAC Event & Meeting Space: Senior Center (3 rooms) & Gazebo
 
$1125 + tax resident
$1400 + tax non- resident


(Sat. 10 a.m. - 12:30 a.m.)
 
Damage Deposits:


375 person capacity
 
Catered event - $350


 
Potluck (less than 150 people) - $300


 
Potluck (150 people or more) - $600


Kitchen Cleaning/Damage Deposit (licensed caterer only)
 
Deposit: $250


CAC Meeting space: Conference Room
 
$25/hr + tax resident
$35/hr + tax non-resident


12 person capacity
 


CAC Meeting space: Arena 1 Meeting Room
 
$30/hr + tax resident
$40/hr + tax non-resident


26 person capacity
 


Zanewood Meeting & Event Space Multi-purpose room
 
$50/hr + tax resident
$65/hr + tax non-resident


(Monday - Friday rates)
 
$100 refundable damage deposit


75 person capacity with round tables/chairs
 


Ice Arenas: hourly ice time rate
 
Prime rate - $230/hr


Non-prime rate - $190/hr


Effective Sept. 1, 2019


Gazebo
 
$325 + tax resident
$400 + tax non-resident


Athletic Association Facility Use fee
 
$2/person - resident
$5/person - non-resident


Admission fees: Open skate
 
$4 adults


$3 children & seniors


$11 family


$3 skate rental


Non-resident recreation program fee
 
20% added to class fee if under $99 and $20 added to class fee if over $100


Garden Plots
 
$50 per plot


Cell Tower Administrative Fees
 
$360




 



RECREATION AND PARK FEES -- FACILITY USER DEFINITIONS



 


RESIDENT

 
Any person who maintains a residential address in the City of Brooklyn Park.
An address to a Brooklyn Park post office box number only is not applicable
to obtain resident stature.


NON-RESIDENT
 
Any person who maintains a residential address outside the Brooklyn Park city
limits.


CIVIC GROUP
 
Includes civic organization, charitable groups and character building
organization devoted to the betterment of the community by offering community
oriented social, educational, recreational and/or cultural enrichment
opportunities.


NON-PROFIT GROUP
 
Includes any group/organization that legally qualifies for a not-for-profit
status and files as such with the Internal Revenue Service.  Proof of status
may be required upon processing a reservation.  Includes churches, political
parties, elected officials and others listed within the Community Center
policies.


COMMERCIAL/ BUSINESS
 
Includes groups that operate for profit or the purpose of promotion or
advertisement.


PRIVATE
 
An individual or group using the facility for personal non-public or private
purpose.



 



 

Edinburgh USA
2019 Rates


Rounds
 
2019


 
Every Day




Patron card holder
 

$43 + tax



Resident
 

$49 + tax



Non-resident
 

$58 + tax



Sr. rate
 

$44 + tax



9-hole league
 

$25 + tax




Daily Specials

 
 


Monday w/cart
 

$47 + tax



Tuesday w/cart
 

$56 + tax



Thursday w/cart
 

$59 + tax



Twilight
 

$30 + tax



Super Twilight
 

$35 + tax



Junior
 

$25 + tax



18-hole cart fee
 

$19 + tax



Twilight/9-hole power cart
 

$14 + tax




Rounds

 
 


Pull cart
 

$7 + tax



Patron cards
 

$90 + tax



Patron cards/before April
 

$85 + tax



Range tokens
 

$5 + tax



Range key
 

$120 + tax



Jr. Season Pass
 

$325 + tax



SAC Season Pass
 

$2,200 unlimited
$1,550 (50 rounds)
$1,280 (40 rounds)
$990 (30 rounds)
$720 (20 rounds)
$390 (10 rounds)





 



 

BROOKLAND EXECUTIVE
NINE HOLE GOLF COURSE
2019 RATES



ROUNDS

 

2019



 
1st ROUND
 
2nd ROUND




Adults
 
$15.00 + tax
 
$ 5.58 + tax


Sr.
 
  14.00 + tax
 
  5.58 + tax


Jr.
 
  12.00 + tax
 
  5.58 + tax


Gas Cars
 
$10 per person
 
$10 per person


Clubs Rental - Youth
 
 
No charge


Club Rental - Adults
 
$4.65 + tax
 
$4.65 + tax


Pull Cart
 

$4.65 + tax

 

$4.65 + tax





 



 



 
2019


Patron Card - Annual

Adult Patron Round

Sr. Patron Round

Jr. Patron Round

Footgolf

Footgolf Replay Round

Soccer Ball Rental
 
$60 + tax

$8 + tax

$7 + tax

$3 + tax

$9 + tax

$6 + tax

$3 + tax



 



RECYCLING SERVICE CHARGES



 


Quarterly Recycling Service Charges



Year
 
Single-Family through 8 Residential Unit
 
Multi-Family Units
 
Reference


January 1, 2019
 

$10.05 per unit per quarter

 

$6.30 per unit per quarter

 

§ 98.39




 



SANITARY SEWER RATES AND CHARGES



 


QUARTERLY SANITARY SEWER RATES AND CHARGES




Year

 

Multi-Family, Commercial, Industrial and Institutional

 

Residential
(Individually Metered)

 

Residential
(Not Metered)

 

Reference






January 1, 2019

 

$6.55 per 5/8" meter equivalent plus $3.55 per 1,000 gallons used

 

$6.55 per meter plus $3.55 per 1,000 gallons used

 

$49.00 per quarter

 

§ 99.75



Meter equivalents shall be as defined by Water Rates (AWWA No. M1) as
published by American Water Works Association.



MISCELLANEOUS FEES



Type of Work
 

Fee

 

Reference




Installation of water meters on non- metered residential properties

 

$50

 

§ 99.75




Surcharge for property owners who are not in compliance with regulations or
who have refused to allow their property to be inspected

 

$100 per month

 

§ 99.75




Sewer connection charge

 

$215

 

§ 99.76




Sewer connection permit and inspection fee

 

$75 for residential



$125 for commercial or industrial

 

§§ 99.77 and 103.02




Late charge for sewer billings not paid within 20 days after the billing date

 

10% of unpaid balance or a minimum of $1

 

§ 99.79




Administrative costs incurred by city for certification of delinquent charges

 

$15 when notification letter is mailed



$35 when certified to county

 

§ 99.80





 



STORM SEWER RATES AND CHARGES



 




   Storm Sewer Rates and Charges



QUARTERLY STORM SEWER RATES



Year

 

Land Use Class

 

Quarterly Charge

 

Reference



January 1, 2019
 
Single Family Residential
 

$14.38 per unit

 

§ 108.04



 
 
Townhouse/Two Family Residential
 

$8.90 per unit

 

§ 108.04



 
 
Multiple Family Residential
 

$4.81 per unit

 

§ 108.04



 
 
Business
 

$66.70 per acre

 

§ 108.04



 
 
Industrial
 

$75.96 per acre

 

§ 108.04



 
 
School/Church
 

$31.64 per acre

 

§ 108.04



January 1, 2020
 
Single Family Residential
 

$16.18 per unit

 

§ 108.04



 
 
Townhouse/Two Family Residential
 

$9.80 per unit

 

§ 108.04



 
 
Multiple Family Residential
 

$5.26 per unit

 

§ 108.04



 
 
Business
 

$70.04 per acre

 

§ 108.04



 
 
Industrial
 

$79.76 per acre

 

§ 108.04



 
 
School/Church
 

$33.22 per acre

 

§ 108.04



January 1, 2021
 
Single Family Residential
 

$17.98 per unit

 

§ 108.04



 
 
Townhouse/Two Family Residential
 

$10.70 per unit

 

§ 108.04



 
 
Multiple Family Residential
 

$5.71 per unit

 

§ 108.04



 
 
Business
 

$73.54 per acre

 

§ 108.04



 
 
Industrial
 

$83.75 per acre

 

§ 108.04



 
 
School/Church
 

$34.89 per acre

 

§ 108.04



January 1, 2022
 
Single Family Residential
 

$19.78 per unit

 

§ 108.04



 
 
Townhouse/Two Family Residential
 

$11.60 per unit

 

§ 108.04



 
 
Multiple Family Residential
 

$6.16 per unit

 

§ 108.04



 
 
Business
 

$77.22 per acre

 

§ 108.04



 
 
Industrial
 

$87.94 per acre

 

§ 108.04



 
 
School/Church
 

$36.63 per acre

 

§ 108.04





 



STREET/SIGNAL LIGHTING RATES AND CHARGES



 

Street/Signal Lighting Rates and Charges


QUARTERLY STREET/SIGNAL LIGHTING RATES AND CHARGES



Year

 

Land Use Class

 

Quarterly Charge

 

Reference





January 1, 2019
 
Single Family Residential
 

$10.85 per unit

 

§ 109.03



 
 
Townhouse/Two Family Residential
 

$7.70 per unit

 

§ 109.03



 
 
Multiple Family Residential
 

$3.75 per unit

 

§ 109.03



 
 
Business/Industrial/School/Church
 

$0.25 per street front lineal foot

 

§ 109.03



 
 
1.   Decorative street lights increase quarterly charge by 50 per cent for
single family and townhouse residential.

2.   Private street lights (not parking lot lights) decrease quarterly
charge by 50 per cent for single family and townhouse residential.

3.   Standard street lights are cobra head fixture type with fiberglass or
wood poles.

4.   Minimum charge for Business/Industrial to be not less than Single
Family Residential rate.




 



SUBDIVISION AND ZONING FEES AND CHARGES



 


Application

 

Fee

 

Escrow

 

Total Due Upon Application





Administrative Permits

   Event permits (residential)

   Event permits (nonresidential)

   Fence permits (critical area overlay)

   Larger entertainment events including music event, dances, parades, and
the like
 




$30



$50



Based on UBC



$250

 




$0



$0



$0

 




$30



$50



Based on UBC



Amended subdivision
 

$400

 

$1,000

 

$1,400



Amendment to a Conditional Use

Permit, General Plan of

Development (PCDD) or

Development Plan (PUD)
 




$400

 




$1,000

 




$1,400



Comprehensive Plan Amendment
 

$400

 

$2,000

 

$2,400



Concept Plan Review
 

$350

 

$500

 

$850



Conditional Use Permit
 

$400

 

$2,000

 

$2,400



Construction of permanent,

subdivision identification sign at the

major entry point(s)
 




$50

 




$0

 




$50



Development Plan - Neighborhood

Plan
 

$400

 

$2,000

 

$2,400



Environmental Review
 


 

$5,000

 

$5,000



General Plan of Development
 

$400

 

$2,000

 

$2,400



Interim use permit for reuse of

agricultural buildings
 

$150

 

$500

 

$650



Interim use permit for detached

accessory buildings
 

$150

 

$500

 

$650



Park dedication fees:
 


 


 

Paid with recording of plat



   Residential (10% land dedication)
 


 


 




      Low Density Residential
 

$4,600 per unit

 

$0

 

$4,600 per unit



      Medium Density Residential
 

$4,600 per unit

 

$0

 

$4,600 per unit



      High Density Residential
 

10% average land valuation

 

$0

 




   Commercial (5% land dedication)
 

$8,000 per acre

 

$0

 

$8,000 per acre



   Industrial (5% land dedication)
 

$8,000 per acre

 

$0

 

$8,000 per acre



Rezoning or Zoning Ordinance Text

Amendment
 

$500

 

$2,000

 

$2,500



Site Plan and Building Review and

Inspections for relocating structures
 

$50

 

$600

 

$650



Site Plan Review
 

$450

 

$2,000

 

$2,450



Subdivision
 

$500

 

$2,000

 

$2,500



Variance to Subdivision Ordinance
(Waiver)
 

$350

 

$500

 

$850



Waiver of Platting (Duplex Split)
 

$100

 

$350

 

$450



Zoning letter preparation
 

$50

 


 

$50



Zoning/Sign Ordinance Variance
 

$200

 

$0

 

$200





 



WATER ACCESS CHARGES



 


Year

 

Amount of Charge

 

Reference




June 1, 2018

 

$2,125

 

§ 100.63




June 1, 2019

 

$2,250

 

§ 100.63




WAC total charge is calculated utilizing the same unit charge multiplier as
per the Metropolitan Council Environmental Services (MCES) Sewer Availability
Charge (SAC) Procedure Manual.




 



WATER RATES AND CHARGES



 


QUARTERLY WATER RATES AND CHARGES




Year

 

Multifamily, Commercial, Industrial and Institutional

 

Residential
(Individually Metered)

 

Irrigation
(Separately Metered)

 

Reference






January 1, 2019

 
$6.05 per 5/8" Meter Equivalent plus $2.10 per 1,000 gallons used
 
$6.05 per 5/8" Meter Equivalent plus $2.10 per 1,000 gallons used for the
first 40,000 gallons and $3.05 for each 1,000 gallons used in excess of
40,000 and $3.80 for each 1,000 used in excess of 80,000
 
$56.30 per 5/8" Meter Equivalent plus $3.50 per 1,000 gallons used
 

§ 100.55




Meter equivalents are as defined by Water Rates (AWWA No. M1) as published by
American Water Works Association.




MISCELLANEOUS RATES AND CHARGES




Reason for Charge

 

Amount of Charge

 

Reference




Late charge for water billings not paid within 20 days after the billing date

 

10% of the unpaid balance or a minimum of $1

 

§ 100.55




Administrative costs incurred by city for certification of  delinquent
charges

 

$15 when notification letter is mailed



$35 when certified to county

 

§ 100.55




Reinstating water service after turn-off for delinquency

 

$40

 

§ 100.55




Service charge imposed if payment is not received by the shut-off deadline
for payments

 

$25

 

§ 100.55





 



WATER MAINTENANCE AND FIRE PROTECTION CHARGES



 


Quarterly Charges Against Properties Not Connected to the Municipal Water
System

 

Amount of Charge

 

Reference






Single and double residences (each unit)

 

$10

 

§ 100.55 (E)




Service stations

 

$15

 

§ 100.55 (E)




Restaurants, cafes and churches

 

$20

 

§ 100.55 (E)




Commercial properties having a floor area of less than 1,000 square feet

 

$15

 

§ 100.55 (E)




Commercial properties having a floor area of from 1,000 to 5,000 square feet

 

$30

 

§ 100.55 (E)




Commercial properties having a floor area of over 5,000 square feet

 

$50

 

§ 100.55 (E)




Multiple residences - three or more units (each unit)

 

$10

 

§ 100.55 (E)




Schools - elementary, each

 

$60

 

§ 100.55 (E)




Schools - junior and senior high, each

 

$100

 

§ 100.55 (E)




Charges against such properties not connected to the municipal water systems
and not listed above are made on the basis of the meter size which would be
needed if the property were to be connected to the municipal water system;
based upon sizes of meters installed on similar properties elsewhere in the
city. 




Deposit for disconnecting, testing and repair of a meter

 

$50

 

§ 100.60




Fee for disconnecting a water meter or connecting a meter

 

$50

 

§ 100.61





 



WATER METERS



 


Reason for Charge

 

Amount of Charge

 

Reference



Deposit for disconnecting, testing and repair of a meter
 
5/8  " to 1" meters
 

$75

 

§ 100.60



1½" to 2" meters
 

$300



3" to 8" meters
 

$600



Deposit for a temporary meter
 

$350

 

§ 100.65



Fee for disconnecting a water meter or connecting a meter
 

$75

 

§ 100.61




 



 



PARALLEL REFERENCES



References to Minnesota Statutes



References to Minnesota Rules



References to 1972 Code



References to Ordinances



REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES



 

M.S. Section
 
Code Section




10A.14
 
112.300


Chapter 12
 
36.01


13.01 et seq.
 
41.03


15.73
 
102.22


15.99
 
152.542


16B.59 - 16B.75
 
103.01


16B.62, Subd. 1
 
103.01


16B.65, Subd. 1
 
103.01


16B.70
 
103.01


16B.665
 
Appendix


17.04
 
114.02


18.011 - 18.024
 
97.03


18.75 - 18.88
 
97.03


18.77, Subd. 8
 
97.02, 97.03


18.771(e)
 
97.02


Chapter 28A
 
114.01, 114.02


29.21
 
114.02


29.23
 
114.02


29.235
 
114.02


29.237
 
114.02


29.24
 
114.02


29.25
 
114.02


29.26
 
114.02


29.27
 
114.02


30.39
 
114.02


Ch. 34A
 
114.02


69.01
 
98.30


84.81 - 84.88
 
73.30, 73.40, 73.99


Chapter 89
 
97.03


89.63(B)
 
97.30


89.001
 
97.01


97A.041
 
92.36


97B.091
 
73.39, 73.40


Chapter 103F
 
152.491


Chapter 103G
 
152.512, 152.513


103G.005, Subd. 14
 
152.513


103G.005, Subd. 15
 
153.06


103G.221 et seq.
 
152.008, 153.06


103G.222 - .2373
 
153.03


103G.245
 
152.513


115A.03, Subd. 11
 
98.30


115A.03 Subd. 12
 
98.30


115A.46
 
98.30


116.07
 
90.25


116.491 Subd. (1)
 
93A.11


Chapter 116G
 
151.026


Chapter 144.05
 
111.02


144.391
 
122.01


144.1222
 
105.06


144.1222, Subd. 1, 1a
 
105.06


Chapter 145A
 
94.06, 114.01


Chapter 146B
 
123.02, 152.008, 152.342


152.01, Subd. 5
 
135.08


152.01 et seq.
 
112.003, 117.49


152.02
 
135.01


152.02, Sched. I - V
 
94.01


Chapter 157
 
105.06, 114.02, 117.25


157.15, Subd. 9
 
114.03, 152.008


157.15, Subd. 12.a, 13, and 14
 
114.03


157.16
 
105.06, 114.02, 117.25


161.45
 
102.22, 102.43


Chapter 168
 
152.343, 152.344


Chapters 168 - 171
 
73.30


Chapter 168A
 
152.343, 152.344


Chapter 168B
 
90.15, 90.18


168B.07
 
90.18


168B.08
 
90.18


168B.09, Subd. 2
 
90.15


Chapter 168C
 
73.16


Chapter 169
 
71.01, 95.07


169.01
 
90.16, 152.008


169.041
 
90.16, 90.18


169.06
 
151.086


169.345, Subd. 3
 
72.17


169.345, Subd. 2.
 
72.17


211B.045
 
150.06


216B.02
 
102.22


216B.02, Subd. 4
 
102.22


216B.02, Subd. 6
 
102.22


216B.36
 
102.43


Chapter 216D
 
102.25


216D.01 et seq.
 
102.35, 102.45


216D.04, Subd. 3
 
102.22


221.81
 
103.02


222.37
 
102.43


237.16
 
102.20


237.162
 
102.20, 102.22, 102.43


237.162, Subd. 4
 
102.22


237.163
 
102.20, 102.22, 102.43


237.163, Subd. 2(b)
 
102.21


237.163, Subd. 3
 
102.22


237.163, Subd. 4(c)
 
102.38


237.163, Subd. 6
 
102.50


237.163, Subd. 6(b)(4)
 
102.28


237.79
 
102.20


237.81
 
102.20


238.02, Subd. 3
 
102.22


238.084
 
102.43


238.086
 
102.20


243.166
 
117.49


Chapter 260B
 
112.003


260C. et seq.
 
117.49


260.185
 
132.99


299C.66 - 299C.71
 
117.52


300.03
 
102.43


303.06
 
119.07


Chapter 306
 
103.01


Chapter 308A
 
102.22


325J.04, Subd. 2
 
119.11


326B.101 - 126B.194
 
106.02


327.10 - 327.131
 
117.25


327.70 - 327.76
 
117.25


333.01
 
119.07


340:11-7
 
Appendix


Chapter 340A
 
112.003, 112.041


340A.22
 
112.400, 112.401, 112.403, 152.008


340A.101
 
112.041, 112.059


340A.101, Subd. 9
 
152.008


340A.101, Subd. 16
 
152.008


340A.301, Subd. 6b
 
152.008


340A.301, Subd. 6(c), (i), (j)
 
112.202


340A.301, Subd. 7
 
112.210


340A.409
 
112.001, 112.300


340A.409, Subd. 1 - 3a
 
112.300


340A.409, Subd. 4
 
112.001


340A.412, Subd. 10
 
112.041, 112.064


340A.419
 
112.049


340A.503
 
34.04


340A.504, Subd. 3(d)
 
112.300


340A.504, Subd. 4
 
112.210


340A.701
 
117.49


340A.702
 
117.49


340A.703
 
117.49


343.20 - 343.36
 
92.15


344.02, Subd. 1(a) - (d)
 
152.008


Chapter 346
 
92.01


346.37
 
92.15


347.31 - 347.40
 
92.15


347.50
 
92.04, 92.25


347.50, Subd,1
 
92.26


347.51
 
92.02


347.51, Subd. 2
 
92.26


347.51, Subd. 2a
 
92.26


347.51, Subd. 3(a)
 
92.26


347.51, Subd. 5
 
92.25, 92.26


347.52
 
92.04, 92.16


347.54
 
92.26


347.541
 
92.26


347.542
 
92.28


347.56
 
117.49


Chapter 349
 
112.041


349.11 through 349.22
 
113.61, 113.62, 113.63, 113.64


349.11 through 349.23
 
113.60


349.213
 
113.60, 113.63


364.01 et seq.
 
41.03


364.03
 
119.33


364.03, Subd. 2
 
119.07, 124.08, 124.11


364.03, Subd. 3
 
124.08, 124.11


412.231 and 609.034
 
10.99


415.02
 
Adopting Ordinance


415.021
 
Adopting Ordinance


Chapter 429
 
94.05, 94.15, 98.38, 102.44, 106.02, 109.01, 111.02


429.081
 
153.08


429.101
 
94.07, 106.02, 111.02


429.101, Subd. 1
 
106.02, 111.02


444.075
 
108.01


444.075, Subd. 3
 
99.80, 100.55


Chapter 453
 
102.22


Chapter 453A
 
102.22


Chapter 462
 
102.44, 152.491


462.351 through 462.364
 
152.007


462.352, Subd. 12
 
151.003


462.358
 
151.001


462.358, Subd. 2A
 
151.085


462.358, Subd. 4b
 
151.011


462.3593
 
152.264


Chapter 463
 
94.15


463.17, Subd. 2
 
111.02


471.195
 
90.01


471.62
 
10.19


Chapter 473
 
99.30, 99.35


Chapter 473C
 
99.83


473.851 - 473.868
 
151.002


477A.018
 
34.35


505.02
 
151.043


505.02
 
151.043, 151.086


505.03, Subd. 1
 
151.044, 151.045, 151.058


505.08, Subd. 1
 
151.040


515A.1-106
 
152.294


Chapter 606
 
112.003


609.02, Subd. 6
 
95.01, 95.03


609.18 through 609.215
 
112.003


609.226
 
117.49


609.229
 
112.003, 117.49


609.26, Subd. 1(8)
 
117.49


609.281 through 609.284
 
112.003


609.29 through 609.352
 
111.02


609.321, Subd. 9
 
112.003, 117.49


609.324
 
112.003, 117.49


609.33
 
117.49


609.342 through 609.3451
 
112.003


609.415
 
37.05


609.50
 
112.003, 117.49


609.66 et seq.
 
112.003, 117.49


609.68
 
94.01


609.71
 
112.003, 117.49


609.713
 
112.003, 117.49


609.715
 
112.003, 117.49


609.72
 
112.003, 117.49


609.75 through 609.76
 
112.003, 117.49


609.78
 
112.003, 117.49


609.903
 
112.003, 117.49


617.23 through 617.229
 
111.02


617.298, Subd. 2
 
113.46


624.714
 
136.06, 136.10


624.715
 
136.06, 136.10


1234.05 through 1234.09
 
152.182


Ch. 1505
 
97.45




 



REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA RULES



 

Minn. Rules
 
Code Section




1300.0130
 
Appendix


1300.0160
 
Appendix


1300.0210
 
Appendix


1520
 
114.02


1545
 
114.02


1550
 
114.02


1556
 
114.02


1720.1560
 
92.15


Ch. 4625
 
117.25


Ch. 4626
 
114.03


4626
 
114.09


4626, Subp. G through O
 
114.02


4626.1720B
 
114.02


4626.1760
 
114.02


4717.0150 - 4717.3975
 
105.06


4720.51000, Subp. 13
 
153.07


Ch. 4725.4350
 
152.514


6120.5000 - 6120.6200
 

152.053, 152.515, 152.518, 152.520



Ch. 7030
 
152.186


Ch. 7035
 
90.15


Ch. 7080.2270
 
152.514


7400.0100 - 7400.6000
 
152.343, 152.344


7515.1100
 
112.211


Chapter 7560
 
102.37


7560.0150, Subp. 2
 
102.44


7819.0050 et seq.
 
102.20


7819.1000, Subp. 3
 
102.28


7819.1100
 
102.22, 102.32, 102.37


7819.1250
 
102.26, 102.48


7819.3000
 
102.32


7819.3100
 
102.44


7819.3200
 
102.47


7819.3300
 
102.49


7819.4000
 
102.42


7819.4100
 
102.42


7819.5000
 
102.37, 102.44


7819.5100
 
102.37, 102.44


7819.5100, Subd. 2
 
102.44


7819.9900 - 7819.9950
 
102.22




 



REFERENCES TO 1972 CODE OF ORDINANCES



 

1972 Code Section
 
2000 Code Section




100:00
 
30.15


100:03
 
30.16


100:09
 
30.17


100:12
 
30.18


100:15
 
30.19


100:21
 
30.20


100:24
 
30.21


100:30
 
30.22


100:33
 
30.23


100:42
 
30.24


100:51
 
30.25


100:54
 
30.26


100:57
 
30.27


100:69
 
30.28


100:72
 
30.29


100:78
 
30.30


100:81
 
30.31


110:00
 
35.01


110:05
 
35.02


115:00
 
30.01


120:00
 
38.15


120:05
 
38.16


120:10
 
38.17


120:15
 
38.18


120:20
 
38.19


120:25
 
38.20


120:30
 
38.21


120:35
 
38.22


130:00
 
34.01


130:05
 
34.02


130:10
 
34.03


130:15
 
34.05


130:25
 
34.06


130:30
 
34.07


130:35
 
34.08


130:40
 
34.09


205:00
 
31.15


205:05
 
31.16


205:10
 
31.17


205:15
 
31.18


205:20
 
31.19


215:00
 
36.01


215:05
 
36.02


215:10
 
36.03


215:15
 
36.04


215:20
 
36.05


215:25
 
36.06


220:10
 
38.01


225:00
 
32.01


225:05
 
32.02


225:10
 
32.03


225:15
 
32.04


225:20
 
32.05


225:25
 
32.06


225:30
 
32.07


225:40
 
32.08


225:45
 
32.09


225:46
 
32.10


225:47
 
32.11


225:50
 
32.12


225:55
 
32.13


230:00
 
31.30


230:05
 
31.30


230:10
 
31.31


230:15
 
31.32


240:00
 
31.01


240:05
 
31.02


245:00
 
31.45


245:05
 
31.46


245:10
 
31.47


245:15
 
31.48


245:20
 
31.49


250:00
 
31.60


250:10
 
31.61


250:15
 
31.62


265:00
 
33.02


265:05
 
33.03


270:00
 
33.15


270:05
 
33.16


270:10
 
33.17


270:15
 
33.18


270:20
 
33.19


270:25
 
33.20


270:30
 
33.21


285:00
 
34.21, 34.22


285:00
 
34.20


285:10
 
34.23


285:15
 
34.24


285:20
 
34.25


285:25
 
34.26


285:30
 
34.27


285:35
 
34.28


285:40
 
34.29


285:45
 
34.30


285:50
 
34.31


285:55
 
34.32


285:60
 
34.33


285:65
 
34.34


285:70
 
34.35


285:75
 
34.36


290:00
 
31.75


290:05
 
31.76


290:10
 
31.77


290:15
 
31.78


290:20
 
31.79


315:00
 
103.01


315.60
 
103.03


315.75
 
103.04


315.80
 
103.05


323:00
 
103.75


323:10
 
103.76


323:15
 
103.77


323:20
 
103.78


323:25
 
103.79


340:00
 
118.01


340:05
 
118.02


340:10
 
118.03


340:15
 
118.04


340:20
 
118.05


340:25
 
118.06


340:30
 
118.07


340:35
 
118.08


340:40
 
118.09


345:00
 
151.001


345:02
 
151.002


345:04
 
151.003


345:06
 
151.004


345:08
 
151.005


345:10
 
151.006


345:11
 
151.007


345:13
 
151.025


345:16
 
151.026


345:20
 
151.027


345:22
 
151.040


345:25
 
151.041


345:28
 
151.042


345:31
 
151.043


345:34
 
151.044


345:37
 
151.045


345:40
 
151.046


345:43
 
151.055


345:46
 
151.056


345:49
 
151.057


345:52
 
151.058


345:55
 
151.059


345:58
 
151.060


345:59
 
151.061


345:61
 
151.070


345:61
 
151.071


345:64
 
151.085


345:64
 
151.086


345:67
 
151.087


345:68
 
151.088


345:70
 
151.089


345:73
 
151.090


345:76
 
151.091


345:79
 
151.092


345:82
 
151.008


345:85
 
151.100


345:86
 
151.101


345:87
 
151.102


345:88
 
151.009


345:91
 
151.010


345:92
 
151.011


345:93
 
151.012


345:94
 
151.013


356:00
 
150.01


356:05
 
150.02


356:10 - 356:15
 
150.03


356:20
 
150.04


356:25
 
150.05


356:40
 
150.07


356.30
 
150.30


356.30
 
150.27


356.30
 
150.26


356.30
 
150.28


356.30
 
150.29


356.30
 
150.31


356.30
 
150.25


356.35
 
150.06


356.45
 
150.08


356.50
 
150.09


356.55
 
150.10


356.60
 
150.11


356.65
 
150.12


356.70
 
150.13


356.75
 
150.14


356.76
 
150.15


400:00
 
110.01


400:03
 
110.02


400:06
 
110.03


400:09
 
110.03


400:12
 
110.03


400:15
 
110.03


400:18
 
110.04


400:21
 
110.05


400:24
 
110.06


400:27
 
110.07


400:30
 
110.08


400:33
 
110.09


400:36
 
110.10


400:39
 
110.11


400:42
 
110.12


400:45
 
110.13


400:48
 
110.14


400:51
 
110.15


400:54
 
110.16


400:57
 
110.17


400:60
 
110.18


405:01
 
73.15


405:40
 
73.16


405:45
 
73.17


405:50
 
73.18


415:00
 
92.01


415:03
 
92.35


415:04
 
92.36


415:06
 
92.37


415:09
 
92.38


415:12 - 415:15
 
92.02


415:18
 
92.03


415:21
 
92.04


415:23
 
92.05


415:24
 
92.06


415:25
 
92.08


415:26
 
92.09


415:27
 
92.10


415:28
 
92.11


415:30
 
92.12


415:33
 
92.13


415:36
 
92.14


415:38
 
92.16


415:39
 
92.17


415:42
 
92.18


415:45
 
92.19


415:48
 
92.20


415:54
 
92.21


415:57
 
92.22


415:75
 
92.23


415:76
 
92.24


415:245
 
92.07


422:00
 
111.01


422:05
 
111.02


422:10
 
111.03


422:15
 
111.04


422:20
 
111.05


422:25
 
111.06


422:30
 
111.07


422:35
 
111.08


422:40
 
111.09


426:00
 
113.40


426:05
 
113.41


426:10
 
113.42


426:15
 
113.43


426:20
 
113.44


426:25
 
113.45


426:30
 
113.46


426:35
 
113.47


426:40
 
113.48


426:45
 
113.49


426:50
 
113.50


432:00
 
105.01


432:02
 
105.02


432:05
 
105.03


432:10
 
105.04


435:00
 
98.01


435:05
 
98.02


435:10
 
98.03


435:15
 
98.04


435:25
 
98.05


435:30, 435:40
 
98.06


435:45
 
98.07


435:46
 
98.08


435:47
 
98.09


435:50
 
98.10


435:55
 
98.11


435:60
 
98.12


435:65
 
98.13


435:70
 
98.14


435:75
 
98.15


435:80
 
98.16


435:85
 
98.17


437:00
 
98.30


437:05
 
98.31


437:10
 
98.32


437:15
 
98.33


437:20
 
98.34, 98.35, 98.36, 98.37, 98.99


437:25
 
98.38


437:30 - 437:65
 
98.39


455:00
 
117.40


455:05
 
117.41


455:10
 
117.42


455:15
 
117.43


455:16
 
117.44


455:17
 
117.45


455:26
 
117.46


455:36
 
117.47


455:40
 
117.48


455:50
 
117.49


455:70
 
117.50


455:75
 
117.51


455:78
 
117.52


456:05
 
117.26


456:10
 
117.27


456:15
 
117.28


456:20
 
117.29


456:25
 
117.30


468:00
 
119.01


468:05
 
119.02


468:10
 
119.03


468:15
 
119.04


468:20
 
119.05


468:25
 
119.06


468:30
 
119.07


468:35
 
119.08


468:40
 
119.09


468:45
 
119.10


468:50
 
119.11


468:55
 
119.12


468:60
 
119.13


468:65
 
119.14


468:70
 
119.15


468:75
 
119.16


468:80
 
119.17


468:85
 
119.18


468:90
 
119.19


468:95
 
119.20


468:100
 
119.21


470:00
 
99.60


470:05
 
99.61


470:10
 
99.62


470:15
 
99.63


470:20
 
99.64


470:25
 
99.65


470:30
 
99.66


475:00
 
121.01


475:05
 
121.02


475:10
 
121.03


475:15
 
121.04


475:20
 
121.05


475:25
 
121.06


475:30
 
121.07


475:35
 
121.08


475:40
 
121.09


475:45
 
121.10


475:50
 
121.11


475:55
 
121.12


475:60
 
121.13


475:65
 
121.14


475:70
 
121.15


475:75
 
121.16


475:80
 
121.17


475:85
 
121.18


485:00
 
120.02


485:00
 
120.01


485:05
 
120.03


485:10
 
120.04


485:15
 
120.05


485:20
 
120.06


485:25
 
120.07


491:00
 
113.60


491:05
 
113.61


491:10
 
113.62


491:15
 
113.63


491:20
 
113.64


500:00
 
110.35


500:05
 
110.36


500:10
 
110.37


500:15
 
110.38


500:20
 
110.39


505:00
 
103.02


505:10
 
103.02


510:00
 
99.75


510:05
 
99.76


510:10
 
99.77


510:11
 
99.78


510:15
 
99.79


510:16
 
99.80


510:20
 
99.81


510:25
 
99.82


510:30
 
99.83


515:00
 
100.55


515:04
 
100.56


515:05
 
100.57


515:10
 
100.58


515:12
 
100.59


515:15
 
100.60


515:20
 
100.61


515:25
 
100.62


515:30
 
100.63


515:35
 
100.64


520:00
 
151.014


600:00
 
99.01


600:05
 
99.02


600:10
 
99.03


600:15
 
99.04


600:25
 
99.05


605:20
 
99.06


610:00
 
99.15


610:15
 
99.16


610:30
 
99.17


615:00
 
99.30


615:33
 
99.31


615:36
 
99.32


615:42
 
99.33


615:44
 
99.34


615:46
 
99.35


615:48 - 615:54
 
99.36


615:57
 
99.37


615:60
 
99.38


615:63
 
99.39


615:66
 
99.40


615:77
 
99.41


615:80
 
99.42


615:85
 
99.43


615:90
 
99.44


615:95
 
99.45


616:00
 
99.46


616:05
 
99.47


616:10
 
99.48


620:01
 
101.01


620:06
 
101.02


620:11
 
101.03


620:16
 
101.04


620:21
 
101.05


650:00
 
96.40


650:02
 
96.41


650:04
 
96.42


650:08
 
96.43


650:10
 
96.44


650:12
 
96.45


650:14
 
96.01


650:17
 
96.02


650:18 - 650:24
 
96.03


650:26
 
96.04


650:28
 
96.05


650:30
 
96.06


650:32
 
96.07


650:34
 
96.08


650:36
 
96.09


650:38
 
96.10


650:40
 
96.11


650:42
 
96.12


650:48
 
96.13


650:52
 
96.14


650:54
 
96.15


650:56
 
96.16


650:58
 
96.17


650:60
 
96.18


650:62
 
96.19


650:64
 
96.20


650:66
 
96.21


650:68
 
96.22


650:70
 
96.23


650:72
 
96.24


650:74
 
96.25


650:76
 
96.26


650:78
 
96.27


655:00
 
96.28


675:00
 
100.01


675:02
 
100.02


675:03
 
100.03


675:04
 
100.04


675:07
 
100.05


675:09
 
100.06


677:05
 
100.15


678:00
 
100.16


678:15
 
100.17


678:20
 
100.18


682:00
 
100.30


682:05
 
100.31


682:10
 
100.32


682:15
 
100.33


682:20
 
100.34


682:25
 
100.35


682:30
 
100.36


682:35
 
100.37


682:40
 
100.38


682:45
 
100.39


682:50
 
100.40


682:55
 
100.41


682:60
 
100.42


700:00
 
71.01


705:00
 
71.15


705:05
 
71.16


710:00
 
73.50


710:05
 
73.51


715:00
 
73.01


715:05
 
73.02


715:10
 
73.03


720:00 - 720:05
 
71.02


725:00
 
72.01


725:03
 
72.02


725:15
 
72.03


725:18
 
72.04


725:21
 
72.05


725:24
 
72.06


725:27
 
72.07


725:30
 
72.08


725:31
 
72.09


725:32
 
72.10


725:33
 
72.11


725:36
 
72.12


725:39
 
72.13


725:42
 
72.14


725:45
 
72.15


725:48
 
72.16


725:50
 
72.17


725:51
 
72.18


725:54
 
72.19


725:57
 
72.20


725:60
 
72.21


730:00
 
73.30


730:05
 
73.31


730:10
 
73.32


730:40 - 730:65
 
73.38


730:70
 
73.39


730:75
 
73.40


735:00
 
71.40


735:05
 
71.41


735:10
 
71.42


735:15
 
71.43


735:20
 
71.44


735:25
 
71.45


735:30
 
71.46


735:35
 
71.47


735:40
 
71.48


735:45
 
71.49


735:50
 
71.50


740:00
 
71.25


740:05
 
71.26


740:10
 
71.27


740:15
 
71.28


740:20
 
71.29


740:25
 
71.30


805:00
 
112.030


805:05
 
112.031


805:10
 
112.032


805:20
 
112.033


805:25
 
112.034


805:30
 
112.035


805:40
 
112.036


805:45
 
112.037


805:50
 
112.038


805:55
 
112.039


805:60
 
112.040


805:65
 
112.041


805:70
 
112.042


805:75
 
112.043


805:80
 
112.044


805:85
 
112.045


805:90
 
112.046


805:95
 
112.047


810:00
 
112.055


810:05
 
112.056


810:10
 
112.057


810:15
 
112.058


810:20
 
112.059


810:25
 
112.060


810:30
 
112.061


810:35
 
112.062


810:40
 
112.063


810:45
 
112.064


810:50
 
112.002


810:55
 
112.065


810:60
 
112.066


810:65
 
112.067


810:70
 
112.068


810:75
 
112.069


820:00
 
112.095


820:05
 
112.096


820:10
 
112.097


820:15
 
112.098


820:20
 
112.099


820:25
 
112.100


825:00
 
112.001


903:10
 
37.01


903:20
 
37.02


903:40
 
37.03


903:50
 
37.04


903:60
 
37.05


903:70
 
37.06


903:80
 
37.07


903:90
 
37.08


903:100
 
37.09


903:110
 
37.10


910:00
 
134.30


910:05
 
134.31


910:10
 
134.32


910:20
 
134.33


910:20
 
134.34


910:25
 
134.35


912:00
 
133.01


912:05
 
133.02


912:10
 
133.03


912:15
 
133.04


912:20
 
133.05


914:00
 
130.01


920:00
 
134.15


920:05
 
134.16


920:10
 
134.17


920:15
 
134.18


920:20
 
134.19


922:00
 
134.02


935:00
 
133.15


935:05
 
133.16


935:10
 
133.17


940:00
 
131.01


940:05
 
131.02


940:10
 
131.03


940:11
 
131.04


940:15
 
131.05


950:00
 
136.01


950:05
 
136.02


950:10
 
136.03


950:15
 
136.04


950:20
 
136.05


950:25
 
136.06


950:30
 
136.07


950:35
 
136.08


950:45
 
136.09


950:50
 
136.10


950:55
 
136.11


961:00
 
135.01


961:05
 
135.02


961:10
 
135.03


961:15
 
135.04


961:20
 
135.05


961:25
 
135.06


961:30
 
135.07


961:35
 
135.08


965:00
 
134.03


980:00
 
130.02


985:00
 
130.03


1000:01
 
94.01


1000:06
 
94.02


1000:11
 
94.03


1000:16
 
94.04


1000:21
 
94.05


1000:26
 
94.06


1000:31
 
94.99


1000:60
 
94.07


1005:00
 
103.60


1005:10
 
103.61


1005:15
 
103.62


1020:00
 
97.01


1020:00
 
97.02


1020:00
 
97.20


1020:05
 
97.25


1025:00
 
91.01


1025:05
 
91.02


1025:10
 
91.03


1025:15
 
91.99


1105:00
 
70.02


1105:00
 
70.01


1110:00
 
70.03


1110:00
 
110.20


1200:00
 
10.05


1400:00
 
10.04




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




1971-31(A)
 
11-8-71
 
71.01


1972-106
 
5-8-72
 
105.01


1972-115
 
7-10-72
 
105.04


1972-117(A)
 
8-14-72
 
73.38


1972-120(A)
 
8-28-72
 
32.02


1972-121(A)
 
8-28-72
 
38.01


1972-122(A)
 
8-28-72
 
112.032, 112.036


1972-123(A)
 
8-28-72
 
151.101


1973-136
 
2-12-73
 
99.83


1973-138(A)
 
2-26-73
 
92.35


1973-142(A)
 
5-14-73
 
131.04


1973-147(A)
 
6-11-73
 
151.010


1973-154(A)
 
10-9-73
 
31.60


1973-156(A)
 
11-12-73
 
92.14


1973-159(A)
 
12-17-73
 
96.28


1974-161(A)
 
2-11-74
 
103.03


1974-169(A)
 
6-24-74
 
112.059


1974-170(A)
 
7-22-74
 
151.010


1974-176(A)
 
12-9-74
 
151.071


1975-181(A)
 
1-27-75
 
110.38


1975-210(A)
 
10-27-75
 
72.01, 72.18


1975-215(A)
 
12-8-75
 
151.005


1976-225(A)
 
8-9-76
 
112.030, 112.055


1976-230(A)
 
  -  -
 
117.26 - 117.30


1977-233(A)
 
1-10-77
 
151.061, T.S.O. II


1977-237(A)
 
2-28-77
 
103.02


1977-238(A)
 
2-28-77
 
72.17


1977-240(A)
 
2-28-77
 
99.77, 100.58


1977-243(A)
 
4-11-77
 
151.071


1977-248(A)
 
8-22-77
 
151.006


1977-251(A)
 
10-11-77
 
92.01, 92.08, 92.09


1977-254(A)
 
12-12-77
 
151.102


1978-256(A)
 
1-9-78
 
130.03


1978-259(A)
 
3-17-78
 
10.99


1978-262(A)
 
4-24-78
 
99.15- 99.17


1978-265(A)
 
5-22-78
 
30.15


1978-266(A)
 
6-12-78
 
151.060


1978-274(A)
 
8-28-78
 
134.02


1979-283(A)
 
2-26-79
 
T.S.O. II


1979-285(A)
 
3-12-79
 
73.15 - 73.17


1979-295(A)
 
7-9-79
 
112.047


1979-296(A)
 
7-23-79
 
113.40 - 113.50


1979-301(A)
 
10-9-79
 
99.75


1979-303(A)
 
11-13-79
 
151.071


1980-316(A)
 
3-10-80
 
113.01 - 113.15


1980-317(A)
 
3-24-80
 
98.03 - 98.06


1980-320(A)
 
4-28-80
 
72.04


1980-330(A)
 
7-14-80
 
98.04


1980-334(A)
 
8-11-80
 
113.25 - 113.31


1980-337(A)
 
10-14-80
 
T.S.O. II


1980-342(A)
 
10-27-80
 
T.S.O. II


1980-346(A)
 
12-8-80
 
99.80 - 99.81, 103.02


1980-348(A)
 
12-15-80
 
T.S.O. II


1981-351(A)
 
1-26-81
 
103.02


1981-355(A)
 
3-23-81
 
118.09


1981-356(A)
 
3-23-81
 
98.01


1981-369(A)
 
11-9-81
 
T.S.O. II


1981-371(A)
 
12-14-81
 
112.032, 112.033, 112.039, 112.040


1981-372(A)
 
12-14-81
 
118.07, 118.09


1981-374(A)
 
12-14-81
 
151.014


1981-375(A)
 
12-14-81
 
99.75, 99.80


1982-377(A)
 
1-25-82
 
T.S.O. II


1982-378(A)
 
1-25-82
 
T.S.O. II


1982-383(A)
 
3-22-82
 
T.S.O. I


1982-384(A)
 
3-22-82
 
112.068


1982-385(A)
 
4-12-82
 
92.37 - 92.38


1982-386(A)
 
4-12-82
 
71.46 - 71.47


1982-390(A)
 
5-24-82
 
134.35


1982-395(A)
 
7-26-82
 
32.02, 32.05, 32.10, 32.13


1983-420(A)
 
5-9-83
 
112.001


1983-421(A)
 
5-9-83
 
117.41 - 117.51


1983-424(A)
 
5-23-83
 
72.08, 72.09


1983-439(A)
 
10-24-83
 
97.03


1983-440(A)
 
11-21-83
 
73.40


1983-442(A)
 
11-21-83
 
10.99


1984-444(A)
 
1-9-84
 
71.25 - 71.30


1984-445(A)
 
2-27-84
 
131.04


1984-447
 
4-9-84
 
Ch. 151


1984-449(A)
 
4-23-84
 
98.06


1984-452(A)
 
5-29-84
 
T.S.O. II


1984-454(A)
 
6-4-84
 
T.S.O. II


1984-455(A)
 
6-11-84
 
92.05


1984-457(A)
 
6-11-84
 
136.01


1984-458(A)
 
6-11-84
 
Ch. 135


1984-466(A)
 
9-24-84
 
112.065


1984-467(A)
 
10-8-84
 
72.04


1984-470(A)
 
11-13-84
 
98.07


1984-473(A)
 
12-17-84
 
101.01 - 101.05


1984-474(A)
 
12-17-84
 
99.60, 99.61, 99.63, 99.65


1985-477(A)
 
2-11-85
 
100.60 - 100.61


1985-480(A)
 
3-18-85
 
151.090


1985-482(A)
 
4-22-85
 
92.20


1985-487(A)
 
8-26-85
 
99.81, 99.82, 100.57, 100.58, 100.60


1985-493(A)
 
9-23-85
 
T.S.O. II


1985-496(A)
 
9-23-85
 
105.04


1985-501(R)
 
  -  -
 
151.086


1985-504(A)
 
12-2-85
 
36.01 - 36.06


1985-505(A)
 
12-2-85
 
32.03, 32.04, 32.08, 32.09, 32.10


1986-511(A)
 
1-27-86
 
99.76


1986-517(A)
 
2-10-86
 
112.033


1986-528(A)
 
5-27-86
 
151.012


1986-531(A)
 
6-9-86
 
73.18


1986-535(A)
 
7-28-86
 
112.001


1986-536(A)
 
7-28-86
 
34.20 et seq.


1986-540(A)
 
8-18-86
 
99.66, 99.81, 99.82, 110.38, 151.014


1986-541(A)
 
8-18-86
 
71.49


1986-543(A)
 
9-22-86
 
T.S.O.  II


1986-544(A)
 
9-22-86
 
112.030, 112.055, 112.064


1986-552(A)
 
12-8-86
 
136.10


1987-563(A)
 
6-8-87
 
112.030


1987-570(A)
 
8-24-87
 
33.03


1987-578(A)
 
10-12-87
 
136.09


1988-587(A)
 
1-25-88
 
99.06


1988-588(A)
 
1-25-88
 
30.15


1988-591(A)
 
2-22-88
 
71.43


1988-596(A)
 
7-11-88
 
151.043


1988-597(A)
 
7- -88
 
113.60 - 113.64


1988-602(A)
 
8-22-88
 
Ch. 150


1989-623(A)
 
3-6-89
 
110.39


1989-626(A)
 
6-26-89
 
92.01, 92.02, 92.04, 92.11, 92.13, 92.14, 92.18, 92.21, 92.24, 92.35, 92.37,
92.38


1989-627(A)
 
6-26-89
 
94.01 - 94.06


1989-628(A)
 
6-26-89
 
112.031, 112.042, 112.055, 112.056


1989-630(A)
 
8-28-89
 
103.02


1989-633(A)
 
9-25-89
 
98.01, 98.04, 98.06, 98.08, 98.09, 98.10


1989-634(A)
 
9-25-89
 
98.30 et seq., 98.99


1989-639(A)
 
11-20-89
 
112.033


1989-640(A)
 
12-18-89
 
94.06


1989-641(A)
 
12-18-89
 
112.042, 112.064, 112.066, 112.098


1990-644(A)
 
2-26-90
 
113.63


1990-645(A)
 
2-26-90
 
136.11


1990-654(A)
 
6-25-90
 
92.05


1990-655(A)
 
7-9-90
 
112.042


1990-657(A)
 
8-27-90
 
150.06


1990-660(A)
 
10-8-90
 
103.02, 151.014


1990-664(A)
 
11-26-90
 
112.032


1990-667(A)
 
12-17-90
 
117.40, 117.48


1990-668(A)
 
12-17-90
 
93.10, 93.12, 93.25


1991-671(A)
 
2-11-91
 
151.090


1991-677(A)
 
8-12-91
 
36.01 et seq.


1991-685(A)
 
11-25-91
 
34.01 et seq.


1991-686(A)
 
12-23-91
 
135.01, 135.02


1992-689
 
3-23-92
 
111.01 et seq.


1992-69
 
  -  -
 
150.26


1992-694
 
5-11-92
 
150.03 - 150.07


1992-696
 
5-11-92
 
110.13


1992-697
 
5-26-92
 
112.030


1992-700
 
8-24-92
 
112.041


1992-705
 
9-14-92
 
151.002, 151.006, 151.007, 151.056, 151.061, 151.086, 151.088


1992-710
 
10-12-92
 
104.18, 117.49


1993-713
 
1-11-93
 
92.07


1993-714
 
2-8-93
 
71.40, 71.50


1993-715
 
2-22-93
 
112.041


1993-720
 
5-24-93
 
72.02, 72.10


1993-726
 
7-12-93
 
31.75 et seq.


1993-727
 
7-12-93
 
133.01 - 133.05


1993-728
 
7-12-93
 
112.039


1993-733
 
9-27-93
 
130.01


1993-735
 
10-11-93
 
92.37


1993-738
 
11-8-93
 
92.36


1993-741
 
11-22-93
 
94.01, 94.03


1993-742
 
11-22-93
 
93.30 - 93.41


1993-743
 
11-22-93
 
93.50 - 93.64


1993-744
 
11-22-93
 
99.76, 99.77, 99.80, 99.82, 103.01, 103.02


1993-746
 
12-13-93
 
151.007


1993-748
 
12-20-93
 
100.55 et seq.


1994-699
 
  -  -
 
113.63


1994-752
 
1-10-94
 
91.01 - 91.03, 91.99


1994-755
 
4-11-94
 
100.57


1994-756
 
5-9-94
 
151.005, 151.089, 151.090


1994-762
 
5-23-94
 
134.19


1994-763
 
6-13-94
 
30.01


1994-765
 
7-25-94
 
113.63


1994-766
 
9-12-94
 
150.05, 150.29


1995-774
 
2-13-95
 
99.36, 99.75, 99.78


1995-779
 
4-24-95
 
Ch. 96, Ch. 98, 99.01 - 99.48, 100.01 - 100.56, Ch. 101, 103.01, 103.03 -
103.05, 103.75 et seq., 105.01 - 105.03


1995-784
 
7-10-95
 
32.01 et seq., 93.01, 93.04, 93.12, 98.16, 93.25, 93.26


1996-795
 
1-22-96
 
117.41 et seq.


1996-800
 
3-25-96
 
100.63, 100.64


1996-801
 
3-25-96
 
151.060, 151.061


1996-818
 
5-28-96
 
100.55


1996-830
 
12-16-96
 
103.01, 105.04


1997-841
 
3-24-97
 
112.001, 112.039, 112.041, 112.047, 112.055 - 112.059, 112.061, 112.064,
112.065, 112.069


1997-843
 
3-24-97
 
110.37, Ch. 119


1997-845
 
4-28-97
 
110.37


1997-846
 
5-12-97
 
36.01 et seq.


1997-848
 
6-9-97
 
150.06, 150.13, 150.14


1997-861
 
10-27-97
 
92.01, 92.02, 92.06 - 92.08, 92.12, 92.14, 92.16 - 92.23, 92.35, 92.36,
92.38, 94.04


1997-863
 
11-24-97
 
31.01, 31.02


1998-870
 
3-23-98
 
31.76


1998-871
 
4-13-98
 
Ch. 97


1998-873
 
4-13-98
 
110.37, Ch. 122


1998-878
 
4-13-98
 
30.15, 30.18


1998-880
 
5-11-98
 
30.01


1998-881
 
5-26-98
 
Ch. 37


1998-887
 
8-10-98
 
151.061


1998-889
 
10-12-98
 
93.04, 93.25, 93.26


1998-890
 
12-14-98
 
99.04, 99.06, 99.07, 99.30, 99.34 - 99.36, 99.40 - 99.42, 99.46, 99.47, 99.75
- 99.80, 99.82, 99.83, 100.04, 100.06, 100.30 - 100.32, 100.34 - 100.36,
100.40, 100.41, 100.55, 100.57 - 100.63, 101.03 - 101.05


1998-891
 
12-14-98
 
103.01


1999-894
 
2-22-99
 
32.02


1999-895
 
3-22-99
 
113.63


1999-900
 
5-24-99
 
150.05


1999-901
 
6-28-99
 
34.01 et seq.


1999-905
 
10-11-99
 
151.061


1999-912
 
10-25-99
 
73.32.73.38 - 73.40


1999-914
 
11-08-99
 
150.03, 150.29, 150.32


2000-923
 
4-10-00
 
30.01


2000-927
 
6-26-00
 
113.63


2000-930B
 
8-28-00
 
Adopting Ordinance


2000-931
 
9-5-00
 
71.03


2000-932
 
9-11-00
 
30.39


2000-933
 
10-9-00
 
150.06


2000-934
 
11-13-00
 
119.40 - 119.52


2000-935
 
11-13-00
 
150.03, 150.06, 150.25 - 150.31


2000-936
 
11-13-00
 
Ch. 152


2000-937
 
11-13-00
 
Appendix


2000-939
 
11-13-00
 
150.03, 150.04


2001-944
 
1-8-01
 
92.01, 92.03


2001-945
 
1-8-01
 
39.01, 39.02


2001-946
 
1-8-01
 
40.01, 40.02


2001-947
 
1-22-01
 
152.480 - 152.486


2001-948
 
2-12-01
 
90.01, 90.15 - 90.18


2001-949
 
2-26-01
 
152.460 - 152.467


2001-951
 
3-26-01
 
152.530


2001-952
 
5-14-01
 
152.008, 152.031, 152.142, 152.181, 152.182, 152.243, 152.262, 152.342,
152.344, 152.361, 152.374, 152.435, 152.547, 152.562, 152.563, 152.570


2001-954
 
7-9-01
 
92.40


2001-955
 
8-13-01
 
106.01, 106.02


2001-956
 
8-13-01
 
117.42 - 117.44, 117.46, 117.52, 117.53


2001-958
 
10-22-01
 
114.01 - 114.10


2001-959
 
11-13-01
 
73.32, 73.38


2001-960
 
11-26-01
 
112.039


2001-961
 
11-26-01
 
151.026, 151.055, 151.056, 151.061, 151.086, 151.088, 151.090, 152.111,
152.221, 152.222, 152.275, 152.291


2002-963
 
2-11-02
 
113.62


2002-964
 
2-25-02
 
39.01, 39.02


2002-969
 
5-13-02
 
95.01 - 95.08


2002-971
 
5-13-02
 
112.036, 112.062, 112.097


2002-972
 
5-13-02
 
107.01 - 107.06, 107.99


2002-973
 
5-28-02
 
97.01 - 97.55


2002-975
 
6-10-02
 
117.40, 117.42 - 117.44, 117.46, 117.48 - 117.52


2002-976
 
6-10-02
 
30.01


2002-977
 
6-24-02
 
152.344, 152.361, 152.417


2002-978
 
8-12-02
 
152.182, 152.342


2002-981
 
11-25-02
 
108.01 - 108.05


2002-983
 
11-25-02
 
109.01 - 109.03


2002-985
 
11-25-02
 
151.026


2002-987
 
12-16-02
 
117.42, 117.44


2003-988
 
2-3-03
 
30.15


2003-989
 
2-10-03
 
152.008, 152.222, 152.241, 152.243, 152.261 - 152.263, 152.271, 152.272,
152.275, 152.342, 152.361, 152.374,  152.375


2003-990
 
2-18-03
 
Established moratorium extension that with the adoption of Ord. 2003-991, the
temporary moratorium imposed by Ord. 2002-986 and the extension imposed by
Ord. 2003-990 is terminated.


2003-991
 
3-17-03
 
152.480 - 152.482


2003-992
 
3-17-03
 
31.90 - 31.93


2003-994
 
3-24-03
 
10.20


2003-996
 
4-14-03
 
91.02


2003-997
 
5-12-03
 
152.033, 152.142, 152.150, 152.243, 152.263, 152.275, 152.292, 152.361,
152.363, 152.374, 152.392, 152.415, 152.417, 152.545


2003-999
 
6-2-03
 
103.01, 103.02, 103.75, 103.77


2003-1000
 
6-16-03
 
152.342


2003-1002
 
8-25-03
 
150.03, 150.25 - 150.28, 150.30


2003-1003
 
9-22-03
 
T.S.O. II


2003-1004
 
10-6-03
 
152.361


2003-1005
 
10-20-03
 
102.20 - 102.50


2003-1006
 
10-27-03
 
T.S.O. I


2003-1007
 
10-27-03
 
117.481, 117.485, 117.52


2003-1008
 
11-3-03
 
72.10, 152.008, 152.145, 152.242, 152.261, 152.262, 152.273, 152.342, 152.361


2003-1009
 
11-17-03
 
T.S.O. II


2003-1010
 
12-1-03
 
93.01, 93.04, 93.09, 93.13, 93.25 - 93.28, 93.30 - 93.41, 93.50 - 93.64


2004-1011
 
1-5-04
 
152.222


2004-1012
 
5-3-04
 
152.008, 152.144, 152.145, 152.242


2004-1013
 
5-10-04
 
110.13, 111.02, 111.08, 112.033, 112.035, 112.041, 113.44, 119.07, 119.18,
Repealed 110.19


2004-1014
 
5-10-04
 
110.05


2004-1018
 
8-23-04
 
152.342


2004-1021
 
11-15-04
 
117.42, 117.43, 117.44, 117.46, 117.485, Repealed 117.462 and 117.463,
117.481, 117.52


2004-1023
 
12-6-04
 
112.101


2004-1024
 
12-13-04
 
152.342


2004-1026
 
12-13-04
 
150.03, 150.06


2004-1028
 
12-13-04
 
152.008, 152.142, 152.212, 152.221, 152.222, 152.243


2004-1029
 
12-13-04
 
152.008, 152.090 - 152.096


2005-1030
 
1-10-05
 
94.01, 94.08 - 94.15, 94.99


2005-1031
 
1-18-05
 
30.15


2005-1032
 
2-7-05
 
152.008, 152.146, 152.148, 152.342, 152.361, 152.362


2005-1033
 
2-7-05
 
152.008, 152.263, 152.491, 152.510, 152.512, 152.513, 152.514, 152.516,
152.517, 152.518, 152.520, 152.522


2005-1036
 
5-23-05
 
117.42, 117.44, 117.52, Repealed 117.461


2005-1040
 
6-6-05
 
151.061


2005-1045
 
7-18-05
 
112.041


2005-1046
 
8-1-05
 
152.008, 152.263


2005-1047
 
8-22-05
 
90.01


2005-1049
 
9-26-05
 
152.008, 152.193 - 152.196


2005-1051
 
11-7-05
 
152.008, 152.415


2005-1052
 
11-28-05
 
112.001


2006-1054
 
1-23-06
 
30.01


2006-1055
 
2-6-06
 
152.221


2006-1058
 
6-5-06
 
152.008, 152.342, 152.344


2006-1059
 
6-5-06
 
152.145, 152.146, 152.147, 152.373, 152.374, Repealed 152.276, 152.376


2006-1061
 
7-24-06
 
151.061


2006-1062
 
8-7-06
 
T.S.O. II


2006-1063
 
9-5-06
 
152.222


2006-1064
 
10-2-06
 
93.26


2006-1067
 
11-27-06
 
92.01, 92.12, 92.14, 92.15, 92.18, 92.25, 92.26


2007-1068
 
2-20-07
 
117.42 - 117.45


2007-1070
 
3-26-07
 
152.033, 152.181, 152.182, 152.261, 152.342, 152.434 - 152.436


2007-1075
 
8-20-07
 
103.01


2007-1076
 
8-20-07
 
99.46, 99.78, 100.35, 100.40, 100.41, 100.55, 100.63, 100.65


2007-1077
 
8-20-07
 
93.25 - 93.28


2007-1078
 
10-15-07
 
31.75, 31.79


2007-1081
 
11-26-07
 
152.361, 152.362


2007-1082
 
12-3-07
 
T.S.O. I


2008-1084
 
2-4-08
 
136.01 - 136.06, 136.10, 136.11


2008-1085
 
3-24-08
 
152.008, 152.276, 152.370 - 152.376, Repealed 152.377, 152.378, 152.379


2008-1086
 
4-7-08
 
31.45, 31.60, 31.76, 31.92


2008-1087
 
5-27-08
 
117.485


2008-1089
 
6-23-08
 
98.04, 98.14


2008-1090
 
7-7-08
 
117.40, 117.41, 117.43, 117.46, 117.48, 117.483, 117.49, 117.491, 117.52


2008-1092
 
8-25-08
 
151.089, 151.090, 152.023


2008-1093
 
8-25-08
 
117.485


2009-1096
 
2-23-09
 
92.01, 92.02, 92.04, 92.12, 92.14, 92.16, 92.17, 92.20, 92.25 - 92.31


2009-1097
 
4-6-09
 
112.003, 112.044


2009-1099
 
5-4-09
 
93.25, 93.26


2009-1100
 
5-26-09
 
72.10


2009-1103
 
9-8-09
 
37.08, 117.521


2009-1104
 
9-8-09
 
106.01, 106.02


2009-1105
 
9-8-09
 
T.S.O. II


2009-1106
 
10-5-09
 
39.02, 40.01, 40.02


2009-1107
 
10-19-09
 
152.433


2010-1110
 
1-4-10
 
98.14


2010-1112
 
4-5-10
 
97.20


2010-1113
 
4-5-10
 
152.008, 152.140 - 152.145


2010-1114
 
4-26-10
 
92.01, 92.03, 92.32, 95.01, 95.02, 95.04


2010-1115
 
6-7-10
 
41.01 - 41.04


2010-1116
 
7-6-10
 
72.10


2010-1117
 
9-7-10
 
150.29


2010-1118
 
10-4-10
 
152.361, 152.362


2010-1120
 
11-22-10
 
152.146


2010-1121
 
12-6-10
 
150.05


2010-1122
 
12-20-10
 
152.008, 152.342.01, 152.344


2010-1123
 
1-3-11
 
123.01 - 123.13, 123.99


2011-1125
 
4-4-11
 
134.04


2011-1127
 
7-25-11
 
152.263, 152.292


2011-1131
 
10-24-11
 
152.034


2012-1133
 
3-5-12
 
152.008, 152.055, 152.142, 152.145, 152.146, 152.184 - 152.188, 152.261,
152.262, 152.321, 152.325, 152.342, 152.344, 152.361, 152.362, 152.373,
152.374, 152.378
Repealed 152.326


2012-1135
 
3-26-12
 
105.02, 105.05, 105.06, 114.02, Repealed 117.01 - 117.16, 117.25, 117.26,
117.28


2012-1136
 
3-26-12
 
37.04, 37.05


2012-1137
 
4-2-12
 
10.20


2012-1138
 
4-16-12
 
152.182, 152.342


2012-1139
 
4-16-12
 
152.008, 152.142, 152.342, 152.344, 152.361


2012-1140
 
4-16-12
 
112.030, 112.032, 112.045, 112.048, 112.049, 112.200 - 112.202, 112.210,
112.211, 112.300, 112.998, 112.999, Repealed 112.015 - 112.018  and 112.080
- 112.084


2012-1143
 
5-21-12
 
152.008, 152.361, 152.362


2012-1147
 
8-20-12
 
150.06


2012-1148
 
9-4-12
 
98.01, 98.02, 98.07


2012-1149
 
9-4-12
 
92.01, 92.04, 92.15, 94.04, 152.342, 152.361


2012-1150
 
10-15-12
 
152.181, 152.182


2012-1152
 
10-22-12
 
150.03, 150.06


2013-1153
 
1-28-13
 
152.361


2013-1154
 
3-4-13
 
124.01 - 124.14


2013-1155
 
3-25-13
 
152.181


2013-1157
 
6-10-13
 
Repealed 106.03


2013-1158
 
7-15-13
 
152.291, 152.292, 152.294


2013-1160
 
8-19-13
 
112.033


2013-1163
 
10-21-13
 
152.262


2014-1165
 
2-3-14
 
150.03, 150.04, 150.06


2014-1166
 
2-3-14
 
Repealed 113.01 - 113.31, 115.01 - 115.05, 116.01 - 116.07, 116.20 - 116.28


2014-1169
 
5-5-14
 
152.342


2014-1170
 
5-27-14
 
97.01 - 97.03, 97.20, 97.25, 97.30, 97.35, 97.40, 97.45, 97.50, 97.55


2014-1171
 
6-16-14
 
Appendix Fee Schedule


2014-1177
 
7-7-14
 
114.03, 119.30, 152.008, 152.361, 152.362


2014-1180
 
9-2-14
 
152.305, 152.342, 152.460, 152.462


2014-1182
 
10-6-14
 
152.008, 152.342, 152.361


2014-1183
 
10-6-14
 
112.400 - 112.403


2014-1184
 
10-20-14
 
152.262


2014-1186
 
12-15-14
 
150.03, 150.27 - 150.31


2015-1187
 
2-17-15
 
30.15


2015-1189
 
3-23-15
 
152.262


2015-1190
 
4-28-15
 
152.262


2015-1191
 
5-18-15
 
92.50 - 92.58, 152.008, 152.243, 152.361


2015-1192
 
5-26-15
 
122.01 - 122.03, 122.05 - 122.09, 122.11, 122.99


2015-1196
 
9-14-15
 
112.041, 112.300, 112.400 - 112.403


2015-1197
 
9-28-15
 
99.76, 100.63


2015-1198
 
10-12-15
 
152.142, 152.342, 152.344


2015-1200
 
11-23-15
 
T.S.O. I


2015-1201
 
11-23-15
 
T.S.O. I


2016-1203
 
3-14-16
 
112.202, 112.403


2016-1206
 
8-22-16
 
152.264


2016-1207
 
9-12-16
 
106.01, 106.02


2016-1208
 
9-29-16
 
117.49, 117.491, 117.52


2016-1209
 
10-10-16
 
152.008, 152.491, 152.510 - 152.514, 152.517 - 152.520


2016-2011
 
11-14-16
 
152.008, 152.342.01, 152.343, 152.344


2016-1212
 
11-14-16
 
152.375, 152.391, 152.392


2017-1217
 
7-10-17
 
104.01 - 104.19, 153.01 - 153.08, 153.99


2017-1219
 
8-28-17
 
93A.01 - 93A.12, 93A.99
Repealed Chapter 93


2017-1223
 
10-23-17
 
112.032, 112.041


2017-1224
 
11-27-17
 
30.32


2017-1225
 
12-4-17
 
102.20 - 102.50


2017-1227
 
12-4-17
 
150.05


2018-1228
 
2-5-18
 
30.23, 30.39, 31.45, 31.75, 31.78, 31.92


2018-1230
 
4-23-18
 
92.21, 92.36


2018-1231
 
7-9-18
 
152.601 - 152.610


2018-1232
 
7-9-18
 
152.342


2018-1233
 
7-9-18
 
30.01


2018-1234
 
7-23-18
 
72.11


2018-1235
 
8-27-18
 
119.30 - 119.34, 119.36, 119.37


2019-1237
 
2-25-19
 
114.01, 114.02, 114.04, 114.09


 
 
 
 
 




 


