CITY OF COKATO, MINNESOTA
CITY CODE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10. GENERAL PROVISIONS
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 30. CITY ORGANIZATIONS
CHAPTER 31. CIVIL EMERGENCIES AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 32. PLANS AND POLICIES
CHAPTER 33. PERSONNEL POLICY
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
CHAPTER 50. GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 51. WATER AND SEWER
CHAPTER 52. GARBAGE
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
CHAPTER 70. TRAFFIC, PARKING AND MOTOR VEHICLES
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 90. (RESERVED)
CHAPTER 91. FIRE PREVENTION; FIREWORKS
CHAPTER 92. ABANDONED, JUNK AND UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLES
CHAPTER 93. STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
CHAPTER 94. ANIMALS
CHAPTER 95. NUISANCES
CHAPTER 96. VACANT BUILDINGS
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 110. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
CHAPTER 111. CABLE SERVICE
CHAPTER 112. PAWN SHOPS, PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS AND
THE LIKE
CHAPTER 113. GENERAL LICENSING PROCEDURES
CHAPTER 114. TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
CHAPTER 115. TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
CHAPTER 131. HUMAN RIGHTS
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150. BUILDING CODE
CHAPTER 151. FLOOD PLAIN
CHAPTER 152. SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 153. ZONING REGULATIONS
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
TABLE II: FRANCHISES
TABLE III: ZONING MAP
PARALLEL REFERENCES
REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
INDEX
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter
10. GENERAL PROVISIONS
1
2 General Provisions
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
10.01 Title of code
10.02 Rules of interpretation
10.03 Application to future ordinances
10.04 Captions
10.05 Definitions
10.06 Severability
10.07 Reference to other sections
10.08 Reference to offices
10.09 Errors and omissions
10.10 Official time
10.11 Reasonable time
10.12 Ordinances repealed
10.13 Ordinances unaffected
10.14 Effective date of ordinances
10.15 Repeal or modification of ordinance
10.16 Ordinances which amend or supplement code
10.17 Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
10.18 Copies of code
10.19 Adoption of statutes and rules by reference
10.20 Enforcement
10.21 Additions
10.22 Numbering
10.23 Statutory rules adopted
10.24 Existing rights and liabilities
10.25 Hearings
10.99 General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE
(A) All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as revised, codified, rearranged,
renumbered and consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known
and
3
4 General Provisions
designated as the "Cokato City Code", for which designation "code of ordinances", "codified
ordinances" or "code" may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section headings do not constitute
any part of the law as contained in the code.
(B) All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to the components of the code unless
otherwise specified. Any component code may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the
"Traffic Code". Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation "§" followed by the
number, such as "§ 10.01".
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION
(A) Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules
of construction, definition and application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those
governing the interpretation of state law.
(B) Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances of the city shall be by the
following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the City Council or of
the context of the same ordinance.
(1) AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written "and/or", whenever
the context requires.
(2) Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provision or ordinance requires an act to be done
which, by law, an agent or deputy may do as well as the principal, that requisition shall be
satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized agent or deputy.
(3) Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be
deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural
and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall
include the future, if applicable.
(4) General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited
to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES
All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to ordinances hereafter
adopted which amend or supplement this code unless otherwise specifically provided.
General Provisions 5
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS
Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and section numbers are
employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS
(A) General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or ordinary and usual sense.
However, technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be
understood according to their technical import.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CITY - The area within the corporate boundaries of the City of Cokato, Minnesota as presently
established or as amended by ordinance, annexation or other legal actions at a future time. The
term CITY, when used in this code, may also be used to refer to the City Council and its
authorized representatives or to the municipal corporation.
CITY ADMINISTRATOR - The City Administrator or designee.
CITY CLERK-TREASURER - The City Clerk-Treasurer.
CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES - This city code as modified by
amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.
COUNCIL - The City Council.
COUNTY - The County of Wright.
MAY - The act referred to is permissive.
MONTH - A calendar month.
OATH - An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an
oath, and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words
AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge taken by the person and
administered by an individual authorized by state law.
OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT - An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of this city unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
6 General Provisions
PERSON - Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm, corporation,
partnerships, co-partnership, limited liability company, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as
applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied
to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
PRECEDING or FOLLOWING - Next before or next after, respectively.
SHALL - The act referred to is mandatory.
SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION - Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
STATE - The State of Minnesota.
SUBCHAPTER - A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in the chapter
analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter, setting apart a group of sections
related by the subject matter of the heading. Not all chapters have subchapters.
WRITTEN - Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
YEAR - A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
(Prior Code, § 100.02)
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY
If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to any person or circumstance
is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the
invalid provision or application.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS
Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that reference shall extend and
apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless
the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES
Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of
this city exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
General Provisions 7
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS
If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words; the omission of any
word or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or
words to which no meaning can be attached or the use of a word or words when another word or
words was clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the
provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as
originally published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME
The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws, shall be the official time within
this city for the transaction of all city business.
§ 10.11 REASONABLE TIME
(A) In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or requires
reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is
necessary for a prompt performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
(B) The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall be computed by excluding
the first day and including the last. If the last day is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED
(A) This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature
pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and embraced.
(B) All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code shall be deemed repealed
from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED
All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not
embraced in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by
necessary implication.
8 General Provisions
§ 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES
All ordinances passed by the City Council requiring publication shall take effect from and after the
due publication thereof, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE
(A) Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified by a subsequent
ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force
until the publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give
effect to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.
(B) No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted, created, given, secured or
accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released or
discharged, but may be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued
in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
(C) When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed,
the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is
expressly provided.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE
(A) If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or section of this code, the chapter
or section shall be specifically repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired
amendment, substituted in its place.
(B) Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new chapter or section shall
indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this code, the proper number of the chapter or section.
In addition to this indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title
shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES
All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of this code shall be prosecuted
and remain punishable as provided by those laws. This code does not affect any rights or liabilities
accrued, penalties incurred or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures shall be
enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In particular, any agreement granting
permission to utilize highway rights-of-way, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the
acceptance, establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate officers shall
remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
General Provisions 9
§ 10.18 COPIES OF CODE
The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer for public
inspection. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall provide a copy for sale for a reasonable charge.
§ 10.19 ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES BY REFERENCE
It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code, all future amendments to any
state or federal rules and statutes adopted by reference in this code, or referenced in this code, are
hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this code was
adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to the contrary.
§ 10.20 ENFORCEMENT
(A) Any licensed peace officer, County Sheriff or any Deputy Sheriff shall have the authority to
enforce any provision of this code.
(B) As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from time to time, the CityAdministrator
shall have the authority to administer and enforce this code. In addition, under that statutory
authority, certain individuals designated within the code or by the City Administrator or City Council
shall have the authority to administer and enforce the provisions specified. All and any person or
persons designated may issue a citation in lieu of arrest or continued detention to enforce any
provision of the code.
(C) The City Administrator and any city official or employee designated by this code who has the
responsibility to perform a duty under this code may with the permission of a licensee of a business
or owner of any property or resident of a dwelling, or other person in control of any premises, inspect
or otherwise enter any property to enforce compliance with this code.
(D) If the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of a premises objects to the inspection
of or entrance to the property, the City Administrator, peace officer or any employee or official
charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that probable
cause exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction, petition
and obtain a search warrant before conducting the inspection or otherwise entering the property.
This warrant shall be only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect the
health, safety and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce these provisions
only, and no criminal charges shall be made as a result of the warrant. No warrant shall be issued
unless there be probable cause to issue the warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is
reasonable. Probable cause does not depend on specific knowledge of the condition of a particular
property.
(E) Every licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of property within the city shall permit
at reasonable times inspections of or entrance to the property by the City Administrator or any other
authorized city officer or employee only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted
10 General Provisions
to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce these
provisions. Unreasonable refusal to permit the inspection of or entrance to the property shall be
grounds for termination of any and all permits, licenses or city service to the property. Mailed
notice shall be given to the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of the property, stating
the grounds for the termination, and the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of the
property shall be given an opportunity to appear before the City Administrator to object to the
termination before it occurs, subject to appeal of the City Administrator’s decision to the City
Council at a regularly scheduled or special meeting.
(F) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the city to enter private
property in urgent emergency situations where there is an imminent danger in order to protect the
public health, safety and welfare.
§ 10.21 ADDITIONS
New ordinances proposing amendments or additions to the code shall be assigned appropriate code
numbers and shall be incorporated into the code as of their effective date. Reference or citation to
the code shall be deemed to include the amendments and additions. When an ordinance is
integrated into the code, there may be omitted from the ordinance the title, enacting clause, section
numbers, definitions of terms identical to those contained in this chapter, the clause indicating date
of adoption and validating signatures and dates.
(Prior Code, § 100.01)
§ 10.22 NUMBERING
(A) Each section number of this code consists of two component parts separated by a decimal.
(B) The first digit of the number refers to the chapter number, and the digits after the period refer
to the position of the section within the chapter.
(Prior Code, § 100.01)
§ 10.23 STATUTORY RULES ADOPTED
The definitions and rules of construction, presumptions and miscellaneous provisions pertaining to
construction contained in M.S. Chapter 645, as it may be amended from time to time, are adopted
by reference and made a part of this code. As so adopted, references in that chapter to laws and
statutes mean provisions of this code and references to the legislature mean the Council.
(Prior Code, § 100.04)
General Provisions 11
§ 10.24 EXISTING RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES
(A) The repeal of prior ordinances and adoption of this code are not to be construed to affect in any
manner rights and liabilities existing at the time of repeal and the enactment of this code.
(B) Insofar as provisions in this code are substantially the same as pre-existing ordinances, they
shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
(Prior Code, § 100.04)
§ 10.25 HEARINGS
(A) General. Unless otherwise provided in this code, or by law, every public hearing required by
law, ordinance or resolution to be held on any legislative or administrative matter shall be conducted
in accordance with this section.
(B) Notice. Every hearing shall be preceded by ten days’ mailed notice to all persons entitled
thereto by law, ordinance or regulation, unless only published notice is required. The notice shall
state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. Failure to give the notice or defects in it shall not
invalidate the proceedings if a good faith effort has been made to comply with this division.
(C) Conduct of hearing. At the hearing, each party in interest shall have an opportunity to be heard
and to present the evidence as is relevant to the proceeding. The Council may adopt rules governing
the conduct of hearings, records to be made and other matters as it deems necessary.
(D) Record. Upon the disposition of any matter after the hearing, the Council shall have prepared
a written summary of its findings and decisions and enter the summary in the official Council
minutes.
(Prior Code, § 100.05)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY
(A) Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this code for which another
penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(B) Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this code, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
12 General Provisions
(C) In either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of prosecution may be
added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation
occurs or continues.
(D) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any official duty imposed by this
code shall not subject the officer or employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.
(E) In addition to any penalties provided for in this section, if any person, firm or corporation fails
to comply with any provision of this code, the Council or any city official designated by it, may
institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the violation.
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
30. CITY ORGANIZATIONS
31. CIVIL EMERGENCIES AND EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT
32. PLANS AND POLICIES
33. PERSONNEL POLICY
1
2 Cokato - Administration
CHAPTER 30: CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
City Council
30.01 Purpose
30.02 General
30.03 Presiding officer
30.04 Agenda
30.05 Voting
30.06 Rules of decorum
30.07 Enforcement of decorum
30.08 Special meetings
30.09 Cameras and recording devices
30.10 Salaries of Mayor and members of City Council
Departments
30.25 Police Department
30.26 Fire Department
Commissions
30.55 Police Advisory Commission
30.56 Planning and Zoning Commission
30.57 Fire Commission
30.58 Park Commission
Code of Ethics
30.75 Purpose
30.76 Standards of conduct
30.77 Disclosures
30.78 Advisor opinions
30.79 Hearing
Cross-reference:
Regulation of opening burning, see §§ 91.20 through 91.26
3
4 Cokato - Administration
CITY COUNCIL
§ 30.01 PURPOSE
It is recognized that in order to enhance the concept of effective and democratic government, it is
essential that a legislative body reaffirm formal rules of procedure and decorum so that a true
deliberative process will be observed and not disturbed.
(Res. 96-27, passed 11-11-1996)
§ 30.02 GENERAL
(A) Law. The city ordinances and state statutes governing the City Council shall be followed and
supplemented by the Rules of Procedure and Decorum of the City Council.
(B) General rules. In all matters of parliamentary procedures, the Council shall be governed by
the latest printed edition of the Robert’s Rules of Order, Newly Revised (11th Ed. 2011), as
published from time to time, except as modified by these rules.
(Res. 96-27, passed 11-11-1996)
§ 30.03 PRESIDING OFFICER
(A) Who presides. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Council. In the absence of the
Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem shall preside. The presiding officer shall have the power to preserve
strict order and decorum at meetings, enforce the rules of procedure and determine without debate,
subject to the final decision of the Council on appeal, all questions of procedure and order.
(B) Appeal of the ruling of the presiding officer. Any member of the Council may appeal from a
ruling of the presiding officer. If the appeal is seconded, the member may speak once solely on the
question involved, and the presiding officer may explain his or her ruling, but no other Council
member shall participate in the discussion. The appeal shall be sustained if it is approved by a
majority vote.
(C) Rights of the presiding officer. The presiding officer may speak on any question and make
motions and second motions.
(Res. 96-27, passed 11-11-1996)
§ 30.04 AGENDA
(A) Matters for consideration. Matters for Council action shall be submitted by members of the
Council and residents to the City Administrator.
City Organizations 5
(B) Preparation. An agenda of business for each regular and special meeting shall be prepared in
the office of the City Administrator and copies thereof delivered to each Council member as far in
advance of the meeting as time for preparation will permit.
(C) Order of business at regular or special meetings. At the hour appointed for the regular or
special meeting of the City Council, the meeting shall be called to order by the Mayor and in the
Mayor’s absence, by the Mayor Pro Tem. If a quorum is present, the City Council shall then
proceed with its business in the following order:
(1) Call meeting to order;
(2) Pledge of Allegiance;
(3) Public hearings (as scheduled);
(4) Audience request-opportunity for the public to address the City Council on matters not on
the agenda;
(5) Recognition or proclamations;
(6) Approval of the regular or special meeting agenda;
(7) Consent agenda:
(a) Approval of the minutes of the last City Council meeting; and
(b) Other routine, noncontroversial items requiring little or no deliberation.
(8) Regular business items;
(9) Mayor’s report;
(10) Public works report;
(11) Council reports;
(12) Financial reports;
(13) Council inquiries; and
(14) Adjournment.
6 Cokato - Administration
(D) Varying order of business. The order of business may be varied by the presiding officer.
(E) Consent agenda. Matters for the Council of a routine or noncontroversial nature which need
minimal Council deliberation shall be placed on the consent agenda. A motion to approve the
consent agenda shall not be debated. At the request of any individual Council member, an item
shall be removed from the consent agenda and placed upon the regular agenda for debate
immediately following the consent agenda.
(F) Items not on the agenda. The Council may consider items not appearing on the agenda as
normal business if an objection is not raised by a Council member. If an objection is raised by a
Council member to consider an item not appearing on the agenda, a vote shall be taken by the
Council to determine the appropriateness of further consideration of the matter at that time.
(G) Public participation. Members of the public may address the City Council during:
(1) Public hearings; and
(2) Audience requests-opportunity for the public to address the City Council on matters not on
the agenda. This portion of the meeting shall be limited to 15 minutes, and individuals shall
be requested to limit their comments to five minutes or less. If the majority of the Council
determines that additional time on a specific issue is warranted then discussion on that issue
shall be continued as a part of the regular agenda.
(H) Written communications on all matters. All interested parties or their authorized
representatives may address the Council by written communication regarding all matters under the
Council’s consideration. The City Administrator shall place these communications on the Council
agenda under "Audience Requests or Regular Business Items".
(Res. 96-27, passed 11-11-1996)
§ 30.05 VOTING
(A) Procedure. The votes of the members on any ordinance, amendment or resolution pending
before the Council shall be by voice vote or roll call. The votes of the members on any motion shall
be by voice vote unless the Mayor or any member of the Council requests that a roll call vote be
taken. The Mayor shall call for a roll call vote whenever a voice vote of the Council is not clear as
to the disposition of the action before the Council.
(B) Abstention. If a Council member does not vote, the abstention shall be recorded as
"Abstain-name".
(C) Voting order for roll call. The Mayor shall call for the vote. The presiding officer shall
always vote last.
(Res. 96-27, passed 11-11-1996)
City Organizations 7
§ 30.06 RULES OF DECORUM
(A) Council. While the Council is in session, the members must preserve order and decorum, and
a member shall neither, by conversation or otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace
of the Council nor disturb any member while speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the presiding
officer.
(B) Recognition. No person or member of the Council shall address the Council without being
recognized by the presiding officer.
(C) Discussion. No member of the Council shall speak more than twice on any question and no
more than five minutes each time without consent of the Council.
(D) Staff. Members of the city staff shall observe the same rules of order and decorum as are
applicable to the City Council.
(E) Pertinent to matter under debate. Members of the Council, staff and public shall confine
remarks to the matter under debate.
(F) Addressing the Council. Each member of the public addressing the Council shall step up to the
microphone provided for the use of the public after being recognized by the presiding officer and
give his or her name and address in an audible tone of voice for the records, state the subject to be
discussed and state who the speaker is representing if representing an organization or other persons.
Unless further time is granted by a majority vote of the Council, remarks from the public shall be
limited to four minutes. All remarks shall be addressed to the Council as a whole and not to any
member thereof. No person other than members of the Council and the person having the floor
shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the Council,
without permission of the presiding officer. No question may be asked of a Council member or a
member of the staff without the permission of the presiding officer.
(G) Spokesperson for group of persons. In order to expedite matters and to avoid repetitious
presentations, whenever any group of persons wishes to address the Council on the same subject
matter, it shall be proper for the presiding officer to request that a spokesperson be chosen by the
group to address the Council and, in case additional matters are to be presented by any other member
of the group, to limit the number of the persons addressing the Council.
(H) After motion. After a motion has been made or a public hearing has been closed, no member
of the public shall address the Council from the audience on the matter under consideration without
first securing permission from the presiding officer.
(I) Conduct. Any member of the Council, staff or other person indulging in personalities or
making impertinent, slanderous or profane remarks or who willfully utters loud, threatening or
abusive language, or engages in any disorderly conduct which would impede, disrupt or disturb the
orderly
8 Cokato - Administration
conduct of any meeting, hearing or other proceeding, shall be called to order by the presiding officer
and, if the conduct continues, may at the discretion of the presiding officer, be ordered barred from
further audience before the Council during that meeting.
(J) Members of the audience. No person in the audience shall engage in disorderly conduct such
as hand clapping, stamping of feet, whistling, using profane language, yelling and similar
demonstrations, which conduct disturbs the peace and good order of the meeting.
(Res. 96-27, passed 11-11-1996) Penalty, see § 10.99.
§ 30.07 ENFORCEMENT OF DECORUM
(A) Warning. All persons shall, at the request of the presiding officer, be silent. If, after receiving
a warning from the presiding officer, a person persists in disturbing the meeting, the officer may
order him or her to remove himself or herself from the meeting. If he or she does not remove
himself or herself, the presiding officer may order that the person be removed by the Sergeant-at-
Arms.
(B) Sergeant-at-Arms. If present, the deputy sheriff shall be Sergeant-at-Arms at Council
meetings. He or she shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the presiding officer for the
purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the Council meeting. Upon instruction of the
presiding officer, it shall be the duty of the deputy sheriff to remove from the meeting any person
who intentionally disturbs the proceedings of the Council.
(C) Resisting removal. Any person who resists removal by the deputy sheriff may be charged
with violating city ordinance.
(D) Motions to enforce. Any Council member may move to require the presiding officer to enforce
these rules and the affirmative vote of a majority of the Council shall require him or her to do so.
(E) Adjournment. In the event that any meeting is willfully disturbed by a group or group of
persons so as to render the orderly conduct of the meeting unfeasible and when order cannot be
restored by the removal of individuals who are creating the disturbance, the meeting may be
adjourned with the remaining business considered at the next regular meeting.
(F) Regular meeting. All regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the second Monday of
each calendar month at 7:00 p.m. or such other date or time as designated by the City Council. Any
regular meeting falling upon a holiday shall be held on the next following business day at the same
time and place as established by the City Council, or another date as designated by the City Council.
All meetings, including special meetings, shall be held in the City Hall or at a place accessible to the
public as designated by the City Council.
(Res. 96-27, passed 11-11-1996)
City Organizations 9
§ 30.08 SPECIAL MEETINGS
The Mayor or any two members of the Council may call a special meeting of the Council upon at
least 72 hours’ written notice to each member of the Council. This notice shall be delivered
personally to each member or shall be left at his or her usual place of residence with some responsible
person. Similar notice shall be given to the official newspaper for publication. The notice shall be
posted at the City Hall and two other public places in the city. Emergency meetings may be called
in accordance with state law.
(A) Initial meeting. At the first regular Council meeting in January of each year, the Council shall:
(1) Designate the depositories of City Council;
(2) Designate the official newspaper;
(3) Choose one of the Council members as acting Mayor, who shall perform the duties of the
Mayor during the disability or absence of the Mayor from the city, or, in case of vacancy in the
office of Mayor, until a successor has been appointed and qualifies; and
(4) Appoint officers, employees and members of boards, commissions and committees as may
be necessary.
(B) Public meetings. All Council meetings, including special meetings and of Council committees,
shall be open to the public, except as permitted under state law.
(C) Minutes. The minutes of each Council meeting shall be recorded by the City Clerk-Treasurer
or other designee and kept on file by the City Clerk-Treasurer. Ordinances, amendments,
resolutions and claims need not be recorded in full in the minutes if they appear in other permanent
records of the City Clerk-Treasurer and can be accurately identified from the description given in
the minutes.
(D) Approval. The minutes of each meeting shall be composed in a word processing form. At the
next regular Council meeting, the minutes shall be considered by the Council. The minutes need
not be read aloud, but the presiding officer shall call for any additions or corrections. If there is no
objection to a proposed addition or correction, it may be made without a vote of the Council. If
there is an objection, the Council shall vote upon the addition or correction. If there are no additions
or corrections, the minutes shall stand approved for publication.
(E) Ordinances, resolutions, motions, petitions and communications. Every ordinance and/or
amendment shall be presented in writing. An ordinance or amendment need not be read in full
unless a member of the Council requests such a reading.
(F) Signing and publication proof. Each ordinance amendment and resolution shall be signed by
the Mayor, attested to, and filed in the binder in the city offices.
10 Cokato - Administration
(G) Repeals and amendments. Each ordinance or amendment repealing a previous action, a section
or division thereof shall give the number, if any, and the title of the ordinance or code number of the
ordinance or resolution to be repealed in whole or in part. Each ordinance or amendment of an
existing ordinance or part thereof shall set forth in full each amended section or subdivision as it will
read with the amendment.
(H) Motion, petitions and communications. Each motion shall be stated in full before it is
submitted to a vote by the presiding officer and shall be recorded in the minutes. Every petition or
other communication addressed to the Council shall be in writing and shall be read in full upon
presentation to the Council unless the Council dispenses with the reading. Each petition or other
communication shall be recorded in the minutes by title and filed in the city offices.
(I) Committees designated. The Council may create the committees, standing or special, as it
deems necessary. Committees shall consist of as many members, and perform duties as the Council
may require. Committee members shall be appointed by the Mayor at the first regular Council
meeting in January of each year.
(J) Membership. Each committee shall include a Council representative. Each Committee
member shall serve as appointed unless excused by a majority of the members of the Council.
(Res. 96-27, passed 11-11-1996)
§ 30.09 CAMERAS AND RECORDING DEVICES
Cameras, including cable television and video types, electronic sound recording devices and any
other mechanical and/or electrical devices may be used in the Council Chamber, but only in such a
manner as will cause a minimum of interference with or disturbance of the proceedings of the
Council.
(Res. 96-27, passed 11-11-1996)
§ 30.10 SALARIES OF MAYOR AND MEMBERS OF CITY COUNCIL
(A) Monthly salary. The salary of the Mayor shall be an amount to be determined by Council, and
the salary of each other member of the City Council shall be an amount to be determined by the
Council.
(B) Special meetings. Each member of the City Council shall receive compensation of an amount
to be determined by the Council for each special meeting of the City Council he or she attends. For
purposes of this section, a SPECIAL MEETING is any duly called meeting of the City Council
except the Council’s regular monthly meeting.
(C) Additional meetings. Council members attend meetings of other organizations and groups in
their capacity as elected city officials. Representation of Council at the meetings is in the city’s
best interest. The meetings are often outside the city and frequently involve a substantial
commitment of time on the part of those attending. Council members shall be compensated for
attending approved meetings
City Organizations 11
at the rate of an amount to be determined by the Council per meeting. The City Council shall
annually establish a list of organizations and groups whose meetings will be attended by one or more
members of the Council and for which the attending members shall receive compensation. The
City Council may from time to time supplement or amend the list of approved meetings to include
unanticipated or extraordinary meetings.
(Ord. 2004-07, passed 7-26-2004)
DEPARTMENTS
§ 30.25 POLICE DEPARTMENT
The city shall not have an independent Police Department, but shall contract with Wright County
for police protection. The City Council shall contract with Wright County at such times as are
necessary for police protection.
(Prior Code, § 202.01)
§ 30.26 FIRE DEPARTMENT
(A) Fire Department continued. There is hereby continued in this city a volunteer Fire Department
consisting of a Chief, an Assistant Chief, a Fire Marshal and firefighters.
(Prior Code, § 203.01)
(B) Appointment. The Chief, the Assistant Chief and the Fire Marshal shall be appointed by the
Council. The Chief shall appoint the firefighters, subject to confirmation by the Council. In
making the appointments, the Chief and the Council shall take into consideration recommendations
of the members of the Department. Each officer and every other member of the Fire Department,
except a probationary firefighter, shall serve during good behavior and may be removed by the
Council only for cause after a public hearing.
(Prior Code, § 203.02)
(C) Duties of Fire Marshal. The Office of Fire Marshal may be held by the Chief or by the
Assistant Chief, if the Council, by resolution, approves. The Fire Marshal shall be charged with
enforcement of all ordinances aimed at fire prevention. He or she shall have full authority to inspect
all premises and to cause the removal or abatement of all fire hazards.
(Prior Code, § 203.03)
(D) Duties of Chief. The Chief shall have control of all the firefighting apparatus and shall be
solely responsible for its care and condition. He or she shall make a semi-annual report to the
Council at its meeting in March and September, on the condition of the equipment and needs of the
Fire Department. He or she may submit additional reports and recommendations at any meeting of
the Council, and he or
12 Cokato - Administration
she shall report each suspension by him or her of a member of the Fire Department at the first
meeting of the Council following the suspension. He or she shall be responsible for the proper
training and discipline of the members of the Fire Department, and may suspend any member for
refusal or neglect to obey orders pending final action by the Council on his or her discharge or
retention.
(Prior Code, § 203.04)
(E) Records. The Chief shall keep in convenient form a complete record of all fires. Such a
record shall include the time of the alarm, location of fire, cause of fire, type of building, name of
owner and tenant, purpose for which occupied, value of building and contents, members of the
Department responding to the alarm and other information as he or she may deem advisable or as
may be required from time to time by the Council or State Insurance Department.
(Prior Code, § 203.05)
(F) Practice drills. The Chief shall have the authority to hold practice drills at his or her discretion.
(Prior Code, § 203.06)
(G) Assistant Chief. In the absence or disability of the Chief, the Assistant Chief shall perform all
the functions and exercise all of the authority of the Chief.
(Prior Code, § 203.07)
(H) Firefighters. The Assistant Chief and firefighters shall be able-bodied and not less than 18
years of age. They shall become members of the Fire Department only after a six month
probationary period. The Council may require that each candidate, before he or she becomes a
probationary firefighter, must satisfy certain minimum requirements of height, weight, education
and any other qualifications which may be specified by the Council, and that he or she must pass
satisfactorily a mental and physical examination.
(Prior Code, § 203.08)
(I) Loss of membership. Absence of any firefighter from three consecutive drills or calls unless
excused by the Chief shall be cause for removal from the Department.
(Prior Code, § 203.09)
(J) Compensation. The members and officers of the Fire Department shall receive compensation
as the Council shall fix by resolution or ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 203.10)
(K) Minimum pay. In computing compensation for fires and practice drills, one hour shall be
considered the minimum to be paid to any firefighter or officer.
(Prior Code, § 203.11)
(L) Present members. No person who is a member of the Fire Department at the time of the
adoption of this section shall be required to serve a probationary period before becoming a
firefighter.
(Prior Code, § 203.12)
City Organizations 13
(M) Relief Association. The members and officers of the Fire Department may organize
themselves into a Firefighter’s Relief Association in accordance with the law.
(Prior Code, § 203.13)
(N) Rules. The Department may adopt its own constitution and bylaws, not inconsistent herewith,
for the proper management of the Department.
(Prior Code, § 203.14)
(O) Equipment. All equipment and apparatus acquired by the Cokato Fire Department, both by
purchase or by contribution, shall become and remain the property of the city.
(Prior Code, § 203.15)
(P) Calls outside city. The Department is hereby authorized to answer fire calls outside the city
limits; and when so doing, shall be considered his or her own doing as firefighters of this city. The
Council shall, by resolution, prescribe the regulations concerning calls outside the city limits to
insure adequate protection being available within the city. The Council may prescribe charges as
may be made by the Fire Department for calls outside the city and must ratify any agreements made
with another municipality or town for fire protection. The Council may contract with any individual
or governmental agency to provide fire protection and to provide reciprocal protection outside the
city limits.
(Prior Code, § 203.16)
(Q) Interference with Department. No person shall give or make, or cause to be given or made, a
fire alarm without probable cause, neglect or refuse to obey any reasonable order of the Chief at a
fire or interfere with the Fire Department in the discharge of his or her duties.
(Prior Code, § 203.17) Penalty, see § 10.99
COMMISSIONS
§ 30.55 POLICE ADVISORY COMMISSION
(A) Establishment of a Police Advisory Commission. These sections shall include the following
areas: establishment of Advisory Commission, membership, term of office, vacancies, legal
advisory, rules, officers, duties and functions, meetings, compensation and amendments.
(B) Establishment of Advisory Commission. A Police Advisory Commission is hereby established
to advise the City Council on police and public safety matters.
(C) Membership.
(1) Composition. The Commission shall consist of four general members and one member of
the City Council.
14 Cokato - Administration
(2) General members. All general at large members shall be appointed by the Council. Any
vacancy in a general membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Council. A
general member of the Police Advisory Commission may be any adult resident of the city.
(3) Council representative. The Council representative shall be appointed by the Mayor with
ratification by the City Council.
(4) Ex-officio representatives. Staff members of the Police Advisory Commission may
include the City Administrator, City Attorney and other city personnel as appointed by the City
Council. The Wright County Sheriff or Department representative may also be requested to
participate in Commission meetings as necessary. Ex-officio representatives shall not be
eligible to vote on Commission activities.
(D) Terms. Appointment to the Commission shall be made at the first regular January meeting of
the City Council. General members shall be appointed on an annual basis for a one-year term.
(E) Vacancies. In the case of a vacancy during the term of office of any general member of the
Commission, the Council shall appoint a new member to serve the remainder of the term. A
vacancy shall exist if any one of the following occur: death, disability, residence outside of the city,
resignation or removal by a majority vote of the Council.
(F) Legal advisor. The City Attorney shall be an ex-officio member and serve as the legal advisor
to the Commission.
(G) Rules. The Commission may adopt rules and regulations for its own proceedings and shall
meet at regular intervals. The time and place to be established by rules adopted from time to time.
All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public except for portions regarding disciplinary
matters that must or may be legally closed or as otherwise authorized by law.
(H) Officers. The Commission shall elect from among its members a Chairperson, Vice
Chairperson and a Secretary.
(1) Duties of Chair. The Chair shall preside at all meetings of the Police Advisory
Commission and shall have the duties normally conferred and parliamentary usage of officers.
(2) Duties of Vice Chair. The Vice Chair shall act for the Chair in his or her absence.
(3) Duties of Recording Secretary. A Secretary may be appointed who is not a member of the
Police Commission but can be employed as a member of city staff. The Secretary shall keep
the minutes and records of the Commission; and with the assistance of support staff, shall
prepare the agenda of the regular and special meetings for Commission members, arrange
proper and legal notice of hearings when necessary, attend to correspondence of the
Commission and other duties as are normally carried out by a Recording Secretary.
City Organizations 15
(I) Duties and functions. The duties and functions of the Commission shall be as follows:
(1) To assist the Council in planning and research in the area of police matters, including
budget, hours of coverage, intergovernmental cooperation and public information programs;
(2) To develop a citizen complaint procedure on matters of public safety and general police
work;
(3) Promote and foster public interest in and for an understanding of the Police Department
and law enforcement work;
(4) To cooperate with all community groups and civic organizations within the city and furnish
them the aid and advice in matters of public safety as deemed appropriate within the means
provided by appropriations made by the Council;
(5) To confer with and advise the Council on all matters concerning public safety within the
city;
(6) To take under advisement, study, hold hearings and make their written recommendations
to the Council on all matters concerning public safety within the city;
(7) To serve as a forum for the citizens of Cokato to voice their opinions regarding community
safety activities and functions; and
(8) To encourage coordination with other communities and agencies to the extent appropriate
in matters pertinent to the community safety function.
(J) Meetings. The Police Advisory Commission shall hold quarterly meetings. Special meetings
may be scheduled by the Chairperson as needed. All meetings shall be open to the general public.
(K) Compensation. Members of the Commission shall serve with compensation as set by Council
for attendance at each meeting.
§ 30.56 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
(A) Establishment of Commission. A City Planning and Zoning Commission for the City of Cokato
is hereby established. The Commission shall be the City Planning Agency authorized by M.S.
§ 462.354, Subdivision 1, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 205.01)
16 Cokato - Administration
(B) Composition.
(1) Membership. The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of five members.
The City Engineer and the City Attorney shall be members ex-officio without the right to vote
and the City Council shall select one member of the Commission from its own membership.
The other four members shall be appointed and may be removed by the Council.
(2) Terms, vacancies and oath. The term of each Planning and Zoning Commission member
shall be an appointment for a period of one year with compensation as set by Council for
attendance at each meeting. Members are also eligible and reimbursed for other expenses such
as mileage that actually incurred in discharging the duties and responsibilities relating to the
work of the Commission.
(Prior Code, § 205.02)
(C) Organizations, meetings and the like.
(1) Officers. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its appointed members
for a term of one year, and the Commission may create and fill the other offices as it may
determine. The City Administrator or designee shall act as Secretary of the Planning and
Zoning Commission, but he or she shall not be a member.
(2) Meetings, records, reports. The Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each
month. It shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its
resolutions, transactions and findings, which records shall be of public record. On or before
February 15 of each year, the Commission shall submit to the City Council a report of its work
during the preceding calendar year. Expenditures of the Commission shall be within amounts
appropriated for the purpose by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 205.03)
(D) Powers and duties of the Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the
powers and duties given planning agencies generally by law. The Commission shall also exercise
the duties conferred upon it by this section and by the Council. After the Commission has prepared
and adopted a Comprehensive Plan, the Commission shall periodically but at least once every five
years, review the Comprehensive Plan and any ordinance in any capital improvement program the
Council has adopted to implement the Plan. After the review it shall, to the extent it deems
necessary, revise the Comprehensive Plan, adopt the amendments or the new Comprehensive Plan
and recommend it to the Council in accordance with law. Similarly, after the review, it shall
recommend to the Council any amendments it deems desirable to the capital improvement program
in any ordinance implementing the Plan.
(Prior Code, § 205.04)
(E) Zoning ordinances; public hearings. No zoning ordinance or amendment shall be adopted by
the Council until a public hearing has been held thereon by the Planning and Zoning Commission
upon notices provided in M.S. § 462.357, Subdivision 3, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 205.05)
City Organizations 17
(F) Subdivisions; approval. Any subdivision submitted to the Council for approval shall, prior to
preliminary approval, be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and
recommendation, if so required by the Subdivision Regulations. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall hold a public hearing on the subdivision following publication of the time and
place of the hearing in the official newspaper at least ten days before the day of the hearing. Any
subdivision so referred shall be returned to the Council by the Commission with its
recommendations within 60 days, and the failure of the Commission to report in that period is
deemed to have satisfied the requirements of this section. Final approval or disapproval of the
subdivision shall be the decision of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 205.06) (Res. 009, passed 6-12-2000)
§ 30.57 FIRE COMMISSION
(A) Establishment of Commission. A Fire Commission for the City of Cokato and government
units served by the Fire Department is hereby established.
(Prior Code, § 213.01)
(B) Composition.
(1) Membership. The Fire Commission shall consist of one representative from each of the
governmental units served by the Cokato Fire Department. The Fire Chief and City
Administrator or designee shall be members ex-officio without voting privileges. Each
governmental unit shall recommend to the City Council a member to be its representative.
Members may be removed by the City Council upon recommendation of the representatives’
governmental unit.
(2) Terms, vacancies, oath. The terms of ex-officio members shall correspond to their
respective tenures. The terms of all other members shall be for a period of one year. Members
of the Commission shall hold office until their successors are appointed. Vacancies during the
term shall be filled by the City Council, upon recommendation of the particular governmental
unit, for the unexpired portion of the term. Every appointed member shall, before entering
upon the discharge of his or her duties, take an oath that he or she will faithfully discharge the
duties of his or her office.
(3) Compensation. Members of the Commission shall serve without pay, but may be
reimbursed for actual expenses accrued in the discharge of their official duties.
(Prior Code, § 213.02)
(C) Organization, meetings and the like.
(1) Officers. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its appointed members.
The Commission may create and fill the other offices that it may deem necessary.
18 Cokato - Administration
(2) Meetings. The Commission shall hold regular meetings at such time and place as may be
established by the Commission. Special meetings may be called by the Chairperson or any two
Commission members upon 3 days written notice. All meetings of the Commission shall be
open to the public.
(3) Quorum, voting. A simple majority of the members at a regular or special meeting shall
constitute a quorum. All questions presented for a vote shall be decided by a simple majority
of those present.
(4) Records, reports. The Commission shall keep a record of its transactions,
recommendations and resolutions which record shall be a public record. The Commission shall
make a quarterly report of its activities to the City Council and other participating government
units. On or before February 15 of each year, the Commission shall submit to the City Council
and other participating government units a report of its work during the preceding year.
(5) Finances. The Commission shall submit a proposed budget for each fiscal year to the city
prior to the beginning of the fiscal year. Expenditures of the Commission shall be within
amounts appropriated by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 213.03)
(D) Powers and duties of the Commission.
(1) Responsibilities. The Fire Commission shall be advisory to the City Council, the Fire
Department, the Firefighters’ Relief Association and other municipal agencies, in all matters
pertaining to the conduct of fire prevention and suppression within the city and governmental
units served by the Cokato Fire Department.
(2) Duties. It shall be the duty of the Commission to:
(a) Submit a proposed Fire Department budget to the City Council and township boards
for adoption;
(b) Review and monitor the adopted Fire Department budget;
(c) Recommend to the City Council proposed amendments to the budget;
(d) Recommend policies to the City Council on matters pertaining to the operation of the
Fire Department;
(e) Report to their respective government units the activities of the Commission and Fire
Department; and
City Organizations 19
(f) Review proposed capital equipment purchases and make recommendations to the City
Council on same.
(Prior Code, § 213.04)
§ 30.58 PARK COMMISSION
(A) Formation of Park Commission.
(1) There is hereby established a Park Commission which shall advise the City Council as to
the acquisition, development, improvement and maintenance of city parks. As an advisory
commission, the Park Commission shall not have any of the powers enumerated in M.S. §
412.521, Subdivision 1, as it may be amended from time to time.
(2) The Park Commission shall consist of five members and one non-voting youth member
appointed by the City Council. The Council shall select a member from among its own
members to serve as one voting member of the Commission.
(3) The membership of the Park Commission shall be appointed annually. Vacancies shall be
filled by appointment of the City Council.
(4) Members of the Commission shall serve with compensation as set by Council for
attendance at each meeting.
(5) Park Commission members serve at the pleasure of the City Council. The Council may
remove any member who is absent at three consecutive Park Commission meetings without
notifying or obtaining the consent of the Commission Chair or for other reasons deemed
sufficient by the City Council.
(6) The Commission shall meet at least once per calendar quarter. The Commission shall
schedule additional meetings as it may deem necessary.
(B) Organization and procedure.
(1) The Commission shall choose from among its members a Chair, a Vice Chair and such
other officers as it deems appropriate.
(2) The Commission may recommend bylaws or rules of procedure governing its operation to
the City Council. The bylaws or rules of procedure shall take effect only if approved by a
majority of the full Council.
(3) Written minutes of meetings of the Commission shall be kept and filed with the City
Administrator prior to the next regularly scheduled Council meeting, but shall be subject to
approval at the next Park Commission meeting.
20 Cokato - Administration
(C) Duties and powers of the Commission.
(1) The Commission shall serve as an advisory body to the City Council. The Commission
shall review and make recommendations to the Council regarding the following:
(a) The acquisition of land for parks, trails and other recreational facilities;
(b) Adoption and amendment of the city's Comprehensive Park Plan;
(c) The construction of roadways, buildings and other necessary structures and
improvements in parks;
(d) Purchase of necessary materials and supplies, equipment and services pertaining to
parks;
(e) The maintenance of park property so that it is adequately maintained and cared for;
(f) Entertainment for the general public on park grounds; and
(g) Such other duties and powers as the City Council may delegate to the Commission.
(2) The Park Commission shall have no authority whatsoever to expend city funds. The
Commission may make recommendations to the City Council regarding expenditures, but no
expenditures for park purposes shall be made unless and until authorized by the City Council.
(3) No later than July 15 of each year, the Park Commission shall present to the Council a
detailed estimate of the financial needs of the city parks for the ensuing fiscal year.
(Ord. 03-2010, passed 5-10-2010)
CODE OF ETHICS
§ 30.75 PURPOSE
The City Council determines that high ethical standards among its members, as well as the members
of its boards and commissions, are essential to the conduct of the public affairs of the city. The
standards of conduct set forth below are intended to serve as a guideline for the members of the City
Council and of the boards and commissions in carrying out their duties. By eliminating conflicts
of interest and providing a guide for conduct in city matters, the City Council intends to promote the
faith and confidence of the citizens of Cokato in their government, and to encourage its citizens to
serve on its council and commissions. The provisions of this code of ethics are not intended to
supersede or conflict with state statutes or city ordinances.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2011)
City Organizations 20A
§ 30.76 STANDARDS OF CONDUCT
(A) No Council member or member of any board or commission may use the member's official
position to secure special privileges or exemptions for the member or others.
(B) Except as permitted by law, all Council members and members of a board or commission must
disclose a potential conflict of interest for the public record and refrain from participating in the
discussion and vote when a matter comes before the City Council or board or commission when the
conflict:
(1) Affects the member's financial interests or those of a business with which the member is
associated, unless the effect on the member or business is no greater than on other members of
the same business classification, profession or occupation; or
(2) Affects the financial interests of an organization in which the member participates as a
member of the governing body, unless the person serves in that capacity as the city's
representative.
(C) No Council member or member of any board or commission may enter into a contract with the
city, unless authorized by law. A Council member or member of a board or commission who has
a proprietary interest of 10% or more in a business or other entity doing business with the city must
make that interest known in writing to the City Council and the City Clerk.
(D) No Council member or member of a board or commission may hold an office incompatible with
the member's office on the City Council or board or commission.
(E) No Council member or member of a board or commission may act as an agent or attorney for
another before the City Council or a board or commission in a matter where a conflict of interest
exists or may exist. No former Council member or member of a board or commission may act as
agent or attorney for another before the City Council or a board or commission if doing so involves
the use of information gain in confidence while a member and which has not become public data.
(F) No Council member or member of any board or commission may knowingly accept or solicit,
directly or indirectly, a gift for the member or another if prohibited by state law.
(G) A Council member or member of any board or commission may accept compensation or
expense reimbursement for the performance of the member's public duties only from the sources
listed below. No Council member or member of any board or commission may solicit or accept,
and no person may offer or pay to a member, compensation or expense reimbursement for the
performance of the member's public duties from any source other than:
(1) Compensation and expenses paid by the city;
20B Cokato - Administration
(2) Compensation and expenses from other employment if the member conducts public
business while being paid for the other employment and if the other employment does not
interfere with, influence, or compromise the member's public position; and
(3) Compensation and expenses paid by another governmental agency or municipal association
to a Council member or member of a board or commission who serves as a city representative
for that agency, but only if the city does not also pay the member for the same activity.
(H) (1) No Council member or member of any board or commission may use public money, time,
personnel, facilities, or equipment for private gain or political campaign activities except when:
(a) The use is required or authorized by law; or
(b) The use is no greater than that allowed for members of the general public.
(2) This does not prohibit correspondence at any time to a resident in response to the resident's
specific inquiries, or general surveys of residents conducted before the time of filing for
candidacy for elective office.
(I) No Council member or member of a board or commission may disclose to the public or use for
the private gain of the member or others any information gained by reason of the member's public
position and which is not public data. No Council member or member of a board or commission
may disclose information received, discussed, or decided in conference with the Council's or board's
attorney that is protected by the attorney/client privilege, unless a majority of the Council or board
has authorized the disclosure.
(J) No Council member or member of a board or commission may use the member's official
authority or influence to compel a person to apply for membership in or become a member of a
political organization, to pay or promise a political contribution or take part in political activity.
(K) No Council member or member of a board or commission may make any public statement or
offer any opinion in the member's official capacity without the prior written approval of the City
Council. Any Council member or member of a board or commission who offers a public statement
or opinion while using the member's title or official position without the prior written permission of
the City Council shall do so in a manner which makes clear that the statement or opinion is the
member's personal statement or opinion, not that of the City Council or board or commission.
(L) No Council member or member of any board or commission may intentionally violate a
provision of state law or city ordinance.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2011)
City Organizations 20C
§ 30.77 DISCLOSURES
(A) Within 30 days after taking the oath of office or being appointed to a position, each Council
member and member of a city board or commission must file a report with the City Administrator
or designee, on a form prepared by the staff, which contains the information specified below for the
preceding year. Subsequently, each member must file a supplemental report on the first day of
February of each year in office covering the preceding calendar year and within 30 days after any
change in information provided under division (5) below. The information must be for the
member, the member's spouse, and all minor children (collectively referred to below as member):
(1) A business entity in which the member is an officer, director, member, or employee, and
the position held;
(2) A business entity in which the member has an ownership interest, either legal or equitable,
greater than 5%;
(3) Sources of income, compensation, fees, or commissions that are received from
employment, for services rendered, or from pensions, except the employment of minor children;
(4) Non-profit organizations in which the member serves on the governing body, and the
position held, except if serving in that capacity as the city's representative; and
(5) Real propertywithin the city owned by the member or in which the member has a beneficial
interest and that has an assessed valuation in excess of $10,000. The member's homestead
need not be included.
(B) The term BUSINESS ENTITY includes any business, proprietorship, firm, partnership, person
in representative or fiduciary capacity, association, venture, trust or corporation.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2011)
§ 30.78 ADVISOR OPINIONS
Any Council member or member of a board or commission may, when the member has a doubt
about the applicability of this code of ethics to a particular situation and with the prior approval of
the City Council, seek an advisory opinion on the matter from the City Attorney.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2011)
20D Cokato - Administration
§ 30.79 HEARING
(A) The City Council may hold a hearing after receiving a written complaint questioning adherence
to this code of ethics or alleging a conflict of interest or failure to file a required disclosure statement
or may do so on the Council's own initiative. At the hearing, the member accused must have the
opportunity to be heard.
(B) A hearing may be held only if the City Council determines, upon advice of legal counsel for the
city:
(1) That the allegations rise to the level of a violation of this code of ethics or to the level of a
legally recognized conflict of interest; and
(2) That the complaint has been lodged in good faith and not for an impermissible purpose
such as delay or harassment.
(C) If after the hearing, the City Council finds that a conflict of interest, failure to file a required
disclosure, or violation of this code of ethics or of a legally recognized conflict of interest does exist,
the City Council may take whatever action it deems appropriate, including referring the matter for
criminal prosecution, directing a member not to participate in a decision, or removing an appointed
member of an advisory board or commission from office. No Council member or member of a
board or commission may participate as a member of the City Council or board or commission in
any hearing or decision involving any matter in which the member is the subject of the complaint.
(Ord. passed 11-14-2011)
CHAPTER 31: CIVIL EMERGENCIES AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
Volunteer Ambulance Service
31.01 Definitions
31.02 Purpose
31.03 Volunteer ambulance service established
31.04 Appointment
31.05 Duties of Director
31.06 Practice sessions
31.07 Assistant Director
31.08 Ambulance attendant qualifications
31.09 Compensation
31.10 Establishment of rates
31.11 Ambulance Fund established
31.12 Records
31.13 Equipment requirements
31.14 Availability of service
31.15 Licensing
31.16 Interference with service
Emergency Management
31.30 Policy and purpose
31.31 Definitions
31.32 Establishment of emergency management organization
31.33 Powers and duties of Director
31.34 Local emergencies
31.35 Emergency regulations
31.36 Emergency management a government function
31.37 Participation in labor disputes or politics
31.99 Penalty
21
22 Cokato - Administration
VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE SERVICE
§ 31.01 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates
or requires a different meaning.
AMBULANCE - A vehicle that is designed or intended for use in providing transportation of
wounded, injured, sick, invalid or incapacitated human beings, or expectant mothers.
ATTENDANT - A trained and/or qualified individual responsible for the operation of an
ambulance and the care of the patients whether or not the attendant also serves as driver.
(Prior Code, § 212.01)
§ 31.02 PURPOSE
This subchapter is for the purpose of providing adequate transportation for the sick and injured and
promoting the public health, safety, comfort and welfare of the citizens of the Cokato area.
(Prior Code, § 212.02)
§ 31.03 VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE SERVICE ESTABLISHED
There is hereby established a volunteer ambulance service for the City of Cokato, to provide
adequate provisions for the transportation of the sick and injured to and from hospitals, asylums,
medical centers or institutions where proper treatment and assistance may be administered; and it
shall consist of its members, including a Director, Assistant Director and three supervisors.
(Prior Code, § 212.03)
§ 31.04 APPOINTMENT
(A) The Ambulance Director, Assistant Director, and Secretary-Treasurer shall be appointed
annually by the City Council. Any member in good standing of the ambulance service may apply
for any of the officer positions by announcing their intentions at or before the November ambulance
meeting. The City Council will consider experience, skills, training and recommendations from the
volunteer membership of the ambulance. If more than one individual has expressed interest in a
position, the City Council as a whole may consider holding interviews of the interested parties or
may instruct the personnel committee to conduct the interviews. Each officer shall comply with
department standards and policies and may be removed by the City Council for just cause after a
public hearing.
(B) The incoming Ambulance Director shall appoint one to two training officers to oversee the
annual training schedule for the membership. The Ambulance Director shall appoint new members
to
Civil Emergencies and Emergency Management 23
the service after reviewing applications, references, and interviewing interested candidates, subject
to confirmation by the Council. Volunteer members of the ambulance service shall comply with
department standards and policies and may be removed by the City Council for just cause after a
public hearing.
(Prior Code, § 212.04) (Am. Ord. 03-2012, passed 10-9-2012)
§ 31.05 DUTIES OF DIRECTOR
(A) The ambulance service shall be directed and supervised by the Director whose duty it shall be
to keep all ambulance equipment in order, to establish rules and regulations for the use and operation
of the same and ensure that the rules and regulations are duly executed and otherwise do and perform
with the assistance of the additional personnel all actions necessary to accomplish the object and
aims of this subchapter.
(B) The Director shall make a report annually to the Council at its meeting in January, as to the
condition of the equipment and needs of the ambulance service. He or she may submit additional
reports and recommendations at any meeting of the Council, and he or she shall report each
suspension by him or her of a member of the ambulance service at the first meeting of the Council
following the suspension. He or she shall be responsible for the proper training and discipline of
the members of the ambulance service and may suspend any member for refusal or neglect to obey
orders pending final action by the Council on his or her discharge or retention.
(Prior Code, § 212.05)
§ 31.06 PRACTICE SESSIONS
It shall be the duty of the Director to hold adequate training for the ambulance service and give the
attendants instruction in approved methods of emergency health care.
(Prior Code, § 212.06)
§ 31.07 ASSISTANT DIRECTOR
In the absence or disability of the Director, the Assistant Director shall perform all the functions and
exercise all the authority of the Director.
(Prior Code, § 212.07)
§ 31.08 AMBULANCE ATTENDANT QUALIFICATIONS
(A) The ambulance attendants shall be able-bodied, not less than 18 years of age and must pass
satisfactorily a physical examination.
(B) They shall possess the 81 Hour Emergency Health Care Certificate or its equivalent (except that
the Director may, at his or her discretion, waive this requirement if an applicant possesses a current
Red
24 Cokato - Administration
Cross Advanced First-Aid Certificate and has other significant professional attributes) and possess
a current Minnesota driver’s license.
(Prior Code, § 212.08)
§ 31.09 COMPENSATION
The members and officers of the ambulance service shall receive compensation as determined by
the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 212.09)
§ 31.10 ESTABLISHMENT OF RATES
The Director shall establish a schedule of charges for the use of the ambulance that will pay all costs
incurred in the operation of the ambulance service, subject to the approval of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 212.10)
§ 31.11 AMBULANCE FUND ESTABLISHED
It is hereby established and the City Clerk-Treasurer shall maintain a fund to be known as the
Ambulance Fund, a record of which shall be kept by the City Clerk-Treasurer, into which shall be
paid all monies received from the use of the ambulance and from which all disbursements shall be
paid.
(Prior Code, § 212.11)
§ 31.12 RECORDS
Upon completion of each ambulance run, the attendants on duty shall complete the Emergency
Medical Service Record form or its equivalent, as prescribed by the Minnesota Department of
Health.
(Prior Code, § 212.12)
§ 31.13 EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS
The ambulance, when in service, shall be equipped with and carry at least the minimum equipment
recommended by the American College of Surgeons.
(Prior Code, § 212.13)
§ 31.14 AVAILABILITY OF SERVICE
The ambulance service shall offer ambulance service 24 hours per day every day of the year.
(Prior Code, § 212.14)
Civil Emergencies and Emergency Management 25
§ 31.15 LICENSING
The ambulance shall possess a valid license issued by the Minnesota State Board of Health.
(Prior Code, § 212.15)
§ 31.16 INTERFERENCE WITH SERVICE
It shall be unlawful for any person to give, or make cause to be made a call for ambulance service
without probable cause, to neglect to obey any reasonable order of a driver or attendants at an
ambulance call or to interfere with the ambulance service’s discharge of its duties. Any person
convicted of violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 212.16) Penalty, see § 31.99.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
§ 31.30 POLICY AND PURPOSE
Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of unprecedented size and
destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado, blizzard, destructive winds or other natural causes, or
from sabotage, hostile action or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure; and in
order to insure that preparations of this city will be adequate to deal with those disasters, and
generally, to provide for the common defense and to protect the public peace, health and safety, and
to preserve the lives and property of the people of this city, it is hereby found and declared to be
necessary:
(A) To establish a city emergency management organization responsible for city planning and
preparation for emergency government operations in time of disasters;
(B) To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies and disasters;
(C) To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this city and other political subdivisions of
this state and of other states with respect to the carrying out of emergency-preparedness functions;
and
(D) To comply with the provisions of M.S. § 12.25, as it may be amended from time to time, which
requires that each political subdivision of the state shall establish a local organization for emergency
management.
26 Cokato - Administration
§ 31.31 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
DISASTER - A situation which creates an immediate and serious impairment to the health and
safety of any person, or a situation which has resulted in or is likely to result in catastrophic loss
to property, and for which traditional sources of relief and assistance within the affected area
are unable to repair or prevent the injury or loss.
EMERGENCY - An unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for immediate action
to prevent from developing or occurring.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT - The preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency
functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent,
minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, tornado
and other acts of nature, or from sabotage, hostile action or from industrial hazardous material
mishaps. These functions include, without limitation, fire-fighting services, police services,
emergency medical services, engineering, warning services, communications, radiological and
chemical, evacuation, congregate care, emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned
functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other functions
related to civil protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental for carrying
out the foregoing functions. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT includes those activities
sometimes referred to as "civil defense" functions.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES - The total personnel resources engaged in citylevel
emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or any
rule or order thereunder. This includes personnel from city departments, authorized volunteers
and private organizations and agencies.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION - The staff responsible for coordinating
city-level planning and preparation for disaster response. This organization provides city
liaison and coordination with federal, state and local jurisdictions relative to disaster
preparedness activities and assures implementation of federal and state program requirements.
§ 31.32 ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION
There is hereby created within the city government an emergency management organization which
shall be under the supervision and control of the City Emergency Management Director, called the
Director. The Director shall be appointed by the City Council for an indefinite term and may be
removed by the Council at any time. The Director shall serve with a salary as established by the
City Council and shall be paid his or her necessary expenses. The Director shall have direct
responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the emergency preparedness
organization, subject to the direction and control of the Council.
Civil Emergencies and Emergency Management 27
§ 31.33 POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR
(A) The Director shall represent the city on any regional or state conference for emergency
management. The Director shall develop proposed mutual aid agreements with other political
subdivisions of the state for reciprocal emergency management aid and assistance in an emergency
too great to be dealt with unassisted, and shall present these agreements to the Council for its action.
These arrangements shall be consistent with the State Emergency Plan.
(B) The Director shall make studies and surveys of the human resources, industries, resources and
facilities of the city as deemed necessary to determine their adequacy for emergency management
and to plan for their most efficient use in time of an emergency or disaster. The Director shall
establish the economic stabilization systems and measures, service staffs, boards and sub-boards
required, in accordance with state and federal plans and directions subject to the approval of the
Mayor.
(C) The Director shall prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for the emergency preparedness of
the city and shall present the plan to the Council for its approval. When the Council has approved
the plan, it shall be the duty of all city agencies and all emergency preparedness forces of the city to
perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. The plan may be modified in
like manner from time to time. The Director shall coordinate the emergency management activities
of the city to the end that they shall be consistent and fully integrated with the emergency plans of
the federal government and the state and correlated with emergency plans of the county and other
political subdivisions within the state.
(D) In accordance with the State and City Emergency Plan, the Director shall institute training
programs, public information programs and conduct practice warning alerts and emergency
exercises as may be necessary to assure prompt and effective operation of the City Emergency Plan
when a disaster occurs.
(E) The Director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing
departments and agencies of the city to the maximum extent practicable. The officers and personnel
of all city departments and agencies shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate with and
extend services and facilities to the city’s emergency management organization and to the Governor
upon request. The head of each department or agency in cooperation with the Director shall be
responsible for the planning and programming of those emergency activities as will involve the
utilization of the facilities of the department or agency.
(F) The Director shall, in cooperation with those city departments and agencies affected, assist in
the organizing, recruiting and training of emergency management personnel, which may be required
on a volunteer basis to carry out the emergency plans of the city and state. To the extent that
emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or agency for emergencies,
they shall be assigned to the departments or agencies and shall be under the administration and
control of the department or agency.
(G) Consistent with the state emergency services law, the Director shall coordinate the activity of
municipal emergency management organizations within the city and assist in establishing and
conducting
28 Cokato - Administration
training programs as required to assure emergency operational capability in the several services as
provided by M.S. § 12.25, as it may be amended from time to time.
(H) The Director shall carry out all orders, rules and regulations issued by the Governor with
reference to emergency management.
(I) The Director shall prepare and submit reports on emergency preparedness activities when
requested by the Mayor.
§ 31.34 LOCAL EMERGENCIES
(A) A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem. It shall not be
continued for a period in excess of three days except by or with the consent of the Council. Any
order, or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local emergency shall be given prompt
and general publicity and shall be filed in the office of the City Administrator.
(B) A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary portions of the response and recovery
aspects of applicable local or inter-jurisdictional disaster plans, and may authorize aid and assistance
thereunder.
(C) No jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local emergency unless expressly authorized
by law or the agreement under which the agency functions. However, an inter-jurisdictional
disaster agency shall provide aid and services in accordance with the agreement under which it
functions.
Penalty, see § 31.99
§ 31.35 EMERGENCY REGULATIONS
(A) Whenever necessary, to meet a declared emergency or to prepare for an emergency for which
adequate regulations have not been adopted by the Governor or the Council, the Council may by
resolution promulgate regulations, consistent with applicable federal or state law or regulation,
respecting: the conduct of persons and the use of property during emergencies; the repair,
maintenance and safeguarding of essential public services, emergency health, fire and safety
regulations, drills or practice periods required for preliminary training, and all other matters which
are required to protect public safety, health and welfare in declared emergencies.
(B) Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing; shall be dated; shall refer to the
particular emergency to which it pertains, if so limited, and shall be filed in the office of the City
Administrator. A copy shall be kept posted and available for public inspection during business
hours. Notice of the existence of these regulations and their availability for inspection at the City
Administrator’s Office shall be conspicuously posted at the front of the City Hall or other
headquarters of the city or at other places in the affected area as the Council shall designate in the
resolution. By resolution, the Council may modify or rescind a regulation.
Civil Emergencies and Emergency Management 29
(C) The Council may rescind any regulation by resolution at any time. If not sooner rescinded,
every regulation shall expire at the end of 30 days after its effective date or at the end of the
emergency to which it relates, whichever comes first. Any resolution, rule or regulation
inconsistent with an emergency regulation promulgated by the Council shall be suspended during
the period of time and to the extent conflict exists.
(D) During a declared emergency, the city is, under the provisions of M.S. § 12.37, as it may be
amended from time to time and notwithstanding any statutory provision to the contrary, empowered,
through its Council, acting within or without the corporate limits of the city, to enter into contracts
and incur obligations necessary to combat the disaster by protecting the health and safety of persons
and property and providing emergency assistance to the victims of a disaster. The city may exercise
these powers in the light of the exigencies of the disaster without compliance with the
time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of
public work, entering rental equipment agreements, purchase of supplies and materials, limitations
upon tax levies and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds, including, but not limited to,
publication of resolutions, publication of calls for bids, provisions of personnel laws and rules,
provisions relating to low bids and requirement for bids.
Penalty, see § 31.99
§ 31.36 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT A GOVERNMENT FUNCTION
All functions and activities relating to emergency management are hereby declared to be
governmental functions. The provisions of this section shall not affect the right of any person to
receive benefits to which he or she would otherwise be entitled under this resolution or under the
worker’s compensation law, or under any pension law, nor the right of any person to receive any
benefits or compensation under any act of Congress.
§ 31.37 PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTES OR POLITICS
The emergency management organization shall not participate in any form of political activity, nor
shall it be employed directly or indirectly for political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor
dispute.
§ 31.99 PENALTY
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed
shall be subject to § 10.99.
(B) Any person who violates any provision of §§ 31.30 through 31.37 or any regulation adopted
thereunder relating to acts, omissions or conduct other than official acts of city employees or officers
is guilty of a misdemeanor.
30 Cokato - Administration
CHAPTER 32: PLANS AND POLICIES
Section
Local Improvement Policy
32.01 (Reserved)
32.02 Classification of projects
32.03 Financing Class B and C improvements
32.04 Assessment regulations for Class B improvements
32.05 Assessment rules for Class C improvements
32.06 Special rules
32.07 Federal, state and county aid use
32.08 Branch service lines
32.09 Partial prepayment
32.10 Certification of assessments
32.11 Permanent Improvement Revolving Fund
32.12 Assessment manual
City Policies
32.30 Abandoned property
Cross-reference:
Abandoned vehicles, see Chapter 92
31
32 Cokato - Administration
LOCAL IMPROVEMENT POLICY
§ 32.01 (RESERVED)
§ 32.02 CLASSIFICATION OF PROJECTS
(A) In general. Public improvements are divided into the three classes specified in the following
divisions according to their respective benefit to the whole city and to property specially served by
the improvement and taking into account past city practice.
(B) Class A.
(1) Class A improvements are those which are of general benefit to the city at-large, including:
(a) Public buildings, except a building which is part of an improvement described in one
of the following divisions;
(b) Any public park, playground or recreational facility;
(c) The installation and maintenance of street lighting systems; and
(d) Any improvement not described in M.S. § 429.021, Subdivision 1, as it may be
amended from time to time.
(2) Any Class A improvement shall be financed from general city funds and not from special
assessments.
(C) Class B. Class B improvements are those which are of both general benefit and special benefit
to abutting or nearby property. Class B improvements include:
(1) Trunk water mains larger than six inches;
(2) Trunk sanitary sewer mains larger than eight inches;
(3) Permanently surfacing arterial streets;
(4) Storm sewers; and
(5) The construction of off-street parking facilities.
(D) Class C. Class C improvements are those which are primarily if not exclusively of benefit to
property abutting or in the area of the improvement, including:
(1) The construction of sidewalks;
(2) The construction of water mains no larger than six inches in diameter;
Plans and Policies 33
(3) The construction of sanitary sewer mains no larger than eight inches in diameter;
(4) The construction of curbs and gutters;
(5) Grading, graveling, oiling and applying non-permanent surfacing to streets;
(6) Permanently surfacing residential streets; and
(7) The abatement of nuisances and the draining of swamps, marshes and ponds on public or
private property and filling the same.
(Prior Code, § 303.02)
§ 32.03 FINANCING CLASS B AND C IMPROVEMENTS
(A) It is the policy of the city to finance Class B and C improvements by the methods prescribed in
§§ 32.04 through 32.06.
(B) The apportionment of the cost between benefitted property and the city at-large and the method
of levying assessments prescribed in those sections shall be followed in each case unless the Council,
by resolution, finds that, because of special circumstances stated in the resolution, a different policy
is necessary or desirable in the particular case.
(C) Any local improvement described in M.S. § 429.021, as it may be amended from time to time,
and not placed in Class A, B or C by § 32.02 shall be financed as the Council determines to be most
feasible and equitable in each case.
(Prior Code, § 303.03)
§ 32.04 ASSESSMENT REGULATIONS FOR CLASS B IMPROVEMENTS
(A) Trunk water mains and sanitary sewers. When a water or sewer main is laid across or adjacent
to unplatted property, the city shall not defer the assessment against the unplatted property if the
assessment would be made for such an improvement in the case of platted property, but the city shall
make the assessment at the time the assessment against other property is made, apportioning the
assessment against the unplatted property on the basis of area. When a trunk sewer or water main
is constructed and is to serve also as a lateral sewer or water main for abutting property, the abutting
property shall be assessed for the cost of a lateral sewer or water main of eight inches. The
assessment for the lateral shall also include the property’s share of the trunk sewer or water main.
The cost of the trunk sewer or water main in excess of the lateral assessment shall be paid for from
general revenue.
(B) Storm sewers. Twenty five percent of the cost of constructing storm sewers shall be paid by
the city from general funds. The remainder of the cost shall be assessed against the property in the
area served by the sewer on the basis of the square footage of the property. The area to be assessed
shall be determined on the basis of topographic maps and other pertinent data.
(Prior Code, § 303.04)
34 Cokato - Administration
§ 32.05 ASSESSMENT RULES FOR CLASS C IMPROVEMENTS.
(A) Sidewalks. The cost of the construction of sidewalks shall be assessed on the basis of frontage
against property abutting the side of the street on which the sidewalk is located.
(B) Water and sewer. The cost of lateral water mains not exceeding six inches in diameter and of
lateral sanitary sewer mains not exceeding eight inches in diameter shall be assessed against abutting
property on the basis of benefit. The cost of water mains to be assessed includes the service lines
if furnished, hydrants and valves. The cost of sewer mains includes lines, if furnished.
(C) Streets. The cost of construction of curbs and gutters on any street, of grading, oiling and
applying non-permanent surfacing to any street, or of applying permanent surfaces to residential
streets shall be assessed on the basis of benefit.
(D) Nuisances. The cost of abating nuisances and draining of swamps, marshes and ponds on
public or private property and filling the same shall be assessed in a manner determined by the
Council in each case to measure most equitably the benefit received by property to be assessed. The
assessment in any case may be made against non-abutting property to the extent the property is
benefitted by the improvement.
(Prior Code, § 303.05)
§ 32.06 SPECIAL RULES
(A) Corner lots. In any assessment made on the basis of frontage, except one for water or sanitary
sewer, corner lots shall be assessed for footage along the front of the lot plus one-third of the side
footage. The other two-thirds of the side footage shall be spread among all other assessed
properties. In the case of an assessment for a lateral water or sewer main, Class C corner lots shall
be assessed for the footage along the front side of the lot and shall be assessed for the footage along
the front side of the street abutting the lot unless the lot is large enough to accommodate another
building which would be benefitted by construction of the second main.
(B) Intersections. The cost of water and sewer improvements in street intersections shall be
included as part of the total assessable cost. In the case of any kind of street improvement,
intersection costs shall be paid by the city.
(C) Adjusted frontage. When the amount of an assessment is determined by frontage, an equivalent
front footage shall be determined according to the following rules when an irregular lot requires an
adjustment to maintain fairness in the assessment:
(1) Front footage shall be measured at the setback on cul-de-sacs and sharply curved streets
and irregularly shaped lots;
Plans and Policies 35
(2) Equivalent front footage shall be determined by dividing the square footage of the lot by
the general lot depth of the subdivision for pie-shaped lots and irregular shaped lots where other
rules do not apply;
(3) Where frontage curves so greatly as to give a general appearance of a corner, the lot shall
be considered a corner lot and equivalent front footage, as well as side footage where required,
determined on the basis of an irregularly shaped lot; and
(4) Where a lot consists of a combination of rectangular and pie-shaped or irregular portions,
the equivalent front footage shall be determined as the sum of the straight front footage plus the
remainder in accordance with applicable rules.
(Prior Code, § 303.06)
§ 32.07 FEDERAL, STATE AND COUNTY AID USE
If the city receives financial assistance from the federal government, the state or the county to defray
a portion of the cost of a street improvement project, the aid shall be used first to reduce the share
of the project cost which would be met from general city funds according to the assessment formula
contained in this subchapter. If the aid is more than the amount of the improvement cost to be borne
by the city, the remainder of the aid so received shall be used to reduce each individual assessment
proportionately.
(Prior Code, § 303.07)
§ 32.08 BRANCH SERVICE LINES
Water and sewer lines shall be installed from the main to the front property line of property to be
served before any permanent street surfacing is constructed in the street. If any property owner
fails to put in the water and sewer service lines within 30 days after notice from the city, the City
Council may proceed to have water and sewer service installed and to assess the cost against the
property.
(Prior Code, § 303.08)
§ 32.09 PARTIAL PREPAYMENT
(A) After the adoption by the City Council of the assessment roll in any local improvement
proceeding, the owner of any property specially assessed in the proceeding may, prior to the
certification of the assessment or the first installment to the County Auditor, pay to the city any
portion of the assessment not less than $100.
(B) The remaining unpaid balance shall be spread over the period of time established by the Council
for installment payment of the assessment.
(Prior Code, § 303.09)
36 Cokato - Administration
§ 32.10 CERTIFICATION OF ASSESSMENTS
After the adoption of any special assessment by the Council, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall transmit
a certified duplicate of the assessment roll with each installment, including interest, set forth
separately to the County Auditor to be extended on the proper tax lists of the county.
(Prior Code, 303.10)
§ 32.11 PERMANENT IMPROVEMENT REVOLVING FUND
(A) Establishment. There is hereby established a permanent improvement revolving fund of the
city to be held and administered by the City Clerk-Treasurer, separate and apart from all other funds
of the city, for the purpose of financing local improvements.
(B) Source of funds. The fund shall be a permanent fund of the city and the monies necessary for
its maintenance shall be provided by taxation, by the appropriation of available monies from other
funds of the city and/or by the issuance and sale of permanent improvement revolving fund bonds
of the city as deemed necessary from time to time by the Council.
(C) Disposition of funds. Monies in the fund shall be used only as directed by resolution of the
Council for the purpose of advancing to local improvement funds the cost of improvements for
which assessments are to be levied. All monies so advanced to an improvement fund shall be
restored as soon as sufficient monies are received in the improvement fund, together with interest at
a rate fixed by the Council during the time for which the monies have been so furnished.
(D) Investment. Whenever there are monies in the fund not immediately needed for local
improvements, the monies shall be invested by the City Clerk-Treasurer under the direction of the
Council in any securities authorized for investment of municipal sinking funds by law.
(E) Transfer of surplus. When the fund accumulates encumbered monies in excess of any amounts
reasonably anticipated to be needed for local improvement fund advances, the Council may, by
resolution adopted by a four-fifths vote, declare any part of the excess to be surplus and transfer it
to the general fund.
(Prior Code, § 303.11)
§ 32.12 ASSESSMENT MANUAL
The City Clerk-Treasurer shall prepare an administrative manual specifying more detailed
procedures for the conduct of local improvements and the levy of special assessments in
supplementation of this subchapter and consistent therewith. Upon approval of the Council by
resolution, the manual shall be used with this subchapter in the conduct of all local improvement
proceedings to which they apply by their terms.
(Prior Code, § 303.12)
Plans and Policies 37
CITY POLICIES
§ 32.30 ABANDONED PROPERTY
(A) Procedure. All abandoned property, except motor vehicles regulated under Chapter 92 of this
Code of Ordinances, lawfully coming into possession of the city shall be disposed of as provided in
this chapter.
(B) Storage. The department of the city acquiring possession of the property shall arrange for its
storage. If city facilities for storage are unavailable or inadequate, the department may arrange for
storage at privately owned facilities.
(C) Claimed by owner. The owner may claim the property by exhibiting satisfactory proof of
ownership and paying the city any storage or maintenance costs incurred by it. A receipt for the
property shall be obtained upon release to the owner.
(D) Sale. If the property remains unclaimed in the possession of the city for 60 days, the property
shall be sold to the highest bidder at a public auction conducted by the City Clerk-Treasurer after
two weeks published notice setting forth the time and place of the sale and the property to be sold.
(E) Disposition of proceeds. The proceeds of the sale shall be placed in the general fund of the
city. If the former owner makes application and furnishes satisfactory proof of ownership within
six months of the sale, he or she shall be paid the proceeds of the sale of his or her property less the
cost of storage and the proportionate part of the cost of published notice and other costs of the sale.
(Prior Code, § 208.02) (Am. Ord. 07-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
38 Cokato - Administration
CHAPTER 33: PERSONNEL POLICY
Section
33.01 Personnel Policy
§ 33.01 PERSONNEL POLICY
The City Council may adopt such personnel policies as it deems advisable.
(Prior Code, Chapter 2, Part 7) (Res. 93-22, passed 12-13-1993; Res. 93-23, passed 12-13-1993;
Res. 98-17, passed 9-24-1998; Res. 98-18, passed 9-24-1998; Res. 98-20, passed 11-9-1998; Res.
98-25, passed 12-7-1998; Res. 2006-04, passed 11-13-2006)
39
40 Cokato - Administration
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter
50. GENERAL PROVISIONS
51. WATER AND SEWER
52. GARBAGE
1
2 Cokato - Public Works
CHAPTER 50: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
50.01 Trunk sanitary sewer and water main fees as a condition to subdivision approval
50.02 Water and sewer access charges for new multi-family and commercial projects
50.03 Delinquent utility accounts
50.99 Penalty
§ 50.01 TRUNK SANITARY SEWER AND WATER MAIN FEES AS A CONDITION TO
SUBDIVISION APPROVAL
Trunk sanitary sewer and water main fees. As a condition to subdivision approval, subdividers
shall pay both a trunk sanitary sewer fee and a trunk water main fee to the city to fund the sanitary
sewer and water main improvements required by the proposed new development. The city shall
establish the trunk fees by ordinance based on the subdivision’s gross acreage and shall periodically
update the fees to account for changes in costs and revenues. The city shall incorporate these trunk
fees into a development agreement with the subdivider.
§ 50.02 WATER AND SEWER ACCESS CHARGES FOR NEW MULTI-FAMILY AND
COMMERCIAL PROJECTS
(A) Any facility not included on the list in the table below will receive an access charge determined
on a case-by-case basis by the City Administrator and City Council pursuant to a schedule
established by ordinance.
(B) One equivalent access charge equals 250 gallons of daily wastewater flow.
(C) Commercial and industrial units shall be assigned a minimum of one access charge.
(D) Sewer access charge for buildings or premises presently connected to the wastewater treatment
plant, the use of which is changed or expanded, or is to be changed or expanded in such manner as
to significantly increase the output of sewage therefrom, shall be determined by applying the
respective provision above to the addition and/or expanded uses therein.
3
4 Cokato - Public Works
(E) The sewer access charge shall be subject to review and establishment by the City Council.
(F) All access charges will be incorporated with each new building permit issued by the city.
Type Parameter Equivalent Charge
Apartments/condominium Per unit 0.5
Automobile service Two service bays 1.0
Barber shop Per unit 1.0
Car wash (self service) One stall 3.0
Car wash (service station) One stall 3.0
Churches Per 275 seats 1.0
Elementary school Per 18 students 1.0
General office building 2,400 square feet or less 1.0
Laundromats Regular water volume for cycle
time (eight per)
3.0
Middle school Per 15 students 1.0
Motel/hotel Every two rooms 1.0
Movie theater Per 64 seats 1.0
Nursing home Every three beds 0.5
Restaurants Per 22 seats 1.0
Retail store 3,000 square feet 1.0
Secondary school Per 14 students 1.0
Swimming pools (private
outdoor)
Per 900 square feet 1.0
Townhouses/twin
homes/duplexes
Per unit 1.0
Warehouse/manufacturing Per 14 employees 1.0
(Res. 1997-10, passed 6-9-1997)
General Provisions 5
§ 50.03 DELINQUENT UTILITY ACCOUNTS
(A) The City Clerk-Treasurer and Deputy Clerk, under the direction of the City Administrator and
Council, shall be responsible that all charges for water, sewer, garbage and recycling services will
be due each month and considered delinquent 30 days thereafter. The city will insure collection of
each utility account promptly. A late fee will be imposed not later than the third day of each month
unless the due date falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. If so, the late fee will be imposed
no later than the first day of each month which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday.
(B) The City Clerk-Treasurer shall also be responsible to insure preparations of an assessment roll
for all delinquent utility accounts to include sanitary sewer, water, garbage and recycling expenses
whereby satisfactory arrangements for payment have not been made. All delinquent utility
accounts in excess of 60 days past due on October 15 of each year shall be delivered to the City
Council at the first regular meeting in November. Each delinquent account shall require the entire
total balance due with 10% penalty added for certification to the Wright County Auditor for
collection with the ad valorem property taxes. The action is optional for the City Council in
addition to termination of services and may be subsequent to taking legal action to collect delinquent
utility accounts.
§ 50.99 PENALTY
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
6 Cokato - Public Works
CHAPTER 51: WATER AND SEWER
Section
General Provisions
51.001 Water and Sewer Departments
51.002 Use of water or sewer system restricted
51.003 Applications for service
51.004 Service connection permits
51.005 Accounting, billing and collections
51.006 Procedure for termination of service
Water System
51.020 General water regulations
51.021 Meters
51.022 Plumbing regulations
51.023 Rates
51.024 Access charges
Sanitary Sewer System
51.040 Building sewers and connections
51.041 Stormwater discharge
51.042 Sewer connection required
51.043 Conflicting provisions
51.044 Sewer rates
51.045 Definitions
51.046 Annual review of user charge system
51.047 Industrial users
51.048 Harmful discharges
51.049 Surcharge for wastes containing BOS and SS that exceed normal concentrations
51.050 Industrial pretreatment
51.051 Service agreements
51.052 Prohibited toxins
51.053 Control manholes
51.054 Extension of service
51.055 Inspection of system
7
8 Cokato - Public Works
Individual Sewage Disposal Systems
51.070 Definitions
51.071 Restrictions
Storm Drainage Districts
51.085 Storm drainage districts
51.086 South Central Storm Drainage District
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001 WATER AND SEWER DEPARTMENTS
There are hereby established a separate Water Department and a separate Sewer Department, which
shall be under the supervision of the Public Works Director. The Departments shall be responsible
for the management, maintenance, care and operation of their respective systems and facilities.
(Prior Code, § 401.01) (Ord. passed 7-15-1991; Am. Ord. 04-2010, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 51.002 USE OF WATER OR SEWER SYSTEM RESTRICTED
No person shall make or use any water or sewer service installation connected to the city water or
sewer system except pursuant to application and permit as provided in this chapter. No person shall
make or use any such installation contrary to the regulatory provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 401.02) (Am. Ord. 04-2010, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 51.003 APPLICATIONS FOR SERVICE
(A) Procedure. Applications for a water and/or sewer connection shall be made to the City
Administrator or designee on forms furnished by the city. By signature, the applicant shall agree
to conform to this chapter and to rules and regulations that may be established by the city as
conditions for the use of the water and sewer systems.
(B) Fees or deposits. Application for a service connection shall be made by the owner of the
property to be served or by the agent. The applicant shall, at the time of making the application,
pay to the city the amount of fees or deposits required.
(Prior Code, § 401.03) (Am. Ord. 04-2010, passed 7-12-2010)
Water and Sewer 9
§ 51.004 SERVICE CONNECTION PERMITS
(A) Permit required; fees. No connection shall be made for water or sanitary sewer system without
a permit from the city. The City Council shall by ordinance establish the fees for said permits.
These fees shall be required under divisions (B), (C) and (D) below.
(B) Connection fees. When a connection requires installation of a service line from the main to the
property line, a permit is required from the city. The applicant may provide for the installation of
a service line. The applicant shall be responsible for the cost of making necessary connections, taps
and installation of the pipes, appurtenances and necessary street repairs to provide service to the
property with inspection by the city.
(C) Certification. No permit shall be issued unless the City Administrator or designee certifies to
the truth of one of the following, or the payment required under division (D) below is made:
(1) That the lot or tract to be served has been assessed for the cost of construction of the main
with which the connection is made or that proceedings for levying the assessment have been or
will be commenced in due course; or
(2) That the cost of construction of the main has been paid by the developer or builder platting
the lot or tract; or
(3) That, if neither of the foregoing is true, a sum equal to 110% of the cost of constructing the
main has been paid to the city in cash.
(D) Additional connection fee. If no such certificate can be issued, the applicant shall pay an
additional connection fee equal to the portion of the cost of construction of the main upon the same
basis as any assessment previously levied against other property for the main. The determination
shall be made by the City Administrator or designee. If no such assessment has been levied, the
assessable cost shall be determined upon the basis of the uniform charge that may have been or will
be charged for similar connection with the main.
(Prior Code, § 401.04) (Am. Ord. 04-2010, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 51.005 ACCOUNTING, BILLING AND COLLECTIONS
(A) Responsibility for accounts. Responsibility for accounts shall be carried in the name of the
owner. The owner shall be liable for the cost of all services to the property, whether occupying the
property or not and any charges unpaid shall be a lien upon the property.
(B) Nonresident accounts. Customers whose premises are located primarily outside the corporate
limits of the city shall be subject to a surcharge upon the total amount of their utility bill. The City
Council shall by ordinance establish the amount of the surcharge.
10 Cokato - Public Works
(C) Multiple units. Whenever two or more residential, commercial or industrial premises with
separate plumbing facilities are located in the same building and served through one service
connection for each utility and a water meter, each unit over and above the first shall be subject to
separate surcharges for water and sewer service. When similar circumstances exist where there is
no water meter, each unit shall be considered a separate account and no surcharge under this division
will apply. The City Council shall by ordinance establish the amount of the surcharges.
(D) Bills for service. All accounts receiving services shall be charged for the value of those
services as determined in this chapter. Water and sewer shall be billed together. Bills shall be
mailed monthly by first class mail on the date established by the City Council.
(E) Partial bills; refunds. Accounts that do not receive utility service for the entire month will be
prorated. When an account has been overpaid, all excess monies will be applied toward future bills.
No cash refunds will be made except in the case of a final bill on a closed account.
(F) Delinquent accounts. All charges for water and sewer service shall be due on the monthly due
date specified for the respective account and shall be considered delinquent the first day of the month
following the initial mailing. The city shall endeavor to collect delinquent accounts promptly.
Delinquent accounts shall be subject to monthly interest charged against outstanding amounts. The
City Council shall by ordinance establish the rate of interest to be charged. In any case where
satisfactory arrangements for the payment have not been made, the Public Works Director may, after
the procedural requirements of § 51.006 have been complied with, discontinue water service to the
delinquent customer by removing the meter and/or shutting off the water at the curb stop box.
When water service to any premises has been discontinued, service shall not be restored except upon
the payment of all delinquent charges, interest and fees. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall prepare an
assessment roll of all delinquent accounts, where satisfactory arrangements for payment have not
been made, that are in excess of 30 days past due on October 1 of each year. The assessment roll
shall be delivered to the Council for adoption at its first meeting of November of each year for
certification to the County Auditor for collection as other taxes are collected. Such action is
optional and may be subsequent to taking legal action to collect delinquent accounts.
(G) Cold Weather Rule. Pursuant to M.S. § 216B.097, as it may be amended from time to time, no
water service of a residential customer shall be discontinued if the disconnection affects the primary
heat source for the residential unit during the period between October 15 and April 15, the residential
customer has declared their inability to pay with a household income at 185% of the federal poverty
level, and such has been documented by the customer to the city. The customer’s account must be
current for the billing period immediately prior to October 15 or be making reasonably current
monthly payments. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall between August 15 and October 15 of each
year, notify all residential customers of these ordinance amendment provisions.
(Prior Code, § 401.05) (Ord. passed 5-13-1991; Am. Ord. passed 7-15-1991; Am. Ord. 04-2010,
passed 7-12-2010; Am. Ord. 02-2012, passed 10-9-2012)
Water and Sewer 11
§ 51.006 PROCEDURE FOR TERMINATION OF SERVICE
Water shall not be shut off for delinquency under § 51.005(F) or for a violation of rules and
regulations affecting utility service until notice and an opportunity for a hearing have first been given
the owner and/or occupant of the premises involved. The notice shall be served by United States
mail, postage prepaid and shall state that if payment is not made before a date stated in the notice
but not less than 20 days after the date on which the notice is given, the water supply to the premises
will be terminated. The notice shall also state that the occupant may, before such date, demand a
hearing on the matter, in which case the supply will not be cut off until after the hearing is held. If
the customer requests a hearing before the date specified, a hearing shall be held on the matter by a
panel consisting of the City Administrator and any two Council Members at least seven days after
the date on which the request is made. The panel shall consider all circumstances, including the
amount owed, previous efforts to collect amounts owed, any applicable statutory provisions and the
likely effect on the health and safety of the occupants of the building if water service is terminated.
If, as a result of the hearing, the panel finds that the amount claimed to be owing is actually due and
unpaid and that there is no reason why the water supply of the delinquent customer may not be shut
off in accordance with this chapter, the city may terminate service.
(Prior Code, § 401.06) (Ord. passed 5-13-1991; Am. Ord. 04-2010, passed 7-12-2010)
WATER SYSTEM
§ 51.020 GENERAL WATER REGULATIONS
(A) Interruption of service. The city may interrupt service to any water customer without notice
for necessary repairs or maintenance activities.
(B) Termination of service. The city may terminate service upon notice as provided for in § 51.006
for non-payment of charges or for violation of rules and regulations affecting water and sewer
services.
(C) Supply from one service. No more than one principal building shall be supplied from one
service connection. Whenever two or more premises with separate plumbing facilities are supplied
from one service connection with a service main, each building or part of building separately
supplied shall have a separate stop box and a separate meter or the provisions of § 51.005(C) shall
apply.
(D) Tapping mains; turning water off and on. No person except an authorized city employee shall
tap any main or other water system line, turn on or off any water supply at any curb stop box or any
gate valve without a permit. A fee shall be charged for any service that has to be turned off and
turned on due to a seasonal move.
(E) Use of fire hydrants. No person other than an authorized city employee shall operate a fire
hydrant or interfere in any way with the water system.
12 Cokato - Public Works
(F) Repair of leaks. The owner, agent or occupant shall be responsible for maintaining the service
line from the curb stop box into the building served. If leaks in the service lines are not repaired
within 24 hours after notice by the city, the city may turn the water off. The water shall not be
turned on again until a fee has been paid to the city. Whenever the flow of water is great or damage
is likely to result from the leak, the city shall turn the water off immediately upon the giving of
notice if repair is not commenced immediately. The water shall not be turned on again until repairs
are made to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director.
(G) Private water supply. No water line of the city water system shall be connected with any pump,
well or tank that is connected with any other source of water supply. Whenever any such
connection is found, the city shall notify the owner to sever the connection immediately. If the
connection is not severed within 24 hours of receipt of notice, the city shall turn off the water until
the connection is severed. Before any new connection to the city system is permitted, the
Department shall ascertain that no cross-connection will exist when the new connection is made.
(H) Restricted hours. Whenever the City Council determines that a shortage of water supply
threatens the city, it may, by resolution, impose a sprinkling ban that shall limit the times and hours
during which city water may be used for sprinkling, irrigation, car washing, air conditioning or other
specific uses. After 24-hour public notice of the ban is given by posting, publication, personal
delivery or direct mailing to each customer, no person shall use or permit water to be used in
violation thereof. Continued violation shall be cause for a discontinuance of water service as set
out in § 51.006.
(I) Permitting use by others. No person shall permit water from the city water supply to be used
for any purposes except upon his or her own premises. Anyone wishing to obtain water from a
hydrant for construction purposes shall make application to the city for the services.
(Prior Code, § 402.01) (Ord. passed 5-13-1991; Am. Ord. 04-2010, passed 7-12-2010) Penalty,
see § 10.99
§ 51.021 METERS
(A) Meters required. No person other than an authorized city employee shall use water from the
city water system or permit water to be drawn therefrom unless the water passes through a meter
supplied or approved by the city. Exceptions may be granted only in extraordinary circumstances
by the City Council. No person not authorized by the city shall connect, disconnect, take apart or
in any manner change or interfere with any meter or its use.
(B) Meters property of the city. Water meters shall be the property of the city and may be removed
and replaced as to type and size when deemed necessary. The City Council shall by ordinance
establish the fee for an initial meter.
(C) Maintenance. The city shall maintain and repair at its expense any meter that has become
unserviceable through ordinary wear and use and shall replace it if necessary at no cost to the
customer.
Water and Sewer 13
Where repair or replacement is made necessary by act or neglect of the owner or occupant of the
premises it serves, any city expense caused thereby shall be a charge against and collected from the
water customer.
(D) Meter reading and inspection. Authorized city employees shall have free access at reasonable
hours of the day to all parts of every building connected with the city water supply in order to read
meters and make inspections. Water meters shall be kept unobstructed and accessible at all times.
(E) Complaints; meter testing. When a customer complains that a bill for any past service is
excessive, the city shall have the meter reread upon request. If the consumer remains dissatisfied,
the meter shall be tested upon written request of the customer. If the test shows an error exceeding
5% of the water consumed, an accurate meter shall be installed, and the bill shall be adjusted
accordingly. If the test shows the meter is accurate to within 5% of the water consumed, the
customer shall be charged the cost of the testing. Such adjustment shall not extend back more than
one month from the date of the written request.
(Prior Code, § 402.02) (Am. Ord. 04-2010, passed 7-12-2010) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.022 PLUMBING REGULATIONS
(A) Service lines. Every service line shall be laid with sufficient bend to allow not less than one
foot of extra length and in such manner as to prevent rupture by settlement. The service pipe shall
be placed not less than six feet below the established grade and be so arranged as to prevent rupture
by freezing. The shutoff or other stopcock with waste valve of the size and strength required shall
be placed close to the inside wall of the building and be well protected from freezing. Copper
tubing shall be used for all services of two inches or less. Joints on copper tubing shall be as few as
possible and not more than one joint shall be used for a service up to 70 feet in length. Each joint
shall be left uncovered until inspected by the city. Every service over two inches shall be cast iron.
Connections with the mains for domestic supply shall be at least three-quarters of an inch.
(B) Curb stop boxes. Curb stop boxes shall be installed generally where desired by the owners of
the premises, within the public right-of-way. They shall be placed as near as possible to the curb
as on a street or within one foot of the alley line if the main is located in an alley. Curb boxes shall
not be installed in driveways. Stop boxes shall be installed at a depth of not less than six feet of the
established grade and shall be left in a vertical position when backfilling is completed. No planting
of trees or landscaping such as to obstruct the usage or repair of curb boxes shall be allowed.
(C) Water meter setting. Every water meter shall be installed in accordance with the following
provisions:
(1) The service line from the water main to the meter shall be brought through the floor in a
vertical position where the pipe enters the building. The stop and waste valve shall be 12 inches
above the floor.
14 Cokato - Public Works
(2) The bottom of the meter shall be between six and 12 inches above the finished floor line.
The meter shall be set not more than 12 inches horizontally from the inside line of the basement
wall unless a different position is approved by the city. A suitable bracket shall be provided to
support the meter in a proper vertical position and prevent noise and vibration.
(3) Each meter installation shall have a stop valve in the street side of the meter. In no case
shall more than 12 inches of service line be exposed to the point of entrance through the
basement floor of the stop and waste valve. A stop valve shall also be installed in the house
side of the meter.
(4) The service line pipe connecting with the main shall not exceed two feet under the basement
floor from the inside of the basement wall to the water meter connection.
(5) Meter setting devices for meters of one inch or less shall be of copper pipe or tubing from
the terminus of the service pipe up to and including the stop and waste valve on the building
side.
(6) Each meter shall be placed so as to be protected from freezing and other hazards.
(D) Inspections. All plumbing installations covered in this section shall be subject to inspection
and approval by the city. The Public Works Director shall make said inspections. Any violations
of this section, or other practices of this section or other practice or situation that could cause
potential harm to the water system, shall be corrected by the customer immediately upon notification.
(Prior Code, § 402.03) (Am. Ord. 04-2010, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 51.023 RATES
Each customer shall pay a minimum charge each month for an active water service. Additional
charges shall be made for water consumed. The City Council shall by ordinance establish the rates
for water services. The City Council may, by contract, establish special rates for individual
customers in extraordinary circumstances.
(Prior Code, § 402.04) (Ord. passed 5-13-1991; Am. Ord. 04-2010, passed 7-12-2010)
§ 51.024 ACCESS CHARGES
Prior to the hook-up of any service line to the city water supply system an access charge shall be
paid based upon the size of the service line. The City Council shall by ordinance establish the
amount of said access charges.
(Prior Code, § 402.05) (Am. Ord. 04-2010, passed 7-12-2010)
Water and Sewer 15
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
§ 51.040 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
(A) Unauthorized connections. No unauthorized persons shall uncover, make any connection with
or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance without first obtaining a
permit from the city and otherwise complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(B) Indemnification by owner. The owner shall bear the costs and expenses incident to the
installation and connection of the sewer service line. He or she shall indemnify the city for any loss
or damage directly, or indirectly, caused by its installation. To the extent he or she deems necessary,
the Public Works Director shall establish rules and regulations for the proper implementation of this
requirement which, when approved by the Council by resolution, shall govern the installations of
sewer service lines and connections.
(C) Requirements for sewer service lines construction. Building sewer construction shall meet the
following requirements.
(1) Every sewer service line shall be constructed of extra heavy duty cast iron pipe, cement
pipe, PVC or vitrified clay pipe or other material approved by the Public Works Director. Cast
iron pipe shall be used for a sewer service line laid within ten feet of any well. Minimum size
of sewer service line shall be four inches for cast iron or cement pipe and six inches for vitrified
clay pipe. Fittings used to change direction in a sewer service line shall be approved by the
Public Works Director.
(2) Sewer service lines shall be installed according to accepted plumbing practices and
manufacturers recommendations. All installations shall be subject to inspection and approval
by the Public Works Director.
(3) A sewer service line may be laid across an existing cesspool or septic tank if the pipe rests
on a steel reinforced concrete slab, the ends of which rest directly on a concrete block wall.
The two center sections of a cesspool cover laid parallel with each other may be used.
(4) Whenever possible, the sewer service line shall be brought to the building at an elevation
below the basement floor. No sewer service line shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of
any bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford
protection against frost. The sewer service line shall be laid at the uniform grade and in a
straight alignment insofar as possible. In any building in which any building drain is too low
to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sewage carried by the drain shall be lifted by
approved artificial means and discharged into the sewer service line.
16 Cokato - Public Works
(D) Inspection and approval. The applicant for the sewer connection permit shall notify the Public
Works Director when the sewer service line and connection is ready for inspection. The connection
shall be made under the supervision of the Public Works Director when the sewer service line and
connection is ready for inspection. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
Public Works Director or his or her representative. No backfill shall be placed until the work has
been inspected and approved.
(Prior Code, § 403.01)
§ 51.041 STORMWATER DISCHARGE
(A) Stormwater discharge.
(1) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged stormwater, surface water, ground
water, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters (hereinafter referred to as clear
water) into any sanitary sewer. No rainspout, roof drain, swimming pool discharge, cistern
overflow pipe, surface drain, sump pump or other foundation drainage shall be connected into
the sanitary sewer system. All disconnects or openings in the sanitary sewer must be closed
or repaired in an effective, workmanlike manner.
(2) All sumps must have a discharge pipe with one-inch inside diameter installed to the outside
wall of the building. The pipe attachment must be a permanent fitting such as PVC pipe with
glued fittings. The discharge must extend at least three feet outside the foundation wall and
must be directed toward the nearest storm drainage route of the property. No discharge shall
be conveyed directly toward adjacent properties or to areas that will create adverse conditions.
(3) Every person owning improved real estate that discharges clear water into the municipal
sanitary sewer system must within 30 days from the date of a written inspection request from
the city:
(a) Allow a representative of the city to inspect both the inside and outside of buildings
located on the property to confirm that there is no discharge of clear water into the sanitary
sewer system; or
(b) Furnish the city with a certificate in acceptable form from a licensed plumber which
certifies that the buildings on the property have no discharge of clear water into the sanitary
sewer system.
(c) Failure by a property owner to allow an inspection by a representative of the city or
provide the city with a certificate of compliance within 30 days from the date of the city's
inspection request shall make the property immediately subject to the surcharge provided
for in division (4) below until compliance with this section. The City Council may, by
resolution, provide for a waiver by reason of hardship from the requirements of this section.
(4) A nonrefundable surcharge in the amount specified in the city fee ordinance shall be
imposed in the case of every property not in compliance with this section. The surcharge will
be added to every subsequent billing until the property is found to be in compliance as
determined by the city.
Water and Sewer 17
(5) The remedies provided in this section are cumulative and do not limit the right of the city
to pursue any available legal remedy, including obtaining an administrative search warrant.
(6) The city reserves the right to inspect or require a certificate of compliance regarding all
properties at least yearly to verify compliance with this section.
(7) All new dwellings with active sump pits for which a building permit is issued after
November 1, 2011 shall have a pump and shall be piped to the outside of the dwelling before a
certificate of occupancy is issued. All new dwellings with inactive sump pits for which a
building permit is issued after November 1, 2011 shall have plumbing installed from the sump
pit to the outside of the dwelling before a certificate of occupancy is issued. The plumbing at
the sump pit connection needs to be capable of receiving a pump. No discharge shall be
conveyed directly towards adjacent properties or to areas that will create adverse conditions.
(8) The City Administrator is authorized to issue a permit to allow a property owner to
discharge clear water into the sanitary sewer system. Prior to issuance of the permit, the City
Administrator may consult with the City Engineer or Public Works Director to verify that at
least one of the criteria to issue the permit has been satisfied. The permit shall authorize the
discharge only from November 15 to March 15, shall require the owner to permit an inspection
of the property on March 16 or as soon thereafter as possible or produce a certificate from a
licensed plumber to verify that discharge into the sanitary sewer has been discontinued. No
property shall be issued a permit under this section more than twice. The owner shall be
subject to the surcharge provided for in division (4) above in the event the owner refuses an
inspection or fails to provide a certificate from a licensed plumber verifying that the owner has
discontinued the discharge into the sanitary sewer. The nonrefundable surcharge will
commence with the April billing and continue until the property owner establishes compliance
with this division. A property owner is required to meet at least one of the following criteria
in order to qualify for the permit:
(a) The freezing of the clear water discharge from the sump pump or footing drain is likely
to cause a dangerous condition, such as ice buildup or flooding, on either public or private
property;
(b) The property owner has demonstrated that it is likely there is a danger that the sump
pump or footing drain pipes will freeze up and result in either failure or damage to the sump
pump unit or the footing drain and cause basement flooding; or
(c) The clear water being discharged from the sump pump, footing drain or other source
cannot be readily discharged into a storm drain or other acceptable drainage system.
(9) The City Administrator may require a property owner to discharge clear water from a sump
pump into the sanitary sewer from November 15 to March 15 if discharge in the manner
otherwise required by this section is likely to cause a hazard or nuisance because of icy
conditions or flooding on public streets or sidewalks.
18 Cokato - Public Works
(10) The City Administrator's decision under division (8) or (9) above may be appealed to the
City Council by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 20 days of the City
Administrator's decision.
(B) Point of sale.
(1) After December 31, 2011, no person shall sell, convey, advertise for sale, give or transact
a change in title or property ownership of real property in the city improved with one or more
buildings or structures without first obtaining a certificate from the city indicating compliance
with the city's statutory sewer regulations, including regulations regarding the discharge of clear
water.
(2) Unless the property owner already has a certificate of compliance for a property, the owner
or owner's representative is required to apply for a certificate and complete an inspection thereof
before the property is offered for sale, gifted or transferred, and before the owner or owner's
representative enters into any purchase agreement, contract for deed or similar transaction. If
the property owner already has a certificate of compliance which is more than one year old, a
new sump pump inspection is required for all properties containing sump pumps. At the time
of application, the applicant for a certificate of compliance inspection shall pay the fee
established in the city's fee schedule.
(3) The applicant for a certificate of compliance inspection is responsible for providing an
inspection of the property after making application and payment of the fee. An inspection
shall be made either by a representative of the city or by a licensed plumber to determine
whether the property use is in accordance with city sanitary sewer regulations. The inspector
shall communicate the findings of the inspection to the property owner, including notification
of any illegal or non-compliant connections that will be severed. The entire property and all
buildings on the property shall be made available for inspection.
(4) If an inspection of the property reveals that the property is in compliance with the sanitary
sewer regulations, a certificate of compliance shall be issued in accordance with the following
terms and conditions:
(a) If the property use is determined to be in accordance with city sanitary sewer
regulations following inspection, a certificate of compliance will be issued by the city.
(b) A certificate of compliance is valid to be used for the transfer of the property.
(c) The certificate of compliance must be conspicuously displayed on the premises at all
times when the property is being shown for sale and the owner is responsible for informing
any potential buyers, gift recipients or other persons to whom the owner intends to transfer
title regarding the certificate of compliance.
(d) If an inspection discloses that use of a property is not in accordance with city sanitary
sewer regulations, a correction notice may be issued by the city permitting the transfer of
property, providing:
Water and Sewer 18A
1. An agreement by the owner or owner's representative has been executed with the
city, whereby the owner or owner's representative agrees to complete corrections to
the property necessary to bring it within compliance of the city sanitary sewer
regulations within 60 days of the transfer of property; or
2. A financial security to ensure completion of any corrections to the property must
be posted with the closing agent in the form of an escrow, or with the city when a
closing agent is not involved, at the time of property transfer or closing. The security
shall be in an amount at least equal to 125% of the estimated cost of the work necessary
for compliance with this section. The escrow must be fully maintained until a
certificate of compliance is issued. A correction notice shall not be issued for more
than 180 days following the first inspection of the property, but it may be extended for
additional periods up to 180 days each by the City Administrator for good cause.
3. The owner or transferor and any real estate agents involved in the transaction are
responsible for disclosing the correction notice to the transferee and all other persons
or entities involved in the transaction. The responsibility for repairing any
nonconformance with the sanitary sewer regulations is a personal obligation of the
owner and also runs with the land and becomes a joint and several obligation of the
owner and the transferee of the property.
(e) When the property is determined following inspection not to be legal in accordance
with city sanitary sewer regulations, the owner shall be entitled to a second inspection to
be scheduled within 90 days of the original inspection. If, as a result of the second
inspection, the city inspector or a licensed plumber certifies that all violations of city
sanitary sewer regulations have been corrected, the city shall issue a certificate of
compliance.
(f) Violation of the provisions of this division (B) shall cause the property to be subject to
the surcharge provided for in division (A)(4).
(C) Non-acceptable wastes. No person shall discharge or permit to be discharged into any public
sewer any of the following wastes:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature in excess of 150° F;
(2) Any water or waste having a five-day biological oxygen demand or suspended solids
exceeding 1,000 parts per million by weight as averaged during any 12-month period;
(3) Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million by weight of fat,
oil, or grease;
(4) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or
gas;
(5) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded;
18B Cokato - Public Works
(6) Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics,
wood, manure, grit, brick, cement, onyx, carbide, blood, butcher's offal, any other solid or
viscous substance capable of causing obstructions to the flow in sewers, or other matter that
may interfere with the proper operation of the sewers or sewage treatment plant;
(7) Any water or waste having a pH lower than 5.5, higher than 9 or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the
sewage works;
(8) Any water or waste containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantities to
constitute a hazard to humans, animals, or marine life, injure or interfere with sewage treatment
or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;
(9) Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance, which either singly or by interaction with
other wastes is capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life, or which may prevent
entry into sewers or their maintenance and repair; or
(10) Any water or waste containing suspended solids of such a character and quantity that
unusual attention or expense is required to handle the materials at the sewage treatment plant;
provided, however, that the City Council may issue a special permit to do so under the terms and
conditions and charges as determined by the City Council.
(D) Control manhole required. The owner of any property served by a sewer service line carrying
industrial waste shall install and maintain at the owner's expense suitable control manhole in the
sewer service line downstream from any treatment, storage, or other approved works to facilitate
observation, measurement, and sampling of the waste. The manhole shall be constructed at suitable
and satisfactory locations by the owner in accordance with plans approved by the City Engineer.
The owner shall maintain the manhole so as to be safe and accessible at all times for observing,
measuring and sampling of the wastes. Persons using the sewage system for industrial wastes shall
also provide a flow-measuring device, approved by the City Engineer, to record the total flowage
and rate of flow at no cost to the city for the device.
(E) Separate sewers. A separate and independent sewer shall be provided for every building
connected to the sewer system except the City Council may waive this requirement where it finds
that a separate sewer for a building is impractical.
(Prior Code, § 403.02) (Am. Ord. 05-2011, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 51.042 SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED
(A) General requirement.
Water and Sewer 18C
(1) When property abuts upon any public street or alley along which water and sewer mains
have been constructed, the owner of any dwelling or commercial establishment on the property
shall install suitable toilet facilities therein and connect them with the sanitary sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter within 90 days after the date of mailing or
delivering official notice to do so.
(2) The notice shall be given to the owner or occupant in writing by the City Administrator on
order of the City Council.
(B) Connection by city. Whenever any owner or occupant fails to comply with the written notice,
the Council shall, by resolution, direct that the connection be made with the water and sanitary sewer
system and that the cost of installation be paid in the first instance out of the general fund and then
assessed against the property benefitted.
(C) Assessment.
(1) After the installation and connection have been completed pursuant to Council resolution,
the City Administrator shall serve a written notice of the assessment upon the owner or his or
her representative directing him or her to pay the assessment to the City Clerk-Treasurer within
ten days after the service of the notice.
(2) If the assessment is not paid within ten days, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall certify the
amount to the County Auditor for collection in the same manner as other special assessments.
(3) The Council may, by resolution, spread the assessment over a three-year period.
(Prior Code, § 403.03)
§ 51.043 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS
Should any provisions of this subchapter conflict with the State Plumbing Code contained in the
State Building Code which is adopted elsewhere in this code, the State Plumbing Code shall control.
(Prior Code, § 403.035)
§ 51.044 SEWER RATES
(A) General rates for sewer service. Each customer shall pay a minimum charge each bi-monthly
period for an active sewer service line. Additional charges shall be made based upon the amount
of water consumed. The City Council shall by ordinance establish special contract sewer rates for
particular customers in extraordinary circumstances.
(B) Special cases. In the case of an industrial user contributing wastes to the sewage disposal
system in disproportionate amounts of concentrations, the Public Works Director shall make an
individual study of the particular use and fix an individual charge that is commensurate with the
burden
18D Cokato - Public Works
placed by the wastes upon the sewage treatment plant. If a building served by sewer is not served
by city water and the Council determines that the sewer service charge inaccurately measures use of
the sewer system, it may order the installation of a water meter to measure accurately the amount of
water used on the premises. In the case of an industry using substantial amounts of water that is
not discharged into the sewer system, the Council may order installation of a meter accurately
measuring the amount of water that enters the sewer system and fix the sewer service charge on the
basis of the amount. Insofar as practicable, installation and maintenance of such meters shall
conform to the regulations contained in this code of ordinances.
(C) Required information. The owner, occupant or person in charge of any premises shall supply
the city with the information as he or she may reasonably require relating to the use of water, use of
sewer or sewer rates. Willful failure to provide the information, willful falsification of the
information or willful failure to comply with any requirement or order issued pursuant to this section
constitutes a violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 403.04) (Ord. passed 5-13-1991) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.045 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates
or requires a different meaning.
BOD. The amount of dissolved oxygen consumed in five days by biological process breaking down
organic matter.
COMBINED SEWER. A sewer intended to serve as a sanitary sewer and a storm sewer, or as an
industrial sewer and a storm sewer.
Water and Sewer 19
DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. The cost of debt service that is incurred by the city during
construction of the wastewater plant. This includes interest and principal of capital costs to city
during plant and conveyance system construction of both grant eligible and non-grant eligible costs.
It also includes cost of interim financing needed during plant construction.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE. The liquid waste resulting from the processes employed in industrial,
manufacturing, trade or business establishments, as distinct from domestic wastes.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES). A system of
permits to discharge wastewaters to navigable waters developed under the authority of § 402 of Pub.
Law No. 92-500 being 33 U.S.C. 1342. The permit system has, as its objectives, achievements of
the goal of that law and the elimination of the discharge of pollutants by 1985.
NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTES. Liquid wastes:
(1) From the non-commercial preparation, cooking and handling of food; or
(2) Containing human excrement and similar matter for buildings, industrial facilities and
institutions.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COST. The cost of treating, conveyance and collection of
wastewater that will insure the efficient operation and maintenance of the facility.
PRETREATMENT. Application of physical, chemical and biological processes to reduce the
amount of pollutants in or alter the nature of the pollutant properties in a wastewater prior to
discharging the wastewater into the publicly owned wastewater treatment system.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR. The Public Works Director of this city or his or her duly appointed
deputy, agent or representative.
REPLACEMENT COST. The cost of replacing those items of a certain design life as determined
by the City Engineer. This does not include regularly replaced parts such as nuts, bolts and the like.
SANITARY SEWER. A sewer intended to carry only sanitary and industrial wastewaters from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions.
SEWER SERVICE CHARGE. Total cost of operation, maintenance and replacement, plus cost of
debt service as passed on to users by sewer service charge.
SS (SUSPENDED SOLIDS). Solid particles that do not precipitate out of solution or do not easily
filter out.
STORM SEWER. A sewer intended to carry only stormwaters, surface runoff, street wash waters
and drainage.
20 Cokato - Public Works
TOXIC SUBSTANCES. Any substance, chemical elements or compounds, phenols or other waste
or odor producing substances, or any other substances which are not susceptible to treatment or
which may interfere with the biological processes or efficiency of the treatment system, or that will
pass through the system.
USER CHARGE. Proportionate charges for the cost of operation and maintenance, replacement,
conveyance, collection and billing of wastewater to each user class based on class flow and waste
characteristics.
USER CLASSES. User designations according to flow rate and discharge characteristics. The
classes include the following:
CLASS 1 RESIDENTIAL-SINGLE FAMILY AND MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS.
Users in this class have a total flow rate of 25,000 gallons per day or less and discharge does not
exceed 300 mg/liter of BOD and 300 mg/liter of SS.
CLASS 2 INSTITUTIONAL. Users are hospitals, clinics, general units of local government
and religion institutions. Users in this class have a total flow rate of 25,000 gallons per day or
less and discharge does not exceed 300 mg/liter of BOD and 300 mg/liter of SS.
CLASS 3 COMMERCIAL. Users are retail, wholesale, service, restaurants, hotels, motels and
other business establishments not engaged in the manufacture of a finished product or
components of a finished product. Users in this class have a total flow rate of 25,000 gallons
per day or less and discharge does not exceed 300 mg/liter of BOD and 300 mg/liter of SS.
CLASS 4 INDUSTRIAL. Anyone involved in the production of a finished or component
product of the refining or mining of products or materials.
CLASS 5 SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. Anyone involved in the production of a
finished product or component product of the refining or mining of products or materials. Users
in this class have a total flow rate of over 10% of the average daily flow to the treatment facility.
(Prior Code, § 403.05)
§ 51.046 ANNUAL REVIEW OF USER CHARGE SYSTEM
(A) The user charge system shall be reviewed annually to assure continued proportionality of
revenue to costs, and to assure that sufficient revenue is generated to meet the total costs of the
system.
(B) User charges shall be changed based on results of the review.
(Prior Code, § 403.06)
Water and Sewer 21
§ 51.047 INDUSTRIAL USERS
If an industrial user, pursuant to 40 C.F.R. 35.905, September 27, 1978 Federal Register begins
discharging into the city’s sewer system, an industrial cost recovery system will be developed
according to United States Environmental Protection Agency rules and standards.
(Prior Code, § 403.07)
§ 51.048 HARMFUL DISCHARGES
The city shall have the right to reject harmful wastes as determined by the Director to be harmful to
humans or animals, or create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the wastewater disposal system.
(Prior Code, § 403.08)
§ 51.049 SURCHARGE FOR WASTES CONTAINING BOD AND SS THAT EXCEED
NORMAL CONCENTRATIONS
(A) The city shall have the right to attach a surcharge onto the sewer use charge of a user that
discharges greater than 300 mg/liter BOD/day or 300 mg/liter SS/day.
(B) The surcharge shall be based upon the cost required to treat the discharge as a proportional share
of the total costs for operation and maintenance of the treatment facility.
(C) When assessing the above surcharge, the following percentages of flow, SS and BOD shall be
used against the total of OM&R cost:
(1) Flow = 40% of total OM&R cost;
(2) BOD = 30% of total OM&R cost; and
(3) SS = 30% of total OM&R cost.
(D) The city shall have the right to surcharge users with BOD and SS wastes that exceed normal
concentration.
(Prior Code, § 403.09)
§ 51.050 INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT
The city shall have the right to require industrial pretreatment when the Public Works Director deems
the pretreatment necessary to reduce the amount of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less
harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing the pollutants into the city’s
wastewater disposal system.
(Prior Code, § 403.10)
22 Cokato - Public Works
§ 51.051 SERVICE AGREEMENTS
The city shall have the right to contract service agreements with industries in other political
jurisdictions or other political hook-ups to the city’s sewer service.
(Prior Code, § 403.11)
§ 51.052 PROHIBITED TOXINS
(A) The city shall have the right to forbid certain toxins from entering the sewage treatment system.
The list of following toxins shall be prohibited from being discharged into the city’s wastewater
treatment system unless the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency and the Director deem them compatible with the treatment works
operation.
Acidity, Alkalinity, pH Alkali and Alkaline
Ammonia Arsenic
Cadmium Chromium
Chloroform Carbon Tetrachloride
Copper Cyanide
Earth metals Borate (and other boron species)
Iron Lead
Manganese Mercury
Methylene Chloride Chlorobenzenes
Miscellaneous chlorinated hydrocarbons Agricultural chemicals
Miscellaneous organic chemicals Oil and grease
Nickel Silver
Organic nitrogen compounds Surfactants
Phenols Chlorinated hydrocarbons
Sulfate Sulfide
Zinc Alcohols
(B) This list does not preclude the addition of other substances that the EPA may add from time to
time.
(Prior Code, § 403.12)
Water and Sewer 23
§ 51.053 CONTROL MANHOLES
The city shall have the right to install control manholes for the purpose of monitoring users that use,
in the manufacturing process, the substances named in § 51.052. The city shall also have the right
to install control manholes for the purpose of monitoring users that may be discharging substances
not listed that may be harmful to humans or animals, or create a toxic effect in the receiving water
of the wastewater disposal system. The cost of the manholes shall be assessed to the industry or
entity being monitored.
(Prior Code, § 403.13)
§ 51.054 EXTENSION OF SERVICE
The city reserves the right to prohibit new connection to the municipal sanitary sewer system if that
system has reached its design capacity.
(Prior Code, § 403.14)
§ 51.055 INSPECTION OF SYSTEM
Whenever it shall be necessary for the purposes of these sections, and except as otherwise provided
herein, the city may appoint an authorized inspector to inspect service connections and discharge
sources. The inspector may enter any property at reasonable times for inspection for compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 403.15) (Am. Ord. 05-2011, passed 5-9-2011)
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
§ 51.070 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or
requires a different meaning.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. A sewage disposal system, other than a public
or community system, which receives sewage for an individual establishment.
(Prior Code, § 404.01)
§ 51.071 RESTRICTIONS
(A) Individual sewage disposal systems. Individual sewage disposal systems are prohibited within
the city.
24 Cokato - Public Works
(B) Exemptions. An exemption from the application of this part may be granted by the City
Council in extraordinary situations.
(Prior Code, § 404.02)
STORM DRAINAGE DISTRICTS
§ 51.085 STORM DRAINAGE DISTRICTS
These are geographically defined areas within the city limits created for the purpose of establishing
and maintaining appropriate stormwater drainage facilities that are consistent with the city’s
drainage and other systems. The districts shall be created by ordinance as deemed appropriate by
the Council.
(Res. 1994-38, passed 12-12-1994)
§ 51.086 SOUTH CENTRAL STORM DRAINAGE DISTRICT
(A) Geographical description. This district shall include the following described real property.
(1) Non-participating real property.
(a) Builder’s Park Addition: Lots eight through 24 of Block two.
(b) Southview Addition: Lots four and five.
(c) Unplatted land: commencing at the southwest corner of SW one-fourth of NE
one-fourth of 34-119-28; thence south 383 feet; thence east 33 feet to the actual point of
beginning; thence south 100 feet to the northwest corner of Lot nine of Block two of
Builder’s Park Addition; thence east 163 feet along the north line of the Lot nine and Lot
eight of the Block two; thence north 100 feet; thence west 163 feet to the actual point of
beginning.
(2) Participating real property.
(a) Klarbacken Addition: Lots 14 through 17 of Block two; Lots two through five of Block
five; Lots one, two, three, 11 and 12 of Block three; Lot five of Block four.
(b) Klyva Road Addition: Lots one through ten of Block one.
(c) Unplatted real estate: The west 500 feet of the north 600 feet of the southwest
one-fourth of southeast one-fourth, 34-119-28.
Water and Sewer 25
(B) Current hookup. "Participating real property", as described above, has installed storm drainage
systems and all necessary ancillary facilities in accordance with the requirements of the City
Engineer, statutes, regulations and governmental agencies including the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency and has paid all necessary fees.
(C) Future hookup. "Non-participating real property", as described above, is located within the l
Storm Drainage District, but has not installed any storm drainage systems within the District.
Hookup to the South Central Storm Drainage District system shall be required for a lot described as
non-participating real property herein, prior to the issuance of a building permit for improvements
on the lot, except that hookup shall not be required for currently existing residences unless the cost
of the proposed improvements exceeds one-half of the assessor’s estimated market value in effect at
the time of the building permit application. Owners of non-participating real property lots may
request hookup at any earlier time. Future hookup, whether mandatory or voluntary, is subject to
the following requirements.
(1) Each lot shall pay the hookup fee established by ordinance to the city at the time of the
building permit application or when permission to hookup is sought by the lot owner.
(2) The building permit applicant shall be required to install, at his or her expense, all necessary
storm drainage improvements in accordance with specifications established by the City
Engineer, which shall be in accordance with all applicable statutes and regulations. In addition,
the applicant shall reimburse the city for the reasonable and necessary review of fees charged
by the City Engineer.
(Res. 1994-38, passed 12-12-1994)
26 Cokato - Public Works
CHAPTER 52: GARBAGE
Section
General Provisions
52.01 Definitions
52.02 General regulations
52.03 Disposal required
52.04 Containers
Commercial Hauler’s License
52.20 Commercial haulers; definition
52.21 License required
52.22 Issuance of licenses
52.23 Conditions of licenses
52.24 Revocation
52.25 License fee
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates
or requires a different meaning.
GARBAGE. Organic waste resulting from the preparation of food, decayed and spoiled food from
any source.
RECYCLABLES. Paper, plastic, tin cans, aluminum, motor oil, glass and other metal goods, each
separated or otherwise prepared so as to be acceptable.
REFUSE. Garbage and rubbish.
27
28 Cokato - Public Works
RUBBISH. Inorganic solid waste such as tin cans, glass, paper, ashes, sweepings and the like.
(Prior Code, § 502.01)
§ 52.02 GENERAL REGULATIONS
(A) Unauthorized accumulations. Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse on any premises is a
nuisance and is prohibited.
(B) Refuse, streets and the like. No persons shall place any refuse on any streets, alley or other
public place or upon any private property except in proper containers for collection. No person
shall throw or deposit refuse in any stream or any other body of water.
(C) Scattering of refuse. No persons shall deposit anywhere within the city any refuse in such a
manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any public or private premises
within the city.
(D) Burying of refuse; composting. No person shall bury any refuse in the city except in an
approved sanitary landfill, but leaves, grass clippings and easily biodegradable, non-poisonous
garbage may be composted on the premises where the refuse has been accumulated. Garbage may
be composted only in a rodent-proof structure, in an otherwise sanitary manner and after the Health
Officer gives his or her approval of the composting after he or she finds that the composting will be
done in accordance with these standards.
(Prior Code, § 502.02)
§ 52.03 DISPOSAL REQUIRED
Every person shall, in a sanitary manner, dispose of refuse that may accumulate upon property
owned or occupied by him or her. Every householder, occupant and owner of any residence shall
use the garbage and refuse collection service provided by the city, its contractors or licensees.
(Prior Code, § 502.03)
§ 52.04 CONTAINERS
(A) General requirement. Every householder, occupant or owner of any residence and every
restaurant, industrial establishment or commercial establishment shall provide on the premises one
or more containers to receive and contain all refuse which may accumulate between collections.
All normal accumulations of refuse shall be deposited in the containers. Leaves, trimmings from
shrubs, grass clippings, shavings, excelsior and other rubbish of similar volume and weight may be
stored in closed containers not meeting the requirements of division (B) below.
Garbage 29
(B) Container requirements. Each container shall be watertight, shall be impervious to insects and
rodents and shall not exceed 32 gallons in capacity or 35 pounds in weight.
(C) Placement. Where an alley open to traffic is available, each container for premises abutting
the alley shall be placed at the rear of the property next to the alley. Where no alley exists, the
container shall be placed near the rear door of the building to which it relates. In that case, the
container shall be placed at the front property line for collection but it shall not be so placed before
9:00 p.m. the night before collection and shall be removed by 9:00 p.m. the day of collection.
(D) Use of containers. Refuse shall be drained of liquid and household garbage shall be wrapped
before being deposited in a container. Highly flammable or explosive material shall not be placed
in containers.
(Prior Code, § 502.04) (Res. 92-3, passed 5-11-1992) Penalty, see § 10.99
COMMERCIAL HAULER’S LICENSE
§ 52.20 COMMERCIAL HAULERS; DEFINITION
For the purpose of this section, anyone who for consideration disposes of garbage and other refuse
for another person in this municipality, including individuals, partnerships and corporation, shall be
considered a commercial contract hauler.
(Res. 2006-03, passed 8-14-2006)
§ 52.21 LICENSE REQUIRED
The contract hauler shall be required to obtain a commercial hauler’s license from the city before
hauling garbage, refuse and solid waste (as defined in M.S. § 116.06, Subdivision 22, as it may be
amended from time to time). Licensed haulers who haul only animal waste are exempted from the
requirements of this section.
(Res. 2006-03, passed 8-14-2006)
§ 52.22 ISSUANCE OF LICENSES
The commercial haulers shall make application to the city offices providing the information as the
city may require. The City Council shall monitor each application and upon approval thereof, the
30 Cokato - Public Works
Council shall authorize the City Clerk-Treasurer to issue the licenses. Before issuance of each
license, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall collect the fee from the commercial hauler. The fee shall be
paid annually and shall be non-proratable, non-refundable and nontransferable unless authorized by
the City Council. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall credit the license fee to the General Revenue
Fund.
(Res. 2006-03, passed 8-14-2006)
§ 52.23 CONDITIONS OF LICENSES
(A) Each commercial hauler shall dispose of the solid wastes as directed by the City Council and
Wright County in conformity with rules and regulations established from time to time.
(B) Charges published by the commercial hauler licenses may be subject to review by the City
Council.
(Res. 2006-03, passed 8-14-2006)
§ 52.24 REVOCATION
Failure to comply with the rules and regulations established by the Council shall be grounds for
revocation of the commercial hauler’s license.
(Res. 2006-03, passed 8-14-2006)
§ 52.25 LICENSE FEE
The fee for the license shall be the amount as shall be determined by the City Council from time to
time.
(Res. 2006-03, passed 8-14-2006)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
70. TRAFFIC, PARKING AND MOTOR VEHICLES
1
2 Cokato - Traffic Code
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC, PARKING AND MOTOR VEHICLES
Section
Motor Vehicles
70.01 Definitions
70.02 Turning
70.03 Through streets; one-way streets
70.04 Trunk restrictions
70.05 Seasonal and other weight restrictions
70.06 General parking regulations
70.07 Recreational vehicle parking regulations
70.08 Additional residential parking regulations
70.09 Municipal parking lots
70.10 Truck zones, loading zones and the like
70.11 Winter parking
70.12 Establishment of safety zones, lanes of traffic and the like
70.13 Removing keys
70.14 Exhibition driving prohibited
70.15 Police duties
Snowmobiles
70.30 Definitions
70.31 Operation on streets and highways
70.32 Operation generally
70.33 Equipment
70.34 Application of other laws
70.35 Persons under 18
70.36 Leaving snowmobile unattended
70.37 Chasing animals forbidden
Bicycles
70.50 Definition
70.51 Traffic laws apply
70.52 Manner and number of riding
70.53 Hitching rides
70.54 Where to ride
70.55 Right of way; sidewalks
70.56 Carrying articles
70.57 Visibility and brake equipment
3
4 Cokato - Traffic Code
Roller Skates, Inline Skates, Roller Skis, and Skateboards
70.60 Definitions
70.61 Unlawful acts
70.62 Right of way
70.63 Hours of use
70.64 Violations
70.99 Penalty
MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS
Any term used in this chapter and defined in M.S. § 169.011, as it may be amended from time to
time, has the meaning given it by that section, with the exception of Recreational Vehicles, which
are defined in Section 70.07. In this chapter, any reference to POLICE includes any party with
whom the city has contracted for police protection.
§ 70.02 TURNING
(A) Restriction on turns. The Council by resolution may, whenever necessary to preserve the free
flow of traffic or to prevent accidents, designate any intersection as one where the turning of vehicles
to the left or to the right, or both, is to be restricted at all times or during specified hours. The Public
Works Director shall mark, by appropriate signs, any intersections so designated. No intersection
on a trunk highway shall be so designated until the consent of the Commissioner of Transportation
to the designation is first obtained. No person shall turn a vehicle at any such intersection contrary
to the direction on such signs.
(B) U turns. No person shall turn a vehicle so as to reverse its direction on any street in the business
district or at any intersection where traffic is regulated by a traffic control signal.
§ 70.03 THROUGH STREETS; ONE-WAY STREETS
The Council, by resolution, may designate any street or portion of a street as a through highway or
a one-way roadway where necessary to preserve the free flow of traffic or to prevent accidents. The
Public Works Director shall post appropriate signs at the entrance to such streets. No trunk highway
shall be so designated unless the consent of the Commissioner of Transportation to the designation
is first secured.
Traffic, Parking and Motor Vehicles 5
§ 70.04 TRUCK RESTRICTIONS
(A) The City Council, by resolution, may designate streets on which travel by commercial vehicles
in excess of 10,000 pounds gross weight is prohibited.
(B) The Public Works Director shall erect appropriate signs on the streets.
(C) No person shall operate a commercial vehicle on the posted streets in violation of the restrictions
stated.
§ 70.05 SEASONAL AND OTHER WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
(A) The Public Works Director is authorized to prohibit the operation of vehicles upon any city
street or impose weight restrictions on vehicles to be operated on the street whenever the street, by
reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other climactic conditions, may be seriously damaged or
destroyed unless the use of vehicles on the street is prohibited or the permissible weights thereof
reduced.
(B) The Public Works Director shall erect and maintain signs plainly indicating the prohibition or
restriction at each end of the portion of the street affected.
(C) No person shall operate a vehicle on a posted street in violation of the prohibition or restriction.
§ 70.06 GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS
(A) Adoption of State of Minnesota highway traffic regulations. The State of Minnesota highway
traffic regulations as set forth in M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be amended from time to time, are
hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this chapter as if fully set
forth herein. Additional prohibitions and limitations may be added in other sections of this chapter.
(B) Angle and parallel parking. Angle parking shall be required on the east side of Millard Avenue
from Third Street to Fourth Street and on the west side of Millard Avenue from Second Street to
Third Street. On that street, every vehicle parked shall be parked with the front of the vehicle facing
the curb or the edge of the traveled portion of the street at an angle of approximately 30 degrees.
On all other streets, cars shall be parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway in accordance
with the law.
(C) No parking, stopping or standing zones. The City Council may, by resolution, designate
certain streets or portions of streets as "no parking" or "no stopping or standing zones" and may limit
the hours in which the restrictions apply. The Public Works Director shall mark, by appropriate
signs, each zone so designated. Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or a traffic control device, no person shall stop or
park a vehicle in an established no stopping or standing zone when stopping or standing is prohibited.
6 Cokato - Traffic Code
No vehicle shall be parked in a no parking zone during hours when parking is prohibited except that
a vehicle may be parked temporarily in such a zone for the purpose of forming a funeral procession,
and a truck may be parked temporarily between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. of any business
day for the purpose of unloading or loading where access to the premises is not otherwise available.
(D) Time limit parking zones. The City Council may, by resolution, designate certain areas where
the right to park is limited during hours or for length of time specified. The Public Works Director
shall mark, by appropriate signs, each zone so indicated. No person shall park a vehicle in any
limited parking zone during the hours specified or for a longer period than is so specified.
(E) Special time limit.
(1) No vehicle shall be parked for more than two hours during the period from 7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m. on Mondays through Saturdays inclusive on the following streets:
(a) Broadway from railroad right-of-way to Fourth Street;
(b) Millard Avenue from Second Street to Fourth Street;
(c) Third Street from Millard Avenue to Mooers Avenue; and
(d) Water Street.
(2) No vehicle shall be parked more than eight consecutive hours during the period 7:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m. on Mondays through Saturdays inclusive on the following streets:
(a) Second Street from Broadway Avenue to Jackson Avenue; and
(b) Third Street from Millard Avenue to Jackson Avenue.
(3) No vehicle shall be parked at any time on the Industrial Park Road.
(4) No vehicle shall be parked at any time on Clarke Lane.
(5) Additionally, no commercial vehicle of more than a one-ton capacity shall be parked on the
streets specified in this division (E).
(F) Double parking. No motor vehicle shall be double parked on any street in the city except for
loading or unloading purposes, or for the purpose of receiving or discharging passengers and then
only for the time as is reasonably necessary for such purpose but in no event shall the double parking
be permitted where it interferes or obstructs other vehicles.
(G) Parking on public property. No vehicle shall be parked on any property owned or leased by
the city including, but not limited to, parks, playgrounds, boulevards, building grounds, parking lots
and maintenance facilities between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Vehicles in violation of
this division may be impounded as provided for in division (I) below. This does not apply to the
parking lane of public streets or to other areas where specific regulations are set forth in this chapter.
Traffic, Parking and Motor Vehicles 7
Municipal Lot #1 exception. The overnight parking restrictions in this paragraph shall not apply to
Municipal Lot #1 defined in § 70.09 unless there is unplowed snow or untreated ice on the ground
of the lot. If there is no snow or ice present, parking between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall be
permitted in this lot only but limited to one-hour parking for the purposes of patronizing local
businesses with overnight hours.
(H) 72-hour parking limit. No vehicle may be parked or permitted to remain in one location on
any street or highway for more than 72 consecutive hours at any time unless specifically permitted
by this chapter. A vehicle must be moved at least 100 feet from its initial location in order to be
considered not to have remained in one location for 72 hours, and may not return to its original
location within a 24 hour period. Removal of chalk lines or other marks placed by local
enforcement officers is a violation of this section of City Code.
(I) Impoundment.
(1) Any police officer may impound a vehicle from a street to a garage or other place of safety
when the vehicle is left unattended and constitutes an obstruction to traffic or hinders snow
removal, street improvement or maintenance operations.
(2) Any police officer may impound any vehicle from a street to a garage or other place of
safety if the vehicle has remained on the street in violation of any parking restriction in this
chapter after compliance with the requirements of M.S. §§ 168B.04 and 168B.035, as they may
be amended from time to time.
(3) The vehicle shall not be released until the fees for towing and storage are paid in addition
to any fine imposed for violation of this chapter. Vehicles may be disposed of in accordance
with M.S. Chapter 168B.
(J) Prima facie violation. The presence of any motor vehicle on any street when standing or
parked in violation of this chapter is prima facie evidence that the registered owner of the vehicle
committed or authorized the commission of the violation.
§ 70.07 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKING REGULATIONS
(A) In addition to the general parking regulations established in § 70.06, the following parking
regulations regarding recreational vehicles shall apply in all residential zoning districts.
(B) Parking of recreational vehicles.
(1) Purpose. The standards established for recreational vehicles and equipment in this section
are designed to regulate their storage and use and to protect the health, safety and general
welfare of the community. The standards are established to promote the safe use, storage and
parking of recreational vehicles and equipment and to eliminate those conditions or misuses
which are unsafe or cause deterioration of property and property values.
(2) Findings. The outside parking or outside storage of recreational vehicles on or abutting
residential district properties, if unregulated, is found to have a detrimental influence upon the
8 Cokato - Traffic Code
public health, safety, prosperity, good order and general welfare in residential districts. The
detrimental impacts include, but are not limited to, obstruction of view on streets and private
properties; preventing full use of residential streets for residential parking; creating a cluttered
and unsightly area; creating overcrowding if the recreational vehicles are used as a residence;
creating environmental hazards if the recreational vehicles are not properly maintained or are
stored for excessive periods of time; detrimentally impacting the essential residential character
of the neighborhood if the vehicle is stored and not used by the occupants of the principal
dwelling for the vehicle's intended purpose as a recreational vehicle; and otherwise adversely
affecting residential property values and the character of the neighborhood.
(3) Nuisance. The outside parking or outside storage on or abutting residential district
properties of recreational vehicles or equipment in violation of the standards set forth in this
division is found to create a nuisance and is prohibited. Recreational vehicles or equipment as
defined in section (4) below are prohibited from parking on the streets in all residential zoning
districts.
(4) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the meanings assigned
to them below.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT
(a) Travel trailers, including those which telescope or fold down, chassis mounted
campers, motor homes, tent trailers, slip-on campers, converted buses and converted vans
that provide temporary human living quarters. A RECREATIONAL VEHICLE is a
vehicle that:
1. Is not used as the residence of the owner or occupant;
2. Is used while engaged in recreational or vacation activities; and
3. Is either self-propelled or towed on the highways incidental to the recreational or
vacation activities.
(b) The term includes snowmobiles and snowmobile trailers, boats and boat trailers, and
all-terrain vehicles and all-terrain vehicle trailers and utility trailers. The term does not
include manufactured homes or park trailers as those terms are defined by M.S. § 168.002,
as it may be amended from time to time.
SLIP-ON CAMPER. Any camper which is mounted into a pick-up truck in the pick-up box,
either by bolting through the floor of the pick-up box or by firmly clamping to the side of the
pick-up box.
UTILITY TRAILER. Any motorless vehicle used for carrying property on its own structure
while being drawn by a motor vehicle.
Traffic, Parking and Motor Vehicles 9
(5) Parking regulations.
(a) Recreational vehicles and equipment may not be parked on city streets, but may be parked
or stored in a residential zoning district on private property as follows:
(a) In a fully enclosed structure;
(b) On any rear or side yard of a lot except the side yard of a corner lot adjacent to the
street, provided that:
1. No more than one recreational vehicle per property may be parked or stored
outside of an established driveway; and
2. The vehicle meets the requirements of this division; or
(c) In the front yard of a lot, provided that:
1. The recreational vehicle is parked in an established driveway at a location on the
driveway that is farthest from the side lot line of the property;
2. The vehicle is not closer than 12 feet to the curb line of the street abutting the
driveway;
3. The vehicle does not obstruct a public sidewalk; and
4. The vehicle meets the requirements of this division.
(b) Loading. A recreational vehicle may be stored on a lot without regard to the location on
the lot for the sole and express purpose of loading and unloading for a period not in excess of
48 hours.
(c) Slide-in pickup campers. Unmounted slide-in pickup campers must be stored no higher
than 20 inches above the ground and must be securely supported on at least at four corners by
solid support blocks.
(d) Storage. Except as provided herein, all recreational vehicles or equipment parked or
stored outside must be on wheels or must be securely attached to a wheeled trailer or other
wheeled vehicle, with wheels fully inflated. This requirement does not apply to canoes, kayaks
or slide-in pickup campers that are stored in compliance with division (D)(3) above.
(e) Covers. Except as provided herein, all snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles and boats that are
parked or stored outside must be covered with a tightly fitted cover designed to keep out rodents
and rain and kept free of standing water. Canoes or kayaks do not require a cover if they are
stored in a manner that prevents rain accumulation.
(f) Licenses. All recreational vehicles or equipment parked or stored outside must display
current licenses as required by applicable law for use in the State of Minnesota.
(g) Location. All recreational vehicles or equipment parked or stored outside must be located
10 Cokato - Traffic Code
at least three feet from any building or other structure, including but not limited to fences.
Canoes and kayaks are excepted from this requirement.
(h) Owned by occupant. All recreational vehicles or equipment parked or stored outside must
be owned by an occupant of the premises on which the vehicle or equipment is parked or stored.
The owner of the recreational vehicle or equipment must be able to present proof of ownership
of the vehicle or equipment upon request of an authorized code enforcement official. In
addition, owner must be able to show proof of occupancy of the property where the vehicle or
equipment is located.
(i) Size limit. No more than one recreational vehicle or equipment parked or stored outside
on a property may exceed seven and one-half feet in width or seven and one-half feet in height.
(6) Prohibited uses. A recreational vehicle or equipment shall not be used as a permanent
residence.
(7) Waivers. The City Council may grant a waiver to the literal provisions of this section in the
case of unusual circumstances or hardship so long as the public health, safety, or welfare is not
endangered by such waiver and subject to such terms and conditions as the City Council may
establish.
§ 70.08 ADDITIONAL RESIDENTIAL PARKING REGULATIONS
The following additional regulations apply to all vehicle parking in residential zoning districts and
on streets adjacent to residential zoning districts.
(A) Driveways and parking areas shall be at least five feet from a side property line except in the
case of a driveway shared by abutting properties. Vehicles may be parked up to the property line
in the case of shared driveways so long as reasonable access for the abutting property is maintained.
Parking areas shall not be in the street right-of-way or on other public property.
(B) No owner or operator shall park a vehicle in a location which blocks a sidewalk or access to a
driveway.
(C) No Commercial Motor Vehicle as defined in M.S. Section 169.011 Subd. 16 shall be parked or
allowed to stand on any street in a residential zoning district except as follows:
(1) for purposes of making a delivery to a residential property as requested by the
owner/occupant.
(2) for construction purposes with an approved building or other permit issued by the City.
(3) Under no circumstances shall a vehicle meeting these exceptions remain on the street longer
than 24 hours. No overnight parking is allowed.
(D) Whether or not it meets the definition in section (C) above, no semi-truck or semi-truck/trailer
shall be parked or allowed to stand on any street for any length of time within a residential zoning
district except in an emergency in order to change tractors.
Traffic, Parking and Motor Vehicles 11
§ 70.09 MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS
(A) Parking lots designated. The following areas are hereby designated as municipal parking lots:
(1) Municipal Lot # One: Outlot C, Richards Addition, City of Cokato;
(2) Municipal Lot # Two: The west 20 feet of Water Street adjacent to Lot seven and the south
20 feet of Lot eight, Block 12, Lees Addition, City of Cokato; and
(3) Municipal Lot # Three: The west 60 feet of the south 27 feet of Lot six and Lots seven
through ten inclusive, Block 14, Original Townsite, City of Cokato.
(B) Time limits. No vehicle shall be parked in any municipal parking lot contrary to the following
regulations:
(1) Municipal Lot # One: No vehicle shall be parked more than two consecutive hours
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Mondays through Saturdays inclusive. No
vehicle shall be parked between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day;
(2) Municipal Lot # Two: No vehicle shall be parked more than eight consecutive hours
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Mondays through Saturdays inclusive. No
vehicle shall be parked between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day; and
(3) Municipal Lot # Three: No vehicle shall be parked more than 48 consecutive hours during
any period.
§ 70.10 TRUCK ZONES, LOADING ZONES AND THE LIKE
(A) Establishment. The City Council may, by resolution, establish spaces and streets and loading
zones or truck zones. The hours of 6:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays, New Year’s
Day, Memorial Day, July 4, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day, or such other time
as the City Council may specify in the resolution establishing the zones shall be the loading zone or
truck zone hours. The Public Works Director shall mark each zone by appropriate signs.
(B) Truck zone prohibitions. During truck zone hours, no person shall stop, stand or park any
vehicle except a truck in a truck zone. No person shall stop, stand or park a truck in a truck zone
during truck zone hours except to receive or discharge passengers or freight and then only for a
period no longer than is necessary for the purpose.
(C) Loading zone prohibitions. During loading zone hours, no person shall stop, stand or park any
vehicle in a loading zone except to receive or discharge passengers or freight and then only for a
period no longer than is necessary for the purpose. No person shall occupy a loading zone with a
vehicle other than a truck for more than five minutes during such hours.
(D) Property owner initiative. Any person desiring the establishment of a loading zone or truck
zone abutting from premises occupied by him or her shall make written application therefor to the
City Council. If the Council grants the request, the proper city officer shall bill the applicant for
12 Cokato - Traffic Code
the estimated cost of placing signs and of painting the curb. When the amount is paid to the City
Clerk-Treasurer, the Public Works Director shall install the necessary signs and paint the curb.
(E) Semi-truck parking. No person shall allow a semi-truck/trailer combination to stand or be
parked upon any street for more than two hours at any time. No person shall allow a semi-trailer to
stand or be parked unattached from a tractor unit for any length of time on any street, except in an
emergency in order to change tractors. The Council may, by resolution, establish "No Truck
Parking Zones" in the business district, and the Public Works Director shall mark, by appropriate
signs, any zone so established. The zones shall be established in the business district where heavy
traffic by trucks and other traffic congestion makes parking by trucks a hazard to the safety of
vehicles or pedestrians. No person shall park a truck of more than a one-ton capacity between 6:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any weekday upon any street and any such zone, but parking of the vehicle
for a period of not more than 30 minutes shall be permitted in the zone for the purpose of having
access to abutting property when the access cannot conveniently be secured otherwise.
§ 70.11 WINTER PARKING
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle or permit it to stand on any street in the city between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. on any day from November 15 through May 1, both inclusive.
One parking space shall be required for every dwelling unit for a one-family dwelling or efficiency
units.
§ 70.12 ESTABLISHMENT OF SAFETY ZONES, LANES OF TRAFFIC AND THE LIKE
To assist in the direction and control of traffic, to improve safe driving conditions at any intersection
or dangerous location and to warn pedestrians or drivers of motor vehicles of dangerous conditions
or hazards, the Public Works Director may establish safety zones, lanes of traffic and stop
intersections, and he or she may order installation by the city of stop signs, yield signs, warning
signs, signals, pavement markings or other devices. No regulation may be established on a trunk
highway unless the consent of the Commissioner of Transportation is first secured.
§ 70.13 REMOVING KEYS
No person shall leave a motor vehicle, except a truck which is engaged in loading or unloading,
unattended on any street, used car lot or unattended parking lot without first stopping the engine,
locking the ignition and removing all ignition keys from the vehicle.
§ 70.14 EXHIBITION DRIVING PROHIBITED
No person shall turn, accelerate, decelerate or otherwise operate a motor vehicle within the city in a
manner that causes unnecessary engine noise or backfire, squealing tires, skidding, sliding, swaying,
throwing of sand or gravel or in a manner simulating a race. Squealing or screeching sounds
emitted by tires, or the throwing of sand or gravel by the tires, is prima facie evidence of a violation
of this section. This section includes any activities in violation of M.S. §§ 169.69 and 169.693, as
amended from time to time, which are hereby incorporated by reference.
Traffic, Parking and Motor Vehicles 13
§ 70.15 POLICE DUTIES
(A) The police shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and the state traffic laws.
(B) Police officers are authorized to direct all traffic within the city, either in person or by means of
visible or audible signal, in conformity with this chapter and the state traffic laws.
(C) During a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, the police may
direct traffic as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter and the state traffic
laws.
(D) Officers of the Fire Department may direct or assist the police in directing traffic at the scene
of a fire or in the immediate vicinity.
SNOWMOBILES
§ 70.30 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates
or requires a different meaning.
OPERATE. To ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile.
OPERATOR. Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a snowmobile.
OWNER. A person other than a lien holder having the property in or title to snowmobile entitled
to the use or possession thereof.
PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, the state and its agencies and subdivisions, and
any body of persons, whether incorporated or not.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. The entire strip of land traversed by a highway or street in which the public
owns the fee or an easement for roadway purposes.
ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel,
including the shoulder.
SAFETY OR DEADMAN THROTTLE. A device which, when pressure is removed from the
engine accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be disengaged from the driving track.
SNOWMOBILE. A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow, ice or natural terrain
steered by wheels, skis or runners.
STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between boundary lines of any way or place when any
part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter or right, for the purpose of vehicular traffic.
14 Cokato - Traffic Code
§ 70.31 OPERATION ON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS
(A) No person shall operate a snowmobile upon the roadway, shoulder or inside bank or slope of
any trunk, county state aid or county highway in this city and, in the case of a divided trunk or county
highway, on the right-of-way between the opposing lanes of traffic, except as provided in this
chapter; nor shall operation on any highway be permitted where the roadway directly abuts a public
sidewalk, walkway or property used for private purposes.
(B) No person shall operate a snowmobile within the right-of-way of any trunk, county state aid or
county highway between the hours of one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise,
except on the right-hand side of the right-of-way and in the same direction as the highway traffic on
the nearest lane of the roadway adjacent thereto.
(C) No snowmobile shall be operated at any time within the right-of-way of any interstate highway
or freeway within this state.
(1) Street crossing. A snowmobile may make a direct crossing of a street or highway except
an interstate highway or freeway, provided:
(a) The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the direction of the
street or highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing;
(b) The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the shoulder or main
traveled way of the highway;
(c) The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic that constitutes an immediate
hazard;
(d) In crossing a divided street or highway, the crossing is made only at an intersection of
the street or highway with another public street or highway; and
(e) If the crossing is made between the hours of one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour
before sunrise or in condition of reduced visibility, only if both front and rear lights are on.
(2) Street speed limit. No snowmobile shall be operated on streets or highways at a speed
exceeding 15 mph.
(3) Stopping at intersections. No snowmobile shall enter any uncontrolled intersection
without making a complete stop. The operator shall then yield the right-of-way to any vehicles
or pedestrians that constitute an immediate hazard.
(4) Traveling thoroughfares during emergencies. Notwithstanding any prohibition in this
chapter, a snowmobile may be operated on a public thoroughfare in an emergency during the
period of time when and at locations where snow upon the roadway renders travel by automobile
impractical.
Traffic, Parking and Motor Vehicles 15
§ 70.32 OPERATION GENERALLY
Except as otherwise specifically permitted and authorized, it is unlawful for any person to operate a
snowmobile within the limits of the city:
(A) On a public sidewalk or walkway provided or used for pedestrian travel;
(B) On private property of another without lawful authority or consent of owner or occupant;
(C) On any publicly owned lands and frozen waters, including but not limited to school grounds,
park property, playgrounds, recreation areas and golf courses, except areas previously listed or
authorized for such use by the proper authority, in which case the use should be lawful and
snowmobiles may be driven in and out of the areas by the shortest route. Authorized areas in the
City of Cokato owned by the city shall be designated by Council resolution;
(D) At any place, while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, narcotics or habit forming drugs;
(E) At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all the surrounding circumstances;
(F) At any place in a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the person or property
of another or to cause injury or damage thereto;
(G) So as to tow any person or thing on a public street or highway except through use of a rigid tow
bar attached to the rear of the snowmobile;
(H) At a speed greater than ten mph within 100 feet of any lake shore, except in channels, or of
fisherman, ice houses or skating rinks; nor shall operation be permitted within 100 feet of any sliding
area, nor where the operation would conflict with the lawful use of property or would endanger other
persons or property;
(I) In a manner so as to create a loud, unnecessary or unusual noise that disturbs, annoys or
interferes with the peace and quiet of other persons;
(J) During the hours from 10:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. of any day except for one trip for the purpose of
leaving or entering the city; and
(K) With more than two persons on the snowmobile, one of whom is the operator.
§ 70.33 EQUIPMENT
It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile any place within the limits of the City of
Cokato unless it is equipped with the following:
(A) Standard mufflers which are properly attached and in constant operation, and which reduce the
noise of operation of the motor to the minimum necessary for operation. No person shall use a
muffler cutout, by-pass, straight pipe or similar device on a snowmobile motor, and the exhaust
system shall not emit or produce a sharp popping or crackling sound;
16 Cokato - Traffic Code
(B) Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold the snowmobile under any
conditions of operation;
(C) A safety or so-called "deadman" throttle in operating condition, so that when pressure is
removed from the accelerator or throttle, the motor is disengaged from the driving track;
(D) At least one clear lamp attached to the front, with sufficient intensity to reveal persons and
vehicles at a distance of at least 100 feet ahead during the hours of darkness under normal
atmospheric conditions. The head lamp shall be so aimed that glaring rays are not projected into
the eyes of an oncoming vehicle operator. It shall also be equipped with at least one red tail lamp
having a minimum candle power of sufficient intensity to exhibit a red light plainly visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear during the hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions.
The equipment is to be in operating condition when the vehicle is operated between the hours of
one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise or at times of reduced visibility; and
(E) Reflective material at least 16 square inches on each side forward of the handlebars, so as to
reflect or beam light at a 90 degree angle.
(Prior Code, § 702.04)
§ 70.34 APPLICATION OF OTHER LAWS
City traffic ordinances shall apply to the operation of snowmobiles upon streets and highways, and
M.S. § 84.81 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time and M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be
amended from time to time, except for those provisions relating to required equipment, are hereby
adopted by reference, except those provisions which by their nature have no application.
(Prior Code, § 702.05)
§ 70.35 PERSONS UNDER 18
(A) No person under 14 years of age shall operate on a street, highway or make a direct crossing of
a street or highway as the operator of a snowmobile. A person 14 years of age or older, but less
than 18 years of age, may operate a snowmobile on streets or highways as permitted under this
chapter and make a direct crossing thereof only if he or she has in his or her immediate possession
a valid snowmobile safety certificate issued by the Commissioner of Natural Resources as provided
by M.S. § 84.86, as it may be amended from time to time.
(B) It is unlawful for the owner of a snowmobile to permit the snowmobile to be operated contrary
to the provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 702.06)
§ 70.36 LEAVING SNOWMOBILE UNATTENDED
Every person leaving a snowmobile in a public place shall lock the ignition, remove the key and take
the same with him or her.
(Prior Code, § 702.07)
Traffic, Parking and Motor Vehicles 17
§ 70.37 CHASING ANIMALS FORBIDDEN
It is unlawful to intentionally drive, chase, run over or kill any animal, wild or domestic, with a
snowmobile.
(Prior Code, § 702.08) Penalty, see § 70.99
BICYCLES
§ 70.50 DEFINITION
BICYCLE. Every device propelled solely by human power upon which any person may ride,
having two tandem wheels, except scooters and similar devices, and including any device generally
recognized as a bicycle though equipped with two front or rear wheels.
(Amended June 16, 2014)
§ 70.51 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY
Every person riding a bicycle on a street or any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles shall
be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver by this
title.
§ 70.52 MANNER AND NUMBER OF RIDING
(A) It is unlawful for any person propelling a bicycle to ride other than upon or astride a permanent
and regular seat attached thereto.
(B) No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is
designed and equipped, except on a baby seat attached to the bicycle, provided the seat is equipped
with a harness to hold the child securely in the seat and that protection is provided for that child’s
feet from hitting the spokes of the wheel, or in a seat that is attached to the bicycle operator.
§ 70.53 HITCHING RIDES
It is unlawful for any person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, roller skis, inline skates,
skateboards, sled, or toy vehicle to attach the same or themselves to any vehicle upon the street.
§ 70.54 WHERE TO RIDE
(A) Every person operating a bicycle upon a street shall ride as near to the right side of the street as
practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or when proceeding in the same
direction.
(B) Persons riding bicycles upon the street shall not ride more than two abreast exept for paths and
parts of the streets set aside for exclusive use of bicycles.
18 Cokato - Traffic Code
§ 70.55 RIGHT OF WAY; SIDEWALKS
Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, the person shall yield the right-of-way to
any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a pedestrian.
§ 70.56 CARRYING ARTICLES
It is unlawful for any person operating a bicycle to carry any package, bundle, or any article which
prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand upon the handle bars.
§ 70.57 VISIBILITY AND BRAKE EQUIPMENT
(A) Every bicycle, when in use in the hours of darkness, shall be equipped with some sort of
reflective surfaces so as to be clearly visible during the hours of darkness.
(B) Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked
wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
ROLLER SKATES, INLINE SKATES, ROLLER SKIS, AND SKATEBOARDS
§ 70.60 DEFINITIONS
BUSINESS DISTRICT. The part of the city so designated by the council resolution.
OPERATE. To ride on or upon or control the operation of inline skates, roller skates, roller skis,
or skateboard.
OPERATOR. Every person who operates or who is in physical control of inline skates, roller
skates, roller skis, or skateboard.
ROLLER SKATES or INLINE SKATES. A show with wheels attached or a device with wheels
which is designed to be attached to a shoe.
ROLLER SKIS. A pair of skis platformed with wheels attached which is to simulate skiing.
SKATEBOARD. A device for riding upon, usually while standing, consisting of an oblong piece
of wood, or other composition, mounted on skate wheels.
§ 70.61 UNLAWFUL ACTS
(A) It is unlawful for any person to operate inline skates, roller skates, roller skis, or skateboards
under any circumstances set forth hereafter:
(1) On any public sidewalk, street, or public parking lot that is in the business district, unless
passing through with due diligence.
Traffic, Parking and Motor Vehicles 19
(2) In any city parks after sunset, or city property that is not in the business districts.
(3) In any careless, reckless, or negligent manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger
the safety of any person or the property of any person.
(4) On private property of another without the express permission to do so by the owner or
occupant of the property.
(B) It is unlawful for any person to operate inline skates, roller skates, roller skis, or a skateboard
to attach the same, or the person of the operation, to any vehicle upon a street.
(C) Every person operating inline skates, roller skates, roller skis, or a skateboard ping a street shall
ride as close as possible to the right-hand curb or the edge of the street.
(D) Every person operating inline skates, roller skates, roller skis, or a skateboard upon a street shall
observe the same rules of the road as required of bicycles
§ 70.62 RIGHT OF WAY
The operator of inline skates, roller skates, roller skis, or a skateboard emerging from any alley,
driveway, or building, upon approaching a sidewalk, shall yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians
approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area and upon entering the street shall yield the right-ofway
to all vehicles approaching on the street.
§ 70.63 HOURS OF USE
It is unlawful for any person to use inline skates, roller skates, roller skis, or a skateboard upon a
public street, sidewalk, or other roadway from sunset to sunrise, except on private property with the
expressed permission of the owner, and except if the inline skates, roller skates, roller skis,
skateboard, or operator is equipped with reflective surfaces that are clearly visible in the hours of
darkness.
§ 70.64 VIOLATIONS
A person found guilty of violating this ordinance by his/her misuse of public sidewalks, streets,
parking lots, parks, or park equipment consents to the impoundment of the inline skates, roller skates,
roller skis, or skateboards upon the third conviction of a violation of the ordinance in a calendar
year.
20 Cokato - Traffic Code
§ 70.99 PENALTY
(A) Motor Vehicles. Any person convicted of violating any provision of §§ 70.01 through 70.15 is
guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
(B) Snowmobiles. Every person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of §§ 70.30
through 70.37 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(C) Bicycles. Any person violating the provisions of §§ 70.50 through 70.57 shall be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor.
(D) Roller skates, inline skates, roller skis, and skateboards. Any person violating the provisions
of §§ 70.60 through 70.64 shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
Traffic, Parking and Motor Vehicles 21
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
90. (RESERVED)
91. FIRE PREVENTION; FIREWORKS
92. ABANDONED, JUNK AND UNAUTHORIZED
VEHICLES
93. RIGHT OF WAY MANAGEMENT
94. ANIMALS
95. NUISANCES
96. VACANT BUILDINGS
1
2 Cokato - General Regulations
CHAPTER 90: (RESERVED)
3
4 Cokato - General Regulations
CHAPTER 91: FIRE PREVENTION; FIREWORKS
Section
Fireworks
91.01 Definitions
91.02 Permit required
91.03 Sales and storage
91.04 Use and possession
Regulation of Open Burning
91.20 Definitions
91.21 Open burning prohibited
91.22 Exemptions
91.23 Location restricted
91.24 Rules adopted by reference
91.25 Liability
91.26 Area of enforcement
91.99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Fire department, see § 30.26
FIREWORKS
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates
or requires a different meaning.
FIREWORKS. For the purposes of this section, FIREWORKS will have the same definition as
contained in M.S. § 624.20, Subdivision 1, as it may be amended from time to time, or any
superceding statute.
(Ord. 03-03, passed 6-9-2003)
5
6 Cokato - General Regulations
§ 91.02 PERMIT REQUIRED
No person shall sell or possess for sale fireworks without first having obtained an approved annual
permit from the city.
(A) The application for the permit for the manufacturing, storage for commercial purposes and sale
of fireworks shall be submitted to the Building Inspector and the Fire Chief with a minimum of 15
days prior to operating for consideration.
(B) All permits shall be issued for a period of one calendar year.
(C) Prior to processing the application, a criminal records check must be performed by Wright
County. No permit shall be issued if the applicant or the responsible party for the permit shall have
been convicted of a felony or a fire/fireworks related misdemeanor within the last three years.
(D) Prior to processing the permit application, the Fire Chief and Building Inspector shall determine
that the proposed location is code compliant.
(E) The permit application shall include an approved letter from the person legally responsible for
the property on which the fireworks related activity will occur. The letter shall grant permission to
the applicant for the use of the property.
(Ord. 03-03, passed 6-9-2003)
§ 91.03 SALES AND STORAGE
(A) No person shall sell or store fireworks within 50 feet of any fuel dispensing apparatus.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any seller of any fireworks to permit smoking at any site containing
fireworks. "No Smoking" signs must be conspicuously posted and approved fire extinguishers must
be available for use.
(C) In buildings that do not have an automated sprinkling system, retail sales displays of fireworks
shall be limited to a gross weight of 400 pounds of fireworks. In buildings that do contain an
automated sprinkling system, the amount of fireworks contained in retail sales displays shall be
determined on a case-by-case basis after considering the building’s construction, fire suppression
apparatus and other relevant factors.
(D) The requirements of this subchapter are in addition to any requirements imposed by any building
and/or zoning regulations, fire codes or state law.
(E) Only persons 18 years of age or older may purchase fireworks, and the age of the purchaser
must be verified by photographic identification.
Fire Prevention; Fireworks 7
(F) No exterior storage, display, sales or transient sales of fireworks are permitted. No
manufacturing, sales or storage for commercial purposes shall occur in residentially zoned property
or properties used for educational purposes or assemblies.
(G) A list of all consumer fireworks displayed and stored on the property shall be available at all
times. The list shall document the name, weight and quantity of the fireworks and be accompanied
by the material safety data sheets.
(H) Manufacturing, warehouse buildings or displays in excess of the quantities listed in division (C)
above for retail consumer fireworks shall be classified and protected similarly to explosives and
aerosols.
(I) A handout describing fireworks shall be provided to each consumer purchasing fireworks.
(Ord. 03-03, passed 6-9-2003)
§ 91.04 USE AND POSSESSION
(A) It is unlawful to use fire or discharge any fireworks along city streets, roads and routes of and
during any parade, in any place of pubic assembly, on any public property or in any
commercial/industrial zoning district.
(B) It is unlawful at any time to throw, toss or aim any fireworks at any person, animal, vehicle,
other thing, object or used in any manner that may threaten or cause possible harm to life or property.
(C) The discharge of fireworks shall be prohibited inside a building and within 15 feet of any
building.
(D) The Fire Chief is authorized to ban fireworks if dry or windy conditions occur and/or exist.
(E) Juveniles may not possess fireworks unless under the direct supervision of a responsible adult.
(F) Fireworks may not be discharged in such a manner that may create a nuisance or between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
(Ord. 03-03, passed 6-9-2003)
REGULATION OF OPEN BURNING
§ 91.20 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates
or requires a different meaning.
8 Cokato - General Regulations
ATTENDANT. The same as a competent, unimpaired adult.
BURNING PERMIT. A permit issued by the Cokato Fire Chief authorizing fires exempted from
the general provisions hereof, and setting conditions therefore.
CAMP FIRE. A fire set for cooking, warming or ceremonial purposes, which is not more than
three feet in diameter by three feet high, and has the ground four feet from the base of the fire cleared
of all combustible material.
COMPETENT, UNIMPAIRED ADULT. A person over 18 years of age who is not under the
influence of alcohol or other drug, who shall be the responsible party for directly supervising an
open burn and who shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with this subchapter.
OPEN FIRE or OPEN BURNING. A fire burning in a matter, whether concentrated or dispersed,
which is not contained within a fully enclosed fire box, structure or vehicle, and from which the
products of combustion are emitted directly to the open atmosphere without passing through a stack,
duct or chimney. OPEN FIRE or OPEN BURNING also means any open burning which takes
place within a burning barrel.
RECREATION FIRE. The same definition of CAMP FIRE.
RECREATION FIRE BURN. Requirements: when a camp fire is used for recreation purposes, it
must be ignited with an approved starter fluid using dry, clean wood, conducted with an unimpaired
adult tending the fire at all times; extinguished completely before quitting the occasion and
respecting weather conditions, burning bans and air quality so that safety hazards will not be created.
Mobile cooking devices such as manufactured hibachis, charcoal grills, wood smokers and propane
or natural gas devices are not defined as CAMP OR RECREATION FIRES.
RECREATION FIRE SITE. Requirements: an area of more than a three-foot diameter circle
(measured from the inside of the fire ring or border) completely surrounded by non-combustible and
non-smoke or odor producing material, either of natural rock, cement, brick, tile or block of ferrous
metal only and which area is depressed below ground, on the ground or on a raised bed. Included
are permanent outdoor wood burning fire places. RECREATION FIRE SITES shall not be located
closer than 25 feet to any structure. Burners are not a RECREATION FIRE SITE as defined herein.
RECREATION FIRE TIME LIMIT. Requirements. To respect others in the neighborhood, a
recreation fire shall be extinguished no later than the following times:
(a) Sunday through Thursday: 10:00 p.m.;
(b) Friday through Saturday: 1:00 a.m.; and
Fire Prevention; Fireworks 9
(c) Evenings before a legal holiday: 1:00 a.m.
STARTER FUELS. Dry, untreated, unpainted wood or charcoal fire starter. Paraffin candles and
alcohols are permitted as starter fuels and as aids to ignition only. Propane gas torches or other clean
gas burning devices causing minimal pollution may be used to start an open fire. STARTER FUELS
do not include gasoline, diesel fuel, kerosene and heating oil.
WOOD. Dry, clean fuel only such as twigs, branches, limbs, "presto logs", "duraflame logs",
charcoal, cordwood or untreated dimensional lumber, including clean pallets when cut into threefoot
or less lengths. WOOD does not include wood that is green with leaves or needles, rotten, wet,
oil soaked or treated with paint, glue or preservatives, grass clippings or leaves.
(Ord. 02-02, passed 7-8-2002)
§ 91.21 OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED
From and after the effective date of this subchapter, except as otherwise herein provided, open
burning, including burning in burn barrels and burning leaves and brush, shall be prohibited within
the city.
(Ord. 02-02, passed 7-8-2002)
§ 91.22 EXEMPTIONS
Open burning of the types, and subject to the condition hereinafter stated, shall be exempt from the
provisions of § 91.21.
(A) Recreational fires. Fires under managed supervision for which a burning permit has been
obtained from the Cokato Fire Chief, and where required by state law, from the Department of
Natural Resources, but limited to the following:
(1) Fires purposely set for the instruction and training of public and industrial firefighting
personnel;
(2) Fires set for the elimination of a fire hazard which cannot be abated by any other practicable
means;
(3) Fires purposely set for forest and game management purposes; and
(4) The burning of trees, brush, grass and other vegetable matter in the clearing of land, the
maintenance of street, road and highway right-of-way, and in accepted agricultural land
management practices.
10 Cokato - General Regulations
(B) Exemption. Exemption to conduct fires under this section does not excuse a person from the
consequences, damages or injuries which may result therefore, nor does it exempt any person from
regulations promulgated by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency or any other governmental unit
exercising jurisdiction in matters of pollution or fire hazard regulation.
(Ord. 02-02, passed 7-8-2002)
§ 91.23 LOCATION RESTRICTED
No person shall ignite or maintain any fire permitted under this subchapter or authorize any fire to
be ignited or maintained on any private land unless:
(A) The fire is located safely not less than 25 feet from any structure;
(B) Adequate provisions are taken to prevent the fire from spreading to within 30 feet of any
structure and a DNR forestry permit has been obtained from the Cokato Fire Chief or designated fire
warden; and
(C) The fires shall be constantly attended by an adult person until the fire is extinguished and the
person shall have a garden hose connected to a water supply or other fire extinguishing equipment
readily available for use.
(Ord. 02-02, passed 7-8-2002)
§ 91.24 RULES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE
Minnesota Statutes §§ 88.02 through 88.22, 88.75 and 88.76, as they may be amended from time to
time, and the Minnesota Uniform Fire Code are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
subchapter as if fully set forth at this point.
(Ord. 02-02, passed 7-8-2002)
§ 91.25 LIABILITY
The property owner is responsible for all damages caused by the fire.
(Ord. 02-02, passed 7-8-2002)
§ 91.26 AREA OF ENFORCEMENT
This subchapter shall affect the area as set forth and on file with the City Clerk of the city, which is
incorporated in and made a part of the subchapter.
(Ord. 02-02, passed 7-8-2002)
Fire Prevention; Fireworks 11
§ 91.99 PENALTY
(A) Fireworks.
(1) Materials which violate and/or pose a threat to public safety may be confiscated and
destroyed. Costs associated with disposal shall be assessed back to the property owner or permit
holder.
(2) Violations of §§ 91.01 through 91.04 regulation or state statute may result in revocation of
the approved permit.
(3) Any person convicted of a violation of §§ 91.01 through 91.04 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(B) Regulation of open burning. Any person convicted of a violation of §§ 91.20 through 91.26
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon convection shall be punished by a fine and/or
imprisonment as established by state law and which changes from time to time.
12 Cokato - General Regulations
CHAPTER 92: ABANDONED, JUNKED AND UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLES
Section
92.01 Definitions
92.02 Regulation of vehicles
92.03 Impoundment and disposition
92.99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Abandoned property, see § 32.30
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ABANDONED VEHICLE. The meaning given to it by M.S. § 168B.011, Subdivision 2, as it
may be amended from time to time.
JUNK VEHICLE. The meaning given to it by M.S. § 168B.011, Subdivision 3, as it may be
amended from time to time.
MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE. The meaning given to it by M.S. § 168B.011, Subdivision 9,
as it may be amended from time to time or under M.S. § 169.011, Subdivision 92, as it may be
amended from time to time.
UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE. The meaning given to it by M.S. § 168B.011, Subdivision 4, as it
may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 07-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
§ 92.02 REGULATION OF VEHICLES
(A) Residential property. The parking, storage, repairing, dismantling, demolition or maintenance
of junk or abandoned vehicles is prohibited in zoning districts R1, R2, R3 and C1 except a resident
may repair one such vehicle registered in the name of the resident upon the property occupied by the
resident if the period of repair does not exceed 15 consecutive days.
13
14 Cokato - General Regulations
(B) All other zoning districts. The parking, storage, repairing, dismantling, demolition or
maintenance of junk or abandoned vehicles within the C1, C2, M1 and I zoning districts is allowed
only if incidental to a permitted use in such zoning district. The vehicles shall be stored within an
enclosed building or be screened by a solid board on board fence of sufficient height and opacity to
screen the visibility of vehicles from adjacent rights-of-way and adjoining properties. No more than
two junk or abandoned vehicles may be stored or under repair on the property without proper
screening. The time limit duration of the repairs on private property shall not exceed more than 15
consecutive days.
(Ord. 02-05, passed 8-19-2002; Am. Ord. 07-2010, passed 12-13-2010) Penalty, see § 92.99.
§ 92.03 IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION
Abandoned, junk and unauthorized vehicles may be impounded by any police officer as authorized
by M.S. §§ 168B.04 and 169.041, as they may be amended from time to time and disposed of by the
city as authorized by M.S., Chapter 168B, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 07-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
§ 92.99 PENALTY
Any person violating any provision of § 92.02 is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 07-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
CHAPTER 93: RIGHT OF WAY MANAGEMENT
§ 93.01 FINDINGS, PURPOSE, INTENT
To provide for the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, and to ensure the integrity of its streets and
the appropriate use of the rights-of-way, the city strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good
repair and free from unnecessary encumbrances.
Accordingly, the city hereby enacts this new chapter of this code relating to right-of-way permits and
administration. This chapter imposes reasonable regulation on the placement and maintenance of
facilities and equipment currently within its rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some future time. It
is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state and federal agencies. Under this chapter, persons
excavating and obstructing the rights-of-way will bear financial responsibility for their work. Finally,
this chapter provides for recovery of out-of-pocket and projected costs from persons using the public
rights-of-way.
This chapter shall be interpreted consistently with 1997 Session Laws, Chapter 123, substantially
codified in Minnesota Statutes Sections 237.16, 237.162, 237.163, 237.79, 237.81, and 238.086 (the
"Act") and 2017 Session Laws, Chapter 94 amending the Act and the other laws governing applicable
rights of the city and users of the right-of-way. This chapter shall also be interpreted consistent with
Minnesota Rules 7819.0050 —7819.9950 and Minnesota Rules Chapter 7560 where possible. To the
extent any provision of this chapter cannot be interpreted consistently with the Minnesota Rules, that
interpretation most consistent with the Act and other applicable statutory and case law is intended. This
chapter shall not be interpreted to limit the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce
general ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.
§ 93.02 ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal statutory, administrative and
common law, the city hereby elects, pursuant Minn. Stat. 237.163 subd. 2(b), to manage rights-ofway
within its jurisdiction.
§ 93.03 DEFINITIONS
The following definitions apply in this chapter of this code. References hereafter to "sections"
are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this chapter. Defined terms remain
defined terms, whether or not capitalized.
Abandoned Facility. A facility no longer in service or physically disconnected from a portion of the
operating facility, or from any other facility, that is in use or still carries service. A facility is not
abandoned unless declared so by the right-of-way user.
Applicant. Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a right-of-way.
City. The city of Cokato, Minnesota. For purposes of section 93.28, city also means the City’s elected
officials, officers, employees and agents.
City Administrator. The City Administrator, or his or her designee.
Collocate or Collocation. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace a small wireless
facility on, under, within, or adjacent to an existing wireless support structure or utility pole that is
owned privately, or by the city or other governmental unit.
Note: See, Minn. Stat. § 237.162, Subd. 10.
Commission. The State Public Utilities Commission.
Congested Right-of-Way. A crowded condition in the subsurface of the public right-of-way that
occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between existing underground facilities does not allow for
construction of new underground facilities without using hand digging to expose the existing lateral
facilities in conformance with Minnesota Statutes, section 216D.04 subdivision 3, over a continuous
length in excess of 500 feet.
Construction Performance Bond. Any of the following forms of security provided at permittee's
option:
• Individual project bond;
• Cash deposit;
• Security of a form listed or approved under Minn. Stat. Sec. 15.73, subd. 3;
• Letter of Credit, in a form acceptable to the city;
• Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the city;
• A blanket bond for projects within the city, or other form of construction bond, for a time
specified and in a form acceptable to the city.
Degradation. A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by excavation in or disturbance
of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to reconstruct such right-of-way earlier than would be
required if the excavation or disturbance did not occur.
Degradation Cost. Subject to Minnesota Rules 7819.1100 means the cost to achieve a level of
restoration, as determined by the city at the time the permit is issued, not to exceed the maximum
restoration shown in plates 1 to 13, set forth in Minnesota Rules parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950.
Degradation Fee. The estimated fee established at the time of permitting by the city to recover costs
associated with the decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which
equals the degradation cost.
Delay Penalty. The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation,
obstruction, patching, or restoration as established by permit.
Emergency. A condition that (1) poses a danger to life or health, or of a significant loss of
property; or (2) requires immediate repair or replacement of facilities in order to restore service to a
customer.
Equipment. Any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain facilities in any right-of-way.
Excavate. To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or penetrate any part of a right-ofway.
Excavation permit. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be obtained before a person
may excavate in a right-of-way. An Excavation permit allows the holder to excavate that part of the
right-of-way described in such permit.
Excavation permit fee. Money paid to the city by an applicant to cover the costs as provided in
Section 1.12.
Facility or Facilities. Any tangible asset in the right-of-way required to provide Utility Service.
Five-year project plan. Shows projects adopted by the city for construction within the next five
years.
High Density Corridor. A designated portion of the public right-of-way within which
telecommunications right-of-way users having multiple and competing facilities may be required to
build and install facilities in a common conduit system or other common structure.
Hole. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length less than the width of the
pavement.
Local Representative. A local person or persons, or designee of such person or persons, authorized
by a registrant to accept service and to make decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within
the scope of this chapter.
Management Costs. The actual costs the city incurs in managing its rights-of-way, including such
costs, if incurred, as those associated with registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying
right-of-way or small wireless facility permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects;
maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user facilities during right-of-way work; determining
the adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work inadequately performed after providing
notice and the opportunity to correct the work; and revoking right-of-way or small wireless facility
permits. Management costs do not include payment by a telecommunications right-of-way user for the
use of the right-of-way, unreasonable fees of a third-party contractor used by the city including fees
tied to or based on customer counts, access lines, or revenues generated by the right-of-way or for the
city, the fees and cost of litigation relating to the interpretation of Minnesota Session Laws 1997,
Chapter 123; Minnesota Statutes Sections 237.162 or 237.163; or any ordinance enacted under those
sections, or the city fees and costs related to appeals taken pursuant to Section 1.30 of this chapter.
Obstruct. To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to hinder free and open passage over
that or any part of the right-of-way.
Obstruction Permit. The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must be obtained before a person
may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder to hinder free and open passage over the specified
portion of that right-of-way, for the duration specified therein.
Obstruction Permit Fee. Money paid to the city by a permittee to cover the costs as provided in
Section 1.12
Patch or Patching. A method of pavement replacement that is temporary in nature. A patch consists
of (1) the compaction of the subbase and aggregate base, and (2) the replacement, in kind, of the
existing pavement for a minimum of two feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions. A
patch is considered full restoration only when the pavement is included in the city's five-year project
plan.
Pavement. Any type of improved surface that is within the public right-of-way and that is paved or
otherwise constructed with bituminous, concrete, aggregate, or gravel.
Permit. Has the meaning given "right-of-way permit" in Minnesota Statutes, section 237.162.
Permittee. Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a right-of-way has been granted by
the city under this chapter.
Person. An individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of this state, however organized, whether
public or private, whether domestic or foreign, whether for profit or nonprofit, and whether natural,
corporate, or political.
Probation. The status of a person that has not complied with the conditions of this chapter.
Probationary Period. One year from the date that a person has been notified in writing that they have
been put on probation.
Registrant. Any person who (1) has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities located in any rightof-
way, or (2) in any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-of-way or place its
facilities or equipment in the right-of-way.
Restore or Restoration. The process by which an excavated right-of-way and surrounding area,
including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same condition and life expectancy that
existed before excavation.
Restoration Cost. The amount of money paid to the city by a permittee to achieve the level of
restoration according to plates 1 to 13 of Minnesota Public Utilities Commission rules.
Public Right-of-Way or Right-of-Way. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, cartway, bicycle lane or public sidewalk in which the city has an interest, including other
dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes and utility easements of the city. A right-of-way does
not include the airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or other nonwire
telecommunications or broadcast service.
Right-of-Way Permit. Either the excavation permit or the obstruction permit, or both, depending on
the context, required by this chapter.
Right-of-Way User. (1) A telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by Minnesota Statutes,
section 237.162, subd. 4; or (2) a person owning or controlling a facility in the right-of-way that is
used or intended to be used for providing utility service, and who has a right under law, franchise,
or ordinance to use the public right-of-way.
Service or Utility Service. Includes (1) those services provided by a public utility as defined in
Minn. Stat. 216B.02, subds. 4 and 6; (2) services of a telecommunications right-of-way user,
including transporting of voice or data information; (3) services of a cable communications systems
as defined in Minn. Stat. Chapter. 238; (4) natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications
services provided by the city; (5) services provided by a cooperative electric association organized
under Minn. Stat., Chapter 308A; and (6) water, and sewer, including service laterals, steam, cooling
or heating services.
Service Lateral. An underground facility that is used to transmit, distribute or furnish 'gas,
electricity, communications, or water from a common source to an end-use customer. A service
lateral is also an underground facility that is used in the removal of wastewater from a customer's
premises.
Small Wireless Facility. A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications:
(i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume or
could fit within such an enclosure; and
(ii) all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility provided such
equipment is, in aggregate, no more than 28 cubic feet in volume, not including electric
meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, battery backup
power systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable,
conduit, vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and any
equipment concealed from public view within or behind an existing structure or
concealment.
Note: Minn. Stat. § 237.162, Subd. 11.
Supplementary Application. An application made to excavate or obstruct more of the right-ofway
than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that had already been issued.
Temporary Surface. The compaction of subbase and aggregate base and replacement, in kind, of
the existing pavement only to the edges of the excavation. It is temporary in nature except when the
replacement is of pavement included in the city's two-year plan, in which case it is considered full
restoration.
Trench. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a length equal to or greater than
the width of the pavement.
Telecommunications right-of-way user. A person owning or controlling a facility in the right-ofway,
or seeking to own or control a facility in the right-of-way that is used or is intended to be used for
providing wireless service, or transporting telecommunication or other voice or data information. For
purposes of this chapter, a cable communication system defined and regulated under Minn. Stat. Chap.
238, and telecommunication activities related to providing natural gas or electric energy services, a
public utility as defined in Minn. Stat. Sec. 216B.02, a municipality, a municipal gas or power agency
organized under Minn. Stat. Chaps. 453 and 453A, or a cooperative electric association organized
under Minn. Stat. Chap. 308A, are not telecommunications right-of-way users for purposes of this
chapter except to the extent such entity is offering wireless service.
Two Year project Plan. Shows projects adopted by the city for construction within the next two
years.
Utility Pole. A pole that is used in whole or in part to facilitate telecommunications or electric
service.
Note: Minn. Stat. § 237.162, Subd. 12.
Wireless Facility. Equipment at a fixed location that enables the provision of wireless services
between user equipment and a wireless service network, including equipment associated with wireless
service, a radio transceiver, antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies,
and a small wireless facility, but not including wireless support structures, wireline backhaul facilities,
or cables between utility poles or wireless support structures, or not otherwise immediately adjacent to
and directly associated with a specific antenna.
Note: Minn. Stat. § 237.162, Subd. 13.
Wireless Service. Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of
Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or by means of a mobile device, that is provided using wireless
facilities. Wireless service does not include services regulated under Title VI of the Communications
Act of 1934, as amended, including cable service.
Wireless Support Structure. A new or existing structure in a right-of-way designed to support or
capable of supporting small wireless facilities, as reasonably determined by the city.
Note: Minn. Stat. § 237.162, Subd. 16.
§ 93.04 ADMINISTRATION
The City Administrator is the principal city official responsible for the administration of the rights-ofway,
right-of-way permits, and the ordinances related thereto. The City Administrator may delegate
any or all of the duties hereunder.
§ 93.05 UTILITY COORDINATION COMMITTEE
The city may create an advisory utility coordination committee. Participation on the committee is
voluntary. It will be composed of any registrants that wish to assist the city in obtaining information
and, by making recommendations regarding use of the right-of-way, and to improve the process of
performing construction work therein. The city may determine the size of such committee and shall
appoint members from a list of registrants that have expressed a desire to assist the city.
§ 93.06 REGISTRATION AND RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY
(A) Registration. Each person who occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-ofway
or place any equipment or facilities in or on the right-of-way, including persons with
installation and maintenance responsibilities by lease, sublease or assignment, must register
with the city. Registration will consist of providing application information
(B) Registration Prior to Work. No person may construct, install, repair, remove, relocate,
or perform any other work on, or use any facilities or any part thereof, in any right-of-way
without first being registered with the city.
(C) Exceptions. Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or amend the provisions of a city
ordinance permitting persons to plant or maintain boulevard plantings or gardens in the area of
the right-of-way between their property and the street curb. Persons planting or maintaining
boulevard plantings or gardens shall not be deemed to use or occupy the right-of-way, and
shall not be required to obtain any permits or satisfy any other requirements for planting or
maintaining such boulevard plantings or gardens under this chapter. However, nothing herein
relieves a person from complying with the provisions of the Minn. Stat. Chap. 216D, Gopher
One Call Law.
§ 93.07 REGISTRATION INFORMATION
(A) Information Required. The information provided to the city at the time of registration
shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Each registrant's name, Gopher One-Call registration certificate number, address and
e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers.
(2) The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile
numbers of a local representative. The local representative or designee shall be
available at all times. Current information regarding how to contact the local
representative in an emergency shall be provided at the time of registration.
(3) A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
(a) Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the registrant by an insurance
company licensed to do business in the State of Minnesota, or a form of selfinsurance
acceptable to the city;
(b) Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for personal injury, including
death, as well as claims for property damage arising out of the (i) use and occupancy
of the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees and permittees,
and (ii) placement and use of facilities and equipment in the right-of-way by the
registrant, its officers, agents, employees and permittees, including, but not limited
to, protection against liability arising from completed operations, damage of
underground facilities and collapse of property;
(c) Naming the city as an additional insured as to whom the coverages required
herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will be provided as to
all such coverages;
(d) Requiring that the city be notified thirty (30) days in advance of cancellation of
the policy or material modification of a coverage term; and
(e) Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile liability coverage,
workers compensation and umbrella coverage established by the city in amounts
sufficient to protect the city and the public and to carry out the purposes and
policies of this chapter.
(f) The city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies.
(g) If the person is a corporation, a copy of the certificate is required to be filed under
Minn. Stat. Sec. 300.06 as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State.
(h) A copy of the person's order granting a certificate of authority from the Minnesota
Public Utilities Commission or other authorization or approval from the applicable
state or federal agency to lawfully operate, where the person is lawfully required to
have such authorization or approval from said commission or other state or federal
agency.
(B)Notice of Changes. The registrant shall keep all of the information listed above current at all
times by providing to the city information as to changes within fifteen (15) days following the
date on which the registrant has knowledge of any change.
Sec. 93.08 REPORTING OBLIGATIONS
(A)Operations. Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and by December 1 of each year,
file a construction and major maintenance plan for underground facilities with the city. Such
plan shall be submitted using a format designated by the city and shall contain the information
determined by the city to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the
frequency of excavations and obstructions of rights-of-way.
The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:
(1) The locations and the estimated beginning and ending dates of all projects to be
commenced during the next calendar year (in this section, a "next-year project"); and
(2) To the extent known, the tentative locations and estimated beginning and ending dates
for all projects contemplated for the five years following the next calendar year (in this
section, a "five-year project").
The term "project" in this section shall include both next-year projects and five-year
projects.
By January 1 of each year, the city will have available for inspection in the city's office a
composite list of all projects of which the city has been informed of the annual plans. All
registrants are responsible for keeping themselves informed of the current status of this list.
Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change any project in its list of next-year
projects, and must notify the city and all other registrants of all such changes in said list.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a registrant may at any time join in a next-year project of
another registrant listed by the other registrant.
(B) Additional Next-Year Projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city will not deny an
application for a right-of-way permit for failure to include a project in a plan submitted to
the city if the registrant has used commercially reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for
the project.
§ 93.09 PERMIT REQUIREMENT
(A)Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person may obstruct or
excavate any right-of-way, or install or place facilities in the right-of-way, without first having
obtained the appropriate right-of-way permit from the city to do so.
(1) Excavation Permit. An excavation permit is required by a registrant to excavate that part
of the right-of-way described in such permit and to hinder free and open passage over
the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing facilities described therein, to the
extent and for the duration specified therein.
(2) Obstruction Permit. An obstruction permit is required by a registrant to hinder free and
open passage over the specified portion of right-of-way by placing equipment described
therein on the right-of-way, to the extent and for the duration specified therein. An
obstruction permit is not required if a person already possesses a valid excavation permit
for the same project.
(3) Small Wireless Facility Permit. A small wireless facility permit is required by a
registrant to erect or install a wireless support structure, to collocate a small wireless
facility, or to otherwise install a small wireless facility in the specified portion of the
right-of-way, to the extent specified therein, provided that such permit shall remain in
effect for the length of time the facility is in use, unless lawfully revoked.
Note: Minn. Stat. § 237.163, Subd. 13.
(4) Permit Extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the right-of-way beyond the date
or dates specified in the permit unless (i) such person makes a supplementary application
for another right-of-way permit before the expiration of the initial permit, and (ii) a new
permit or permit extension is granted.
(5) Delay Penalty. In accordance with Minnesota Rule 7819.1000 subp. 3 and
notwithstanding subd. 2 of this Section, the city shall establish and impose a delay
penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or
restoration. The delay penalty shall be established from time to time by city council
resolution.
(6) Permit Display. Permits issued under this chapter shall be conspicuously displayed or
otherwise available at all times at the indicated work site and shall be available for
inspection by the city.
§ 93.10 PERMIT APPLICATIONS
Application for a permit is made to the city. Right-of-way permit applications shall contain, and will be
considered complete only upon compliance with, the requirements of the following provisions:
(A)Registration with the city pursuant to this chapter;
(B) Submission of a completed permit application form, including all required attachments, and
scaled drawings showing the location and area of the proposed project and the location of all
known existing and proposed facilities.
(C) Payment of money due the city for:
(1) permit fees, estimated restoration costs and other management costs;
(2) prior obstructions or excavations;
(3) any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the city because of applicant's prior
excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the
city;
(4) franchise fees or other charges, if applicable.
(D)Payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting security or depositing in an escrow
account an amount equal to at least 110% of the amount owing.
(E) Posting an additional or larger construction performance bond for additional facilities when
applicant requests an excavation permit to install additional facilities and the city deems the
existing construction performance bond inadequate under applicable standards.
§ 93.11 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS
(A)Permit Issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this chapter, the city shall
issue a permit.
(B)Conditions. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the permit and the
performance of the applicant thereunder to protect the health, safety and welfare or when
necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use. In addition, a permittee shall comply
with all requirements of local, state and federal laws, including but not limited to Minnesota
Statutes §§ 216D.01 - .09 (Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System) and Minnesota Rules
Chapter 7560.
(C)Small Wireless Facility Conditions. In addition to subdivision 2, the erection or installation of
a wireless support structure, the collocation of a small wireless facility, or other installation of a
small wireless facility in the right-of-way, shall be subject to the following conditions:A small
wireless facility shall only be collocated on the particular wireless support structure, under
those attachment specifications, and at the height indicated in the applicable permit application.
(1) No new wireless support structure installed within the right-of-way shall exceed 50 feet
in height without the city’s written authorization, provided that the city may impose a
lower height limit in the applicable permit to protect the public health, safety and
welfare or to protect the right-of-way and its current use, and further provided that a
registrant may replace an existing wireless support structure exceeding 50 feet in height
with a structure of the same height subject to such conditions or requirements as may be
imposed in the applicable permit.
(2) No wireless facility may extend more than 10 feet above its wireless support structure.
(3) Where an applicant proposes to install a new wireless support structure in the right-ofway,
the city may impose separation requirements between such structure and any
existing wireless support structure or other facilities in and around the right-of-way.
(4) Where an applicant proposes collocation on a decorative wireless support structure, sign
or other structure not intended to support small wireless facilities, the city may impose
reasonable requirements to accommodate the particular design, appearance or intended
purpose of such structure.
(5) Where an applicant proposes to replace a wireless support structure, the city may
impose reasonable restocking, replacement, or relocation requirements on the
replacement of such structure.
Note: Minn. Stat. § 237.163, Subd. 3b.
(D)Small Wireless Facility Agreement. A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on a
small wireless support structure owned or controlled by the city, or any other city asset in the
right-of-way, after the applicant has executed a standard small wireless facility collocation
agreement with the city. The standard collocation agreement may require payment of the
following:
(1) Up to $150 per year for rent to collocate on the city structure.
(2) $25 per year for maintenance associated with the collocation;
(3) A monthly fee for electrical service as follows:
(a) $73 per radio node less than or equal to 100 maximum watts;
(b) $182 per radio node over 100 maximum watts; or
(c) The actual costs of electricity, if the actual cost exceed the foregoing.
The standard collocation agreement shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, the required small
wireless facility permit, provided, however, that the applicant shall not be additionally required
to obtain a license or franchise in order to collocate. Issuance of a small wireless facility
permit does not supersede, alter or affect any then-existing agreement between the city and
applicant.
Note: Minn. Stat. § 237.163, Subd. 6(g).
§ 93.12 ACTION ON SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY PERMIT APPLICATIONS
(A)Deadline for Action. The city shall approve or deny a small wireless facility permit
application within 90 days after filing of such application. The small wireless facility permit,
and any associated building permit application, shall be deemed approved if the city fails to
approve or deny the application within the review periods established in this section.
(B) Consolidated Applications. An applicant may file a consolidated small wireless facility permit
application addressing the proposed collocation of up to 15 small wireless facilities, or a greater
number if agreed to by a local government unit, provided that all small wireless facilities in the
application:
(1) are located within a two-mile radius;
(2) consist of substantially similar equipment; and
(3) are to be placed on similar types of wireless support structures.
In rendering a decision on a consolidated permit application, the city may approve some small
wireless facilities and deny others, but may not use denial of one or more permits as a basis to
deny all small wireless facilities in the application.
(C)Tolling of Deadline. The 90-day deadline for action on a small wireless facility permit
application may be tolled if:
(1) The city receives applications from one or more applicants seeking approval of permits
for more than 30 small wireless facilities within a seven-day period. In such case, the
city may extend the deadline for all such applications by 30 days by informing the
affected applicants in writing of such extension.
(2) The applicant fails to submit all required documents or information and the city provides
written notice of incompleteness to the applicant within 30 days of receipt the
application. Upon submission of additional documents or information, the city shall
have ten days to notify the applicant in writing of any still-missing information.
(3) The city and a small wireless facility applicant agree in writing to toll the review period.
Note: Minn. Stat. § 237.163, Subd. 3c.
§ 93.13 PERMIT FEES
(A)Excavation Permit Fee. The city shall impose an excavation permit fee in an amount sufficient
to recover:
(1) management costs;
(2) degradation costs, if applicable.
(B)Obstruction Permit Fee. The city shall impose an obstruction permit fee in an amount
sufficient to recover management costs.
(C)Small Wireless Facility Permit Fee. The city shall impose a small wireless facility permit fee
in an amount sufficient to recover:
(1) management costs, and;
(2) city engineering, make-ready, and construction costs associated with collocation of small
wireless facilities.
(D)Payment of Permit Fees. No excavation permit or obstruction permit shall be issued without
payment of excavation or obstruction permit fees. The city may allow applicant to pay such
fees within thirty (30) days of billing.
(E)Non Refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the city has revoked for a breach
as stated in Section 1.22 are not refundable.
(F) Application to Franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise, management costs may
be charged separately from and in addition to the franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user
in the franchise.
§ 93.14 RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION
(A)Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the patching and restoration of
the right-of-way as required herein, must be completed within the dates specified in the permit,
increased by as many days as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the
control of the permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under
Section 1.16.
(B) Patch and Restoration. Permittee shall patch its own work. The city may choose either to
have the permittee restore the right-of-way or to restore the right-of-way itself.
(1) City Restoration. If the city restores the right-of-way, permittee shall pay the costs
thereof within thirty (30) days of billing. If, following such restoration, the pavement
settles due to permittee's improper backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the city, within
thirty (30) days of billing, all costs associated with correcting the defective work.
(2) Permittee Restoration. If the permittee restores the right-of-way itself, it shall at
the time of application for an excavation permit post a construction performance
bond in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Rule 7819.3000.
(3) Degradation Fee in Lieu of Restoration. In lieu of right-of-way restoration, a right-ofway
user may elect to pay a degradation fee. However, the right-of-way user shall
remain responsible for patching and the degradation fee shall not include the cost to
accomplish these responsibilities.
(C)Standards. The permittee shall perform excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration
according to the standards and with the materials specified by the city and shall comply with
Minnesota Rule 7819.1100.
(D)Duty to Correct Defects. The permittee shall correct defects in patching or restoration
perfrmed by permittee or its agents. The permittee upon notification from the city, shall correct
all restoration work to the extent necessary, using the method required by the city. Said work
shall be completed within five (5) calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the city, not
including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances constituting force
majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or unreasonable under Section 1.16.
(E)Failure to Restore. If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner and to the
condition required by the city, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration
required by the city, the city at its option may do such work. In that event the permittee shall
pay to the city, within thirty (30) days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way. If
permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise its rights under the construction
performance bond.
§ 93.15 JOINT APPLICATIONS
(A) Joint application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits to excavate or obstruct the right-ofway
at the same place and time.
(B) Shared fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same obstruction or excavation, which
the city does not perform, may share in the payment of the obstruction or excavation permit
fee. In order to obtain a joint permit, registrants must agree among themselves as to the portion
each will pay and indicate the same on their applications.
(C)With city projects. Registrants who join in a scheduled obstruction or excavation
performed by the city, whether or not it is a joint application by two or more registrants or
a single application, are not required to pay the excavation or obstruction and degradation
portions of the permit fee, but a permit would still be required.
§ 93.16 SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS
(A)Limitation on Area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area of the right-of-way
specified in the permit. No permittee may do any work outside the area specified in the permit,
except as provided herein. Any permittee which determines that an area greater than that
specified in the permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater
area (i) make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees required thereby,
and (ii) be granted a new permit or permit extension.
(B) Limitation on Dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates specified in the permit.
No permittee may begin its work before the permit start date or, except as provided herein,
continue working after the end date. If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end
date, it must apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit
or an extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the previous permit. This
supplementary application must be submitted before the permit end date.
§ 93.17 OTHER OBLIGATIONS
(A) Compliance with Other Laws. Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not relieve permittee of
its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, and authority and to pay all fees required
by the city or other applicable rule, law or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all
requirements of local, state and federal laws, including but not limited to Minnesota Statutes,
Section 216D.01-.09 (Gopher One Call Excavation Notice System) and Minnesota Rules
Chapter 7560. A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable codes and
established rules and regulations, and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way
pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the work.
(B) Prohibited Work. Except in an emergency, and with the approval of the city, no right-of-way
obstruction or excavation may be done when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are
unreasonable for such work.
(C) Interference with Right-of-Way. A permittee shall not so obstruct a right-of-way that the
natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterways shall be
interfered with. Private vehicles of those doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked
within or next to a permit area, unless parked in conformance with city parking regulations.
The loading or unloading of trucks must be done solely within the defined permit area unless
specifically authorized by the permit.
(D)Trenchless excavation. As a condition of all applicable permits, permittees employing
trenchless excavation methods, including but not limited to Horizontal Directional Drilling,
shall follow all requirements set forth in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 216D and Minnesota
Rules Chapter 7560 and shall require potholing or open cutting over existing underground
utilities before excavating, as determined by the City Administrator.
§ 93.18 DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT
(A)Reasons for Denial. The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and
conditions of this chapter or if the city determines that the denial is necessary to protect the
health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use.
(B) Procedural Requirements. The denial or revocation of a permit must be made in writing
and must document the basis for the denial. The city must notify the applicant or right-ofway
user in writing within three business days of the decision to deny or revoke a permit. If
an application is denied, the right-of-way user may address the reasons for denial identified
by the city and resubmit its application. If the application is resubmitted within 30 days of
receipt of the notice of denial, no additional application fee shall be imposed. The city must
approve or deny the resubmitted application within 30 days after submission.
Note: Minn. Stat. § 237.163, Subds. 4(c) and 5(f).
§ 93.19 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS
The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other work performed in the right-of-way
shall be done in conformance with Minnesota Rules 7819.1100 and 7819.5000 and other applicable
local requirements, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the Minnesota Statutes, Sections 237.162
and 237.163. Installation of service laterals shall be performed in accordance with Minnesota Rules
Chapter 7560 and these ordinances. Service lateral installation is further subject to those requirements
and conditions set forth by the city in the applicable permits and/or agreements referenced in Section
1.23 subd. 2 of this ordinance.
§ 93.20 INSPECTION
(A)Notice of Completion. When the work under any permit hereunder is completed, the
permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in accordance Minnesota Rule 7819.1300.
(B) Site Inspection. Permittee shall make the work-site available to the city and to all others
as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution of and
upon completion of the work.
(C)Authority of City Administrator.
(1) At the time of inspection, the City Administrator may order the immediate
cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety or
well-being of the public.
(2) The City Administrator may issue an order to the permittee for any work that does
not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable standards, conditions, or
codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the violation will be cause for
revocation of the permit. Within ten (10) days after issuance of the order, the
permittee shall present proof to the City Administrator that the violation has been
corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the required time, the City
Administrator may revoke the permit pursuant to Sec. 1.22.
§ 93.21 WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT
(A)Emergency Situations. Each registrant shall immediately notify the City Administrator of
any event regarding its facilities that it considers to be an emergency. The registrant may
proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency. Excavators'
notification to Gopher State One Call regarding an emergency situation does not fulfill this
requirement. Within two (2) business days after the occurrence of the emergency, the
registrant shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith, and
fulfill the rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this
chapter for the actions it took in response to the emergency.
If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant's facilities, the city will
attempt to contact the local representative of each registrant affected, or potentially
affected, by the emergency. In any event, the city may take whatever action it deems
necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the registrant
whose facilities occasioned the emergency.
(B) Non-Emergency Situations. Except in an emergency, any person who, without first having
obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a right-of-way must subsequently
obtain a permit and, as a penalty, pay double the normal fee for said permit, pay double all
the other fees required by the city code, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct
any damage to the right-of-way, and comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.
§ 93.22 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION
If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or ends sooner than the date given on
the permit, permittee shall notify the city of the accurate information as soon as this information is
known.
§ 93.23 REVOCATION OF PERMITS
(A) Substantial Breach. The city reserves its right, as provided herein, to revoke any right-of-way
permit without a fee refund, if there is a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any
statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial
breach by permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
(1) The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
(2) An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-of-way permit, or the
perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens;
(3) Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a right-of-way permit;
(4) The failure to complete the work in a timely manner, unless a permit extension is
obtained or unless the failure to complete work is due to reasons beyond the permittee's
control; or
(5) The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not conform to a condition
indicated on an order issued pursuant to Sec. 1.19.
(B)Written Notice of Breach. If the city determines that the permittee has committed a substantial
breach of a term or condition of any statute, ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the
permit, the city shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The
demand shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. A
substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at its discretion, to place additional or
revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy the breach.
(C)Response to Notice of Breach. Within twenty-four (24) hours of receiving notification of the
breach, permittee shall provide the city with a plan, acceptable to the city, that will cure the
breach. Permittee's failure to so contact the city, or permittee's failure to timely submit an
acceptable plan, or permittee's failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be
cause for immediate revocation of the permit. Further, permittee's failure to so contact the city,
or permittee's failure to submit an acceptable plan, or permittee's failure to reasonably
implement the approved plan, shall automatically place the permittee on probation for one (1)
full year.
(D)Cause for Probation. From time to time, the city may establish a list of conditions of
the permit, which if breached will automatically place the permittee on probation for
one full year, such as, but not limited to, working out of the allotted time period or
working on right-of-way grossly outside of the permit authorization.
(E) Automatic Revocation. If a permittee, while on probation, commits a breach as
outlined above, permittee's permit will automatically be revoked and permittee will
not be allowed further permits for one full year, except for emergency repairs.
(F) Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also reimburse the city
for the city's reasonable costs, including restoration costs and the costs of collection and
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in connection with such revocation.
§ 93.24 MAPPING DATA
(A) Information Required. Each registrant and permittee shall provide mapping
information required by the city in accordance with Minnesota Rules 7819.4000 and
7819.4100. Within ninety (90) days following completion of any work pursuant to a
permit, the permittee shall provide the City Administrator accurate maps and drawings
certifying the "as-built" location of all equipment installed, owed and maintained by the
permittee. Such maps and drawings shall include the horizontal and vertical location of
all facilities and equipment and shall be provided consistent with the city's electronic
mapping system, when practical or as a condition imposed by the City Administrator.
Failure to provide maps and drawings pursuant to this subsection shall be grounds for
revoking the permit holder's registration.
(C)Service Laterals. All permits issued for the installation or repair of service laterals, other
than minor repairs as defined in Minnesota Rules 7560.0150 subpart 2, shall require the
permittee's use of appropriate means of establishing the horizontal locations of installed
service laterals and the service lateral vertical locations in those cases where the City
Administrator reasonably requires it. Permittees or their subcontractors shall submit to
the City Administrator evidence satisfactory to the City Administrator of the installed
service lateral locations. Compliance with this subdivision 2 and with applicable Gopher
State One Call law and Minnesota Rules governing service laterals installed after
December 31, 2005 shall be a condition of any city approval necessary for
(1) payments to contractors working on a public improvement project including
those under Minnesota Statutes Chapter 429 and
(2) city approval under development agreements or other subdivision or site plan
approval under Minnesota Statutes Chapter 462. The City Administrator shall
reasonably determine the appropriate method of providing such information to
the city. Failure to provide prompt and accurate information on the service
laterals installed may result in the revocation of the permit issued for the work or
future permits to the offending permittee or its subcontractors.
§ 93.25 LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES
(A) Placement, location, and relocation of facilities must comply with the Act, with other
applicable law, and with Minnesota Rules 7819.3100, 7819.5000 and 7819.5100, to the extent
the rules do not limit authority otherwise available to cities.
(B) Undergrounding. Unless otherwise agreed in a franchise or other agreement between the
applicable right-of-way user and the City, Facilities in the right-of-way must be located or relocated
and maintained underground in accordance with Section ______of the City Code.
(C) Corridors. The city may assign a specific area within the right-of-way, or any particular
segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of facilities that is or, pursuant to current
technology, the city expects will someday be located within the right-of-way. All excavation,
obstruction, or other permits issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of
facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue.
Any registrant who has facilities in the right-of-way in a position at variance with the
corridors established by the city shall, no later than at the time of the next reconstruction or
excavation of the area where the facilities are located, move the facilities to the assigned
position within the right-of-way, unless this requirement is waived by the city for good cause
shown, upon consideration of such factors as the remaining economic life of the facilities,
public safety, customer service needs and hardship to the registrant.
(D) Nuisance. One year after the passage of this chapter, any facilities found in a right-of-way
that have not been registered shall be deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any
remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance
or taking possession of the facilities and restoring the right-of-way to a useable condition.
(E) Limitation of Space. To protect health, safety, and welfare, or when necessary to protect the
right-of-way and its current use, the city shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement
of new or additional facilities within the right-of-way. In making such decisions, the city shall
strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users of the right-of-way,
but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the public interest, the public's needs for the
particular utility service, the condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with respect to
essential utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and future city plans
for public improvements and development projects which have been determined to be in the
public interest.
§ 93.26 PRE-EXCAVATION FACILITIES LOCATION
In addition to complying with the requirements of Minn. Stat. 216D.01-.09 ("One Call Excavation
Notice System") before the start date of any right-of-way excavation, each registrant who has
facilities or equipment in the area to be excavated shall mark the horizontal and vertical placement of
all said facilities. Any registrant whose facilities are less than twenty (20) inches below a concrete or
asphalt surface shall notify and work closely with the excavation contractor to establish the exact
location of its facilities and the best procedure for excavation.
§ 93.27 DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES
When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to maintain, support, or move a
registrant's facilities to protect it, the city shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably
possible. The costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant and must be paid within thirty
(30) days from the date of billing. Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any
facilities in the right-of-way which it or its facilities damage. Each registrant shall be responsible for
the cost of repairing any damage to the facilities of another registrant caused during the city's
response to an emergency occasioned by that registrant's facilities.
§ 93.28 RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION
Reservation of right. If the city vacates a right-of-way that contains the facilities of a registrant, the
registrant's rights in the vacated right-of-way are governed by Minnesota Rules 7819.3200.
§ 93.29 INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY
By registering with the city, or by accepting a permit under this chapter, a registrant or permittee
agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Rule
7819.1250.
§ 93.30 ABANDONED AND UNUSABLE FACILITIES
(A) Discontinued Operations. A registrant who has determined to discontinue all or a portion
of its operations in the city must provide information satisfactory to the city that the
registrant's obligations for its facilities in the right-of-way under this chapter have been
lawfully assumed by another registrant.
(B) Removal. Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-way shall remove it
from that right-of-way if required in conjunction with other right-of-way repair, excavation, or
construction, unless this requirement is waived by the city.
§ 93.31 APPEAL
A right-of-way user that: (1) has been denied registration; (2) has been denied a permit; (3) has had a
permit revoked; (4) believes that the fees imposed are not in conformity with Minn. Stat. § 237.163,
Subd. 6; or (5) disputes a determination of the City Administrator regarding Section1.23 subd.2 of this
ordinance may have the denial, revocation, fee imposition, or decision reviewed, upon written request,
by the city council. The city council shall act on a timely written request at its next regularly scheduled
meeting, provided the right-of-way user has submitted its appeal with sufficient time to include the
appeal as a regular agenda item. A decision by the city council affirming the denial, revocation, or fee
imposition will be in writing and supported by written findings establishing the reasonableness of the
decision.
§ 93.32 RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS
A permittee’s rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce
general ordinances as necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.
§ 93.33 SEVERABILITY
If any portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. Nothing in this chapter precludes the city from
requiring a franchise agreement with the applicant, as allowed by law, in addition to requirements set
forth herein.
ASSESSABLE CURRENT SERVICES; OBLIGATION OF PROPERTY OWNERS AND
OCCUPANTS
§ 93.50 CURRENT SERVICES
CURRENT SERVICES includes one or more of the following: snow, ice or rubbish removal from
sidewalks, weed elimination from street grass plots adjacent to sidewalks or from private property,
removal or elimination of public health or safety hazards from private property, excluding any
hazardous building included in M.S. §§ 463.15 to 463.26, as they may be amended from time to
time; installations or repair of water service lines, street sprinkling, street flushing, light street oiling
or other dust treatment of streets, repair of sidewalks and alleys and the operation of a street lighting
system.
§ 93.51 SNOW, ICE, DIRT AND RUBBISH
(A) Duty of owners and occupants. The owner and the occupant of any property adjacent to a
public sidewalk shall use diligence to keep the walk safe for pedestrians. No owner or occupant shall
allow snow, ice, dirt or rubbish to remain on the walk longer than 12 hours after its deposit thereon,
or in the case of snow after it has ceased falling. No owner or occupant shall deposit snow, ice,
dirt, or rubbish into any street, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way.
(B) Removal by city. The city shall remove from all public sidewalks all snow, ice, dirt and rubbish
as soon as possible beginning 12 hours after any matter has been deposited thereon or after the snow
has ceased to fall. The City Council may establish a fee in the city’s fee schedule to recover the costs
for removal when any cleanup is necessary. The city shall keep a record of the removals for
collection. Any unpaid fees may be certified to the county for collection as a special assessment.
§ 93.52 WEED ELIMINATION
(A) Weeds as a nuisance. Any weeds, whether noxious as defined by law or not, growing upon
any lot or parcel of land outside the traveled portion of any street or alley in the City of Cokato to a
greater height than 12 inches or which have gone or are about to go to seed are a nuisance. The
owner and the occupant shall abate or prevent the nuisance on the property and on land outside the
traveled portion of the street or alley abutting on the property.
(B) Notice. The city shall mail notice directing owners and occupants of property within the city
to destroy all weeds declared by division (A) above to be a nuisance and stating that if not so
destroyed within ten days after mailing of the notice, the weeds will be destroyed at the expense of
the owner and if not paid, the charge for the work will be made a special assessment against the
property concerned.
(C) Removal by city. If the owner or occupant of any property in the city fails to comply with the
notice within ten days after it has been mailed, the city shall have the weeds removed. A record
shall be kept showing the cost of the work attributable to each separate lot and parcel for collection
and assessment purposes.
§ 93.53 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY HAZARDS
(A) When the city removes or eliminates public health or safety hazards from private property under
city ordinance, the administrative officer responsible for doing the work shall keep a record of the
cost of the removal or elimination against each parcel of property affected.
(B) This section does not apply to hazardous buildings under the hazardous building law, M.S.
§§ 463.15 to 463.26, as it may be amended from time to time.
§ 93.54 INSTALLATION AND REPAIR OF WATER SERVICE LINES
Whenever the city installs or repairs water service lines serving private property under Title V, the
city shall keep a record of the total cost of the installation or repair, and the property owner shall be
responsible for those costs. Any costs that remain unpaid at the time of annual assessment shall be
certified to the county as a special assessment.
§ 93.55 REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS AND ALLEYS
(A) Duty of owner. The owner of any property within the city abutting a public sidewalk or alley
shall keep the sidewalk or alley in repair and safe for pedestrians. Repairs shall be made in
accordance with the standard specifications approved by the Council and on file in the office of the
City Clerk.
(B) Inspection; notice. The city shall make the inspections as are necessary to determine that
public sidewalks and alleys within the city are kept in repair and safe for pedestrians or vehicles. If
it is determined that any sidewalk or alley abutting on private property is unsafe and in need of
repairs, the city shall cause a notice to be served, by registered or certified mail or by personal
service, upon the record owner of the property and the occupant, if the owner does not reside within
the city or cannot be found therein ordering the owner to have the sidewalk or alley repaired and
made safe within 30 days and stating that if the owner fails to do so, the city will do so, that the
expense thereof must be paid by the owner, and that if unpaid it will be made a special assessment
against the property concerned.
(C) Repair by city. If the sidewalk or alley is not repaired within 30 days after receipt of the notice,
staff shall report the facts to the City Council and the City Council shall, by resolution, order the
repairs to the sidewalk or alley. The city shall keep a record of the total cost of the repair attributable
to each lot or parcel of property.
§ 93.56 ASSESSMENT
On or before the due date established by the County Auditor, the city shall list the total unpaid
charges for each type of current service against each separate lot or parcel to which they are
attributable under this subchapter. The Council may then certify the charges against the property
benefitted as a special assessment under M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time,
and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and collection along with current
taxes the following year or in annual installments, not exceeding ten, as the Council may determine
in each case.
CHAPTER 94: ANIMALS
Section
Dogs
94.01 Definitions
94.02 Dog nuisances
94.03 Running-at-large prohibited
94.04 Licenses required
94.05 Affixing tags
94.06 Confinement of certain dogs
94.07 Limit of dogs at one premises
94.08 Abandonment
94.09 Quarantine of certain dogs
94.10 Muzzling proclamation
94.11 Proceedings for destruction of certain dogs
94.12 Impounding
94.13 Redemption
Other Animals
94.30 General prohibition
94.31 Areas where keeping prohibited
94.32 Treatment
94.33 Animals at-large
94.34 Diseased animals
94.35 Manner of keeping
94.36 Care of premises
94.37 Impounding
94.99 Penalty
31
32 Cokato - General Regulations
DOGS
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates
or requires a different meaning.
HARBORER OF A DOG. Any person who has custody of any dog or permits the same to be kept
or to stay on or about his or her premises.
OWNER. Any person, firm or corporation owning, harboring or keeping a dog.
RUNNING-AT-LARGE OF DOGS. Permitting any dog to go on or about the public streets, alleys
or other places in the city, except on the premises of the owner or harborer thereof, and except on a
leash, in an automobile or similar confinement, and at all times is under control.
(Res. 0022, passed 8-14-2000)
§ 94.02 DOG NUISANCES
(A) Nuisances.
(1) The owner or custodian of any dog shall prevent the dog from committing in the city any
act which constitutes a nuisance such as to habitually, frequently bark or cry, to frequent school
grounds, parks or public beaches, to chase vehicles, to molest or annoy any person away from
the property of his or her owner or custodian, or to damage or destroy public or private property.
(2) Defecation on property other than that of the dog owner is a nuisance. Failure of the owner
or custodian to prevent the dog from committing a nuisance is a violation of this subchapter.
(B) Habitual barking. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a dog which habitually
barks or cries. HABITUAL BARKING shall be defined as barking for repeated intervals of at least
five minutes with less than one minute of interruption. The barking must also be audible off of the
owner’s or caretaker’s premises.
(C) Warrant required. The Animal Control Officer or police officer shall not enter the property of
the owner of an animal described in this section unless the officer has first obtained the permission
of the owner to do so or has obtained a warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction, as
provided for in § 10.20, to search for and seize the animal.
(Res. 0022, passed 8-14-2000) Penalty, see § 94.99
Cross-reference:
Manner of keeping, see § 94.35
Animals 33
§ 94.03 RUNNING-AT-LARGE PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for the dog or cat of any person who owns, harbors or keeps a dog or cat, to runat-
large. A person, who owns, harbors or keeps a dog or cat which runs-at-large shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. Dogs or cats on a leash and accompanied by a responsible person or accompanied by
and under the control and direction of a responsible person, so as to be effectively restrained by
command as by leash, shall be permitted in streets or on public land unless the city has posted an
area with signs reading Dogs or Cats Prohibited.
§ 94.04 LICENSES REQUIRED
(A) No person shall keep any dog within the city without securing an annual license from the city.
(B) Records are kept for licenses issued with proof of vaccinations.
(C) License fees shall be established by the City Council by ordinance.
(Res. 0022, passed 8-14-2000) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.05 AFFIXING TAGS
(A) The owner shall cause the tag to be affixed by a permanent metal fastener to the collar of the
dog in such a manner that the tag may easily be seen.
(B) The owner shall see that the tag is constantly worn by the dog in public.
(Res. 0022, passed 8-14-2000)
§ 94.06 CONFINEMENT OF CERTAIN DOGS
Every female dog in heat shall be confined in a building or other secure enclosure in such manner
that it cannot come into contact with another dog, except for planned breeding.
(Res. 0022, passed 8-14-2000)
§ 94.07 LIMIT OF DOGS AT ONE PREMISES
Not more than two dogs over six months of age shall be kept on any one premises except at a licensed
commercial kennel. However, if more than two dogs are now currently kept at the premises, the dogs
will be permitted to remain if no violations occur under the provisions of this chapter.
(Res. 0022, passed 8-14-2000)
34 Cokato - General Regulations
§ 94.08 ABANDONMENT
It is unlawful for any person to abandon any dog or other animal within the city limits.
(Res. 0022, passed 8-14-2000)
§ 94.09 QUARANTINE OF CERTAIN DOGS
Any dog which bites a person shall be quarantined for such a time as may be directed by the city.
During quarantine, the dog shall be securely confined and kept from contact with any other animal.
At the discretion of the city, the quarantine may be on the premises of the owner. However, if the
conditions require other confinement, the owner shall surrender the dog for the quarantine period to
an animal shelter/clinic or shall, at his or her own expense, place it in a veterinary clinic as
determined by the city.
(Res. 0022, passed 8-14-2000)
§ 94.10 MUZZLING PROCLAMATION
Whenever the prevalence of rabies renders the action necessary to protect the public health and
safety, the Council shall issue a proclamation ordering every person owning or keeping a dog to
muzzle it securely so that it cannot bite. No person shall violate the proclamation and any unmuzzled
dog unrestrained during the time fixed in the proclamation shall be subject to impoundment as
heretofore provided, and the owner of the dog shall be subject to the penalty hereinafter provided.
(Res. 0022, passed 8-14-2000)
§ 94.11 PROCEEDINGS FOR DESTRUCTION OF CERTAIN DOGS
(A) Upon sworn complaint to the Wright County Court that any of the facts set forth in division
(A)(1) through (A)(4), the judge shall issue a summons directed to the owner of the dog commanding
him or her to appear before the court to show cause why the dog should not be seized by Sheriff’s
Department or otherwise disposed of in the manner authorized in this subchapter:
(1) That any dog at any time has destroyed property or habitually trespasses in a damaging
manner on the property of persons other than the owner;
(2) That any dog at any time has attacked or bitten a person outside the owner’s or custodians
premises;
(3) That any dog is vicious, shows vicious habits or molests pedestrians and/or interferes with
vehicles on the public streets; or
(4) That any dog is deemed public nuisance as heretofore defined.
Animals 35
(B) The summons shall be thereof and shall be served at least two days before the time of the
scheduled court appearance. Upon the hearing and finding the facts true as complained of, the court
may either order the dog killed, order the dog owner/custodian to remove it from the city limits or
may order the owner or custodian to keep it confined to a designated place. If the owner or custodian
violates the order, and Sheriff’s Department may impound the dog described in the order. The
provisions are in addition to and supplemental to other provisions of this subchapter.
(C) Costs of the proceeding as specified by this subchapter shall be charged back and/or assessed
to the owner or custodian of the dog, if the facts in the complaint are found to be true; or to the
complainant, if the facts are found not to be true.
(Res. 0022, passed 8-14-2000)
§ 94.12 IMPOUNDING
Unclaimed dogs found unlicensed or running-at-large may be impounded by the city and/or Sheriff’s
Department. Notice of the impounding shall be given to the owner of the dog if known. If the owner
is unknown, the city or deputy sheriff shall post a notice at City Hall. If the dog is not claimed within
seven days including Saturday, Sunday or Monday of the posting the notice, the animal will become
the property of the designated clinic/shelter as described under the adopted Animal Control contract
and put up for adoption or euthanized if injured, ill or a suitable home cannot be found.
(Res. 0022, passed 8-14-2000)
§ 94.13 REDEMPTION
Any dog to be redeemed from the impoundment location by the owner/custodian within the time
stated in the notice shall pay the fee amount as designated in the Animal Control contract to the city.
Any unpaid fee will be paid together with any impounding fines for each time the dog is impounded.
All boarding costs for feeding the dog each day per the Animal Control Contract as approved by the
City Council will be the responsibility of the owner and/or custodian.
(Res. 0022, passed 8-14-2000)
OTHER ANIMALS
§ 94.30 GENERAL PROHIBITION
No person shall keep any horse, cattle, sheep or goat in the city or permit the animal to be kept on
premises owned, occupied or controlled by him or her except under the conditions prescribed by this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 504.01) Penalty, see § 94.99
36 Cokato - General Regulations
§ 94.31 AREAS WHERE KEEPING PROHIBITED
No horse, cattle, sheep or goat shall be kept within the city except within the agricultural zone (or o
n a parcel of land exceeding three acres).
(Prior Code, § 504.02)
§ 94.32 TREATMENT
No person shall treat any animal in a cruel or inhumane manner.
(Prior Code, § 504.03)
§ 94.33 ANIMALS AT-LARGE
(A) No person shall permit any horse, mule, donkey, pony, cattle, sheep, goat, swine, rabbit,
chicken, geese, duck or turkey of which he or she is the owner, caretaker or custodian to be at-large
within the city.
(B) Any animal is deemed to be at-large when it is off the premises owned or rented by the owner
or his or her agent and not under his or her individual restraint.
(Prior Code, § 504.04)
§ 94.34 DISEASED ANIMALS
Any animal with a contagious disease shall be so confined that it cannot come within 50 feet of any
public roadway or any place where animals belonging to or harbored by another person are kept.
(Prior Code, § 504.05)
§ 94.35 MANNER OF KEEPING
No person shall keep any dog, cat or other animal in the city in an unsanitary place or condition or
in a manner resulting in objectionable odors or in such a way as to constitute a nuisance or
disturbance by reason of barking, howling, fighting or other noise or in such a way as to permit the
animal to annoy, injure or endanger any person or property.
(Prior Code, § 504.06)
Cross-reference:
Dog nuisances, see § 94.02
Animals 37
§ 94.36 CARE OF PREMISES
(A) Clean shelters. Every structure and yard in which animals or fowl are kept shall be maintained
in a clean and sanitary condition and free of rodents, vermin and objectionable odors. The interior
walls, ceilings, floors, partitions and appurtenances of any structure shall be whitewashed or painted,
as the Health Officer shall direct. Upon the complaint of any individual or otherwise, the Health
Officer shall inspect the structure or yard and issue any order as may be reasonably necessary to
carry out the provisions of §§ 94.30 through 94.35.
(B) Manure. Manure shall be removed with sufficient frequency to avoid nuisance from odors or
from the breeding of flies, but at least once per month from October 1 to May 1 each year and once
every two weeks at other times. Unless used for fertilizer, manure shall be removed by hauling
beyond the city limits. If used for fertilizer, manure shall be spread upon the ground evenly and
turned under at once or as soon as the frost leaves the ground.
(Prior Code, § 504.07)
§ 94.37 IMPOUNDING
(A) Who impounds. The Public Works Director or any police officer may take up and impound in
the city pound any animal or fowl found running-at-large in violation of this subchapter and shall
provide proper sustenance for every animal impounded.
(B) Notice. Within 24 hours after any animal has been impounded, the pound master shall post
notice in the City Hall and post office in the city describing the animal and stating that it has been
impounded. He or she shall also make a reasonable attempt to give oral or written notice to the owner
if known.
(C) Release. No animal impounded shall be released except to a person displaying a receipt from
the City Clerk-Treasurer showing payment of the impounding fee or the sale price.
(D) Fees. The fee for impounding and feeding fowl and any other impounded animal, except a dog
shall be as set by Council.
(E) Sale. If any impounded animal is not redeemed within six days, the pound master shall give
an additional three-day posted notice, as provided in division (B) above, of the time and place when
and where the animal shall be sold. If the pound master is unable to sell the animal on the day stated,
he or she may sell the animal as soon thereafter as possible without further notice.
38 Cokato - General Regulations
(F) Illegal release. No unauthorized person shall break into the pound or release any animal
legally placed therein.
(Prior Code, § 504.08)
§ 94.99 PENALTY
General. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Res. 0022, passed 8-14-2000)
CHAPTER 95: NUISANCES
Section
Public Nuisances
95.01 Public nuisances prohibited
95.02 Public nuisances affecting health
95.03 Public nuisances affecting morals and decency
95.04 Public nuisances affecting peace and safety
95.05 Abandoned, junk and unauthorized vehicles
95.06 Enforcement by city officers
95.07 Abatement procedure
95.08 Recovery of cost
95.99 Penalty
PUBLIC NUISANCES
§ 95.01 PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED
Whoever by his or her act or failure to act does any of the following is guilty of maintaining a public
nuisance:
(A) Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures or endangers the safety,
health, morals, comfort or repose of any considerable number of members of the public;
(B) Interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for passage, any public highway or right-of-way,
or waters used by the public; or
(C) Does any other act or omission declared by law or city ordinance to be a public nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 801.01) (Am. Ord. 02-2011, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 95.02 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:
39
40 Cokato - General Regulations
(A) Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable matter;
(B) All diseased animals running-at-large;
(C) All ponds or pools of stagnant water;
(D) Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after death;
(E) Accumulations of manure, refuse or other debris;
(F) Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or fly-tight or which are so maintained
as to constitute a health hazard or to emit foul and disagreeable odors;
(G) The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal or body of water by sewage,
industrial waste or other substances;
(H) All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon public or private property or grass
or weeds in excess of eight inches in height in an area maintained as lawn;
(I) Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot or cinders, in unreasonable quantities;
(J) All public exposure of persons having a contagious disease; and
(K) Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute or city ordinance not licensed by the
appropriate authority.
(Prior Code, § 801.02) (Am. Ord. 02-2011, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 95.03 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public morals and decency:
(A) All gambling devices, slot machines and punch boards except as authorized and permitted by
law;
(B) Betting, book making and all apparatus used in those occupations;
(C) All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual intercourse, gambling
houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses;
(D) All places where intoxicating or 3.2 malt liquor is manufactured or disposed of in violation of
law or where, in violation of law, persons are permitted to resort for the purpose of drinking
intoxicating or 3.2 malt liquor, or where intoxicating or 3.2 malt liquor is kept for sale or other
disposition in violation of law and all liquor and other property used for maintaining such a place;
and
Nuisances 41
(E) Any vehicle used for the transportation of intoxicating or 3.2 malt liquor, or for promiscuous
sexual intercourse or any other immoral or illegal purpose.
(Prior Code, § 801.03) (Am. Ord. 02-2011, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 95.04 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY
The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and safety:
(A) All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 24 hours after the snow fall or other
precipitation causing the condition has ceased to fall;
(B) All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent persons from having a clear
view of all traffic approaching an intersection;
(C) All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface of a sidewalk or street as to
constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;
(D) All unnecessary noises and annoying vibrations;
(E) Obstructions all excavations affecting the ordinary use by the public of streets, alleys, sidewalks
or public grounds except under the conditions as are permitted by this code or other applicable law;
(F) Radio aerial or television antennae erected or maintained in a dangerous manner;
(G) Any use of property abutting on a public street or any use of a public street or sidewalk which
causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and the free uses of the streets or
sidewalks;
(H) All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over streets and sidewalks, or so situated
so as to endanger public safety, or not constructed and maintained as provided by ordinance;
(I) The allowing of rainwater, ice or snow to fall from any building or structure upon any street or
sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk;
(J) Any barb-wire fence less than six feet above the ground and within three feet of a public
sidewalk or way;
(K) All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated or operated on private
property as to attract the public;
(L) Waste water cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or other public property;
42 Cokato - General Regulations
(M) Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery, household appliances,
automobile bodies or other material, in a manner conducive to the harboring of rats, mice, snakes or
vermin, or to fire, health or safety hazards from the accumulation or from the rank growth of
vegetation among the items so accumulated;
(N) Any well, hole or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in such other condition as to
constitute a hazard to any child or other person coming on the premises where it is located;
(O) Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a public street drain, gutter or
ditch with trash or other materials;
(P) The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk or other public property of any glass, tacks,
nails, bottles or other substance which may injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic
tire when passing over the substance;
(Q) The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way or on adjacent private property;
(R) All other conditions or things that are likely to cause injury to the person or property of anyone
or which are declared nuisances by any statute or other city ordinance;
(S) Any distinctly and loudly audible noise that unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures, or
endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, or welfare of any person, or precludes the
enjoyment of property, or adversely affects the value of property;
(T) All noise in violation of Minn. Rules. Ch. 7030, as it may be amended from time to time;
(U) The use of any vehicle so out of repair or so loaded as to create loud and unnecessary grating,
grinding, rattling, or other noise;
(V) The discharging of the exhaust or permitting the discharge of the exhaust of any internal
combustion engine, motor boat, motor vehicle, motorcycle, all-terrain vehicle, snowmobile, or any
recreational device, except through a muffler or other device that effectively prevents loud or
explosive noises and complies with all applicable state laws and regulations;
(W) Any loud or excessive noise in the loading, unloading, or unpacking of any vehicle;
(X) The use or operation, or permitting the use or operation, of any radio receiving set, musical
instrument, music device, paging system, machine, or other device for producing or reproduction of
sound in a distinctly and loudly audible manner so as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of any
person nearby; and
(Y) The parking or storage of any recreational vehicle in violation of § 70.07 or other vehicles in
violation of § 70.08 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 801.04) (Am. Ord. 02-2011, passed 5-9-2011)
Nuisances 43
§ 95.05 ABANDONED, JUNK AND UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLES
The parking, storage, repairing, dismantling, demolition or maintenance of any junk or abandoned
vehicle in violation of § 92.02 of this code constitutes a public nuisance. Abandoned, junk or
unauthorized vehicles may be impounded and disposed of as permitted under § 92.03 of this code.
(Ord. 02-2011, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 95.06 ENFORCEMENT BY CITY OFFICERS
City officials may apply and enforce any provision of this chapter relating to public nuisances in the
city. Any peace officer or other designated city official shall have the power to inspect private
premises and take all reasonable precautions to prevent the commission and maintenance of public
nuisances. Except in emergency situations of imminent danger to human life and safety, no peace
officer or designated city official may enter private property for the purpose of inspecting or
preventing public nuisances without the permission of the owner, resident, or other person in control
of the property, unless the officer or person designated has obtained a warrant or order from a court
of competent jurisdiction authorizing entry.
(Ord. 02-2011, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 95.07 ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
(A) Procedure. Except with regard to abandoned, junk or unauthorized vehicles, whenever the
peace officer or other designated official determines that a public nuisance is being maintained or
exists on the premises in the city, the official shall notify in writing the owner of record or occupant
of the premises of such fact and order that the nuisance be terminated or abated. The notice of
violation shall specify the steps to be taken to abate the nuisance and the time within which the
nuisance is to be abated. If the notice of violation is not complied with within the time specified, the
official shall report that fact forthwith to the City Council. Thereafter, the City Council may, after
notice to the owner or occupant and an opportunity to be heard, determine that the condition
identified in the notice of violation is a nuisance and further order that if the nuisance is not abated
within the time prescribed by the City Council, the city may seek injunctive relief by serving a copy
of the City Council order and notice of motion for summary enforcement or obtain an administrative
search and seizure warrant and abate the nuisance.
(B) Notice. Written notice of the violation, notice of the time, date, place, and subject of any
hearing before the City Council, notice of the City Council order, and notice of motion for summary
enforcement hearing shall be served by a peace officer or designated official on the owner of record
or occupant of the premises either in person or by certified or registered mail. If the premise is not
occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or if the owner of record or occupant refuses to accept
notice, notice shall be served by posting it on the premises.
44 Cokato - General Regulations
(C) Emergency procedure; summary enforcement. In cases of emergency, where delay in
abatement required to complete the procedure and notice requirements as set forth in divisions (A)
and (B) of this section will permit a continuing nuisance to unreasonably endanger public health,
safety, or welfare, the City Council may order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance. To
proceed with summary enforcement, the peace officer or other designated official shall determine
that a public nuisance exists or is being maintained on premises in the city and that delay in
abatement will unreasonably endanger public health, safety, or welfare. The officer or designated
official shall notify in writing the occupant or owner of the premises of the nature of the nuisance,
whether public health, safety, or welfare will be unreasonably endangered by delay in abatement
required to complete the procedure set forth in division (A) of this section and may order that the
nuisance be immediately terminated or abated. If the nuisance is not immediately terminated or
abated, the City Council may order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance.
(D) Immediate abatement. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city, without notice or other
process, from immediately abating any condition that poses an imminent and serious hazard to
human life or safety.
(E) Noisy parties or gatherings. When a peace officer determines that a gathering is creating such
a noise disturbance as prohibited under § 95.04, the officer may order all persons present, other than
the owner or tenant of the premises where the disturbance is occurring, to disburse immediately.
No person shall refuse to leave after being ordered to do so by law enforcement. Every owner or
tenant of the premises who has knowledge of the disturbance shall make every reasonable effort to
see that the disturbance is stopped.
(F) Judicial remedy. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from seeking a judicial remedy
when no other adequate administrative remedy exists.
(Ord. 02-2011, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 95.08 RECOVERY OF COSTS
(A) Personal liability. The owner of the premises on which a nuisance has been abated by the city,
or a person who has caused a public nuisance on property not owned by that person, shall be
personally liable for the cost to the city of the abatement, including administrative costs. As soon
as the work has been completed and the cost determined, the City Clerk or other city official shall
prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner. Thereupon the amount shall be immediately due
and payable at the office of the City Clerk.
(B) Assessment. After notice and hearing as provided in M.S. § 429.061, as it may be amended
from time to time, if the nuisance is a public health or safety hazard on private property, the
accumulation of snow and ice on public sidewalks, the growth of weeds on private property or
outside the traveled portion of streets, or unsound or insect-infected trees, the City Clerk shall, on or
before September 1 next following abatement of the nuisance, list the total unpaid charges along
with all other such charges as well as other charges for current services to be assessed under M.S.
§ 429.101 against
Nuisances 45
each separate lot or parcel to which the charges are attributable. The City Council may then spread
the charges against the property under that statute and any other pertinent statutes for certification
to the County Auditor and collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual
installments, not exceeding ten, as the City Council may determine in each case.
(C) Collection of other charges. This division applies to the collection of services charges for the
abatement of nuisances other than those subject to assessment pursuant to M.S. § 429.101. For all
such other services charges and pursuant to M.S. § 415.01, the city hereby avails itself of the
authority under M.S. §§ 366.011 and 366.012 to impose and provide for the collection of services
charges related to the abatement of nuisances. All unpaid charges shall be delinquent 30 days after
a notice of delinquency is sent by the city to the owner of the affected property. The city may certify
any unpaid charge to the County Auditor on or before October 15 of each year for collection with
the property taxes levied against the property if, on or before September 15, the city has given written
notice to the owner of the property of its intention to certify the charge to the auditor. All charges
shall be subject to the same penalties, interest and other conditions provided for the collection of
property taxes.
(Ord. 02-2011, passed 5-9-2011)
§ 95.99 PENALTY
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 02-2011, passed 5-9-2011)
46 Cokato - General Regulations
CHAPTER 96: VACANT BUILDINGS
Section
96.01 Purpose and findings
96.02 Definitions
96.03 Vacant building registration
96.04 Change of ownership
96.05 Inspections
96.06 Maintenance of vacant buildings
96.07 No occupancy or trespass
96.08 Vandalism or removal of items prohibited
96.09 Appeal
96.99 Penalty
§ 96.01 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS
(A) The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by establishing a
program for the identification and regulation of vacant buildings within the city. This chapter also
determines the responsibilities of owners of vacant buildings and provides for administration,
enforcement, and penalties associated with same.
(B) The City Council finds that vacant buildings are a major cause and source of blight in residential
and non-residential neighborhoods, especially when the owner or responsible party of the building
fails to maintain and manage the building to ensure it does not become a liability to the
neighborhood. Vacant buildings often attract transients, trespassers and criminals. Neglect of vacant
buildings and the use of vacant buildings by transients and criminals creates a risk of fire, explosion
or flooding for the vacant building and adjacent properties. Vacant properties often are used as
dumping grounds for junk and debris and frequently are overgrown with weeds and tall grass. Vacant
buildings that are boarded to prevent entry by transients and other long-term vacancies are unsightly,
discourage economic development and inhibit the increase of property values. There is a substantial
cost to the city in monitoring vacant buildings regardless of whether they are boarded. This cost
should not be borne by the general taxpayers but should be borne by those who choose to leave their
buildings vacant.
(Ord. 08-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
47
48 Cokato - General Regulations
§ 96.02 DEFINITIONS
For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
ABANDONED PROPERTY. Any property that the owner has surrendered, relinquished,
disclaimed, or ceded all right, title, claim, and possession, with the intention of not reclaiming it.
BUILDING. A roofed structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
COMPLIANCE OFFICIAL. The City Administrator or the City Administrator's designee
authorized to administer and enforce this section.
OWNER or PROPERTY OWNER. The owner of record according to Wright County property
tax records; those identified as owner or owners on a vacant building registration form; a holder of
an unrecorded contract for deed; a mortgagee or vendee in possession; a mortgagor or vendor in
possession; an assignee of rents; or a receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, other person, firm or
corporation in control of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein. OWNER also means
any person, partnership, association, corporation or fiduciary having legal or equitable title or any
interest in the property or building, including any partner, officer or director of any partnership,
corporation, association or other legally constituted business entity. All owners shall have joint and
several obligations for compliance with the provisions of this section.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY. An owner, entity or person acting as an agent for the owner who has
direct or indirect control or authority over the building or real property upon which the building is
located or any party having a legal or equitable interest in the property, including but not limited to,
a realtor, service provider, mortgagor, leasing agent, management company or similar person or
entity.
VACANT BUILDING. A building in which no person actually and currently conducts a lawful
business or lawfully resides or lives on a permanent, non-transient basis in accordance with city
zoning regulations.
(Ord. 08-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
§ 96.03 VACANT BUILDING REGISTRATION
(A) Application.
(1) The owner or responsible party shall register a vacant building with the city no later than
30 days after the building becomes vacant. The registration shall be submitted on a form
provided by the city and shall include the following information supplied by the owner:
Vacant Buildings 49
(a) The name, address, telephone number and email address of each owner and each
owner's representative;
(b) The tax parcel identification number and street address of the premises on which the
building is situated;
(c) The names, addresses, telephone numbers and email addresses of all known lien
holders and all other parties with any legal interest in the building;
(d) The name, address, telephone number and email address of a local agent or person
responsible for managing or maintaining the property;
(e) The status of water, sewer, natural gas and electric utilities; and
(f) The date the building became vacant, the period of time the building is expected to
remain vacant, and a property plan and timetable for returning the building to appropriate
occupancy or use and correcting code violations and nuisances, or for demolition of the
building.
(2) The owner shall notify the Compliance Official within 30 days of changes in any of the
information supplied as part of the vacant building registration and shall continue to do so on
an ongoing basis during vacancy.
(B) Property plan. The property plan identified above in division (A)(1)(f) above shall meet the
following requirements:
(1) General provisions. The plan shall comply with all applicable regulations and meet the
approval of the Compliance Official. It shall contain a timetable regarding use or demolition of
the property. The plan shall be completed within 30 days after the building is registered.
(2) Maintenance of building. The plan shall identify the means and timetable for addressing all
maintenance and nuisance-related items identified in the application. Any repairs,
improvements or alterations to the property shall comply with building code provisions and
applicable city regulations.
(3) Plan changes. If the property plan or timetable for the vacant building is revised in any
way for any purpose, the revisions shall meet the approval of the Compliance Official.
(4) Demolition required. If a building has remained vacant for a period of 365 consecutive
days or more, and the Compliance Official has not approved an alternative schedule in the
property plan, the city may declare the building to be a nuisance and direct the owner to
demolish the building and restore the grounds. If the owner does not demolish the building and
thereby eliminate the nuisance conditions, the city may commence abatement and cost recovery
proceedings for the abatement of the violation in accordance with Chapter 95 of this code and
M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time.
50 Cokato - General Regulations
(C) Non-compliance and notification. If the owner does not comply with the property plan, or
maintain or correct nuisance violations, the city may commence abatement and recover its costs for
correction of those items in accordance with Chapter 95 of this code and M.S. § 429.101, as it may
be amended from time to time. In the case of an absent owner and ongoing nuisance issues, the city
need not provide notice of each abatement act to the owner. A single notice by the city to the owner
is determined to be sufficient notice that it intends to provide ongoing abatement until the owner
corrects the violations.
(D) Exemptions.
(1) Casualty damage. A building that has suffered casualty damage is exempt from the
registration requirement for a period of 90 days after the date of the casualty event if the owner
submits a request for exemption in writing to the Compliance Official. An exemption request
for review by the Compliance Official shall include the following information supplied by the
owner:
(a) A description of the premises;
(b) The name and address of owner or owners;
(c) A statement of intent to repair and reoccupy the building in an expeditious manner and
the time frame for completion; and
(d) Actions the owner will take to ensure the property does not become a nuisance.
(2) Snowbirds. Those persons who leave their residential buildings on a temporary basis for
vacation purposes or to reside elsewhere during the winter season and have the intent to return
are exempt from the registration requirement. Requests for "snowbird" exemption will be
considered annually with proper verification.
(E) Fees. The owner shall pay an annual registration fee. The registration fee will be in an amount
adopted by ordinance by the City Council. The amount of the registration fee shall be reasonably
related to the administrative costs for registering and processing the registration form and for the
costs of the city in monitoring the vacant building site. The fee shall be paid in full prior to the
issuance of any building permits or licenses, with the exception of a demolition permit.
(F) Assessment. If the registration fee or any portion thereof is not paid within 60 days after billing
or within 60 days after any appeal becomes final, the City Council may certify the unpaid fees against
the property in accordance with M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time.
(G) Issuance of registration. Upon completion of the registration process and payment of the fee,
the city will issue a vacant building registration to the owner. The owner shall securely post the
registration on the vacant building on a side entrance door, where possible, that is not generally
visible from the public street. If no side entrance door is available, the registration shall be securely
posted on another available entrance door.
Vacant Buildings 51
(H) Failure to register. If the property is abandoned or the owner or responsible party fails to
complete the registration process, the property will be registered administratively as a vacant
property and the registration fee shall be assessed against the property.
(Ord. 08-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
§ 96.04 CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP
A new owner shall register or re-register a vacant building in accordance with § 96.03 within 15
days of any transfer of an ownership interest in a vacant building. The new owner shall comply with
the approved property plan and timetable submitted by the previous owner or shall submit a revised
or amended property plan to the Compliance Official for review and approval. For the purposes of
this section, the new owner is an OWNER as defined in § 96.02 if the new owner has purchased the
vacant building since its registration by the previous owner or has otherwise succeeded to all rights
of the previous owner.
(Ord. 08-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
§ 96.05 INSPECTIONS
The Compliance Official may inspect any vacant building in the city for the purpose of enforcing
and assuring compliance with this section and other applicable regulations. Upon the request of the
Compliance Official, an owner or responsible party shall provide access to all interior portions of
the building and the exterior of the property in order to complete an inspection. If the owner or
responsible party is not available, is unresponsive, or refuses to provide access to the interior of the
building, the city may use any legal means to gain entrance to the building for inspection purposes.
Prior to any re-occupancy, the owner or responsible party shall request an inspection of the vacant
building by the Compliance Official to determine compliance with this chapter and all other
applicable regulations. All application and re-inspection fees also shall be paid prior to building
occupancy.
(Ord. 08-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
§ 96.06 MAINTENANCE OF VACANT BUILDINGS
The owner shall comply with and address the following items in the property plan, as described in
§ 96.03(B):
(A) Appearance. All vacant buildings shall be maintained and kept so that they appear to be
occupied.
(B) Securing. All vacant buildings shall be secured from outside entry by unauthorized persons or
pests. Security shall be ensured by normal building amenities such as windows and doors having
52 Cokato - General Regulations
adequate strength to resist intrusion. All doors and windows shall remain locked. There shall be at
least one operable door into every building and into each dwelling unit. Exterior walls and roofs
shall remain intact without holes.
(1) Architectural (cosmetic) structural panels. Architectural structural panels may be used to
secure windows, doors and other openings provided they are cut to fit the opening and match
the characteristics of the building. Architectural panels may be of exterior grade-finished
plywood or Medium Density Overlaid plywood (MDO) that is painted to match the building
exterior or covered with a reflective material such as plexiglass to simulate windows.
(2) Temporary securing. Untreated, exterior grade (CDX) plywood or similar structural
panels may be used to secure windows, doors and other openings for a maximum period of 90
days.
(3) Emergency securing. The Compliance Official may take immediate steps to secure a
vacant building at his or her discretion in emergency circumstances.
(C) Fire safety.
(1) Fire protection systems. Owners of non-residential vacant buildings shall maintain all fire
protection systems, appliances and assemblies in operating condition and maintain underwriter
laboratories (UL) monitoring of all systems.
(2) Removal of hazardous and combustible materials. The owner of any vacant building shall
remove all hazardous material and hazardous refuse that could constitute a fire hazard or
contribute to the spread of fire.
(D) Plumbing fixtures. Plumbing fixtures connected to an approved water system, an approved
sewage system, or an approved natural gas utility system shall be installed in accordance with
applicable codes and be maintained in sound condition and good repair or removed and the service
terminated in the manner prescribed by applicable codes. The building's water systems shall be
protected from freezing.
(E) Electrical. Electrical service lines, wiring, outlets or fixtures not installed or maintained in
accordance with applicable codes shall be repaired, removed or the electrical services terminated to
the building in accordance with applicable codes.
(F) Lighting. All exterior lighting fixtures shall be maintained in good repair, and illumination shall
be provided to the building and all walkways in the same manner as provided at the time the building
was last occupied or as otherwise provided in the approved vacant building plan.
(G) Heating. Heating facilities or heating equipment in vacant buildings shall be removed,
rendered inoperable, or maintained in accordance with applicable codes.
Vacant Buildings 53
(H) Termination of utilities. The Compliance Official may require that water, sewer, electricity, or
gas service to the vacant building be terminated or disconnected. Prior to the termination of any
utility service, the city will provide written notice to the owner as provided in city Code of
Ordinances. No utility may be restored until consent is given by the Compliance Official. Utilities
may be discontinued at the request of the owner or responsible party as part of the approved vacant
building property plan. The Compliance Official may authorize immediate termination of utilities at
his or her discretion in emergency circumstances and provide subsequent notice to the owner or
responsible party.
(I) Signs. On non-residential properties, obsolete or unused exterior signs and installation
hardware shall be removed. Holes and penetrations shall be properly patched and painted to match
the building. Surfaces beneath the signs that do not match the building shall be repaired, resurfaced,
painted or otherwise altered to be compatible with the building surfaces. All signs remaining on the
property shall be maintained in good condition and comply with the provisions of this code.
(J) Exterior maintenance. The owner shall comply with all applicable property maintenance
regulations and city codes including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Nuisances. The owner shall eliminate any activity on the property that constitutes a
nuisance as defined by this code or state statute.
(2) Grass and weeds. Any weeds or grass shall be maintained at a height of no greater than
eight inches and in accordance with this code.
(3) Exterior structure maintenance. The owner shall maintain the vacant building in a manner
so that it does not constitute a nuisance or as otherwise determined to be necessary by the Code
Official to protect public health and safety.
(4) Abandoned or junk vehicles. The owner shall keep the property free of unlicensed,
inoperable, abandoned or junk vehicles. The city may cause such vehicles to be removed.
(5) Storage and disposal of refuse. The storage and disposal of refuse shall comply with the
requirements of this code.
(6) Animals. The owner shall ensure that all animals, including domestic, exotic and feral, are
removed from the property and handled in a humane manner.
(7) Diseased, dead or hazardous trees. The owner shall remove diseased, dead or hazardous
trees or branches from the property in accordance with this code.
(8) Graffiti. The owner shall keep the property free from graffiti.
54 Cokato - General Regulations
(9) Abandoned pools. Swimming pools shall be covered and secured to prevent accidental
entry, treated to prevent pest harborage, and properly drained and winterized.
(K) Removal of garbage and refuse. The owner of any vacant building shall keep the building and
property free of all garbage, refuse, litter, rubbish, swill, film, or other materials identified in this
code.
(L) Police protection systems. All alarm systems in any vacant building or portion thereof shall be
maintained in operating condition.
(M) Loitering, criminal activities. Loitering or engaging in criminal activities is prohibited in the
vacant building or on the real property upon which the vacant building is located. The owner or
responsible party shall not allow these activities and shall take immediate actions to eliminate these
conditions upon notification by the city or upon discovery.
(N) Emergency abatement. The Compliance Official may authorize immediate abatement of any
public nuisance or correction of any maintenance item if the Compliance Official determines that
conditions exist that present an imminent threat to the public health and safety in accordance with
Chapter 95 of this code.
(O) Other codes. The property owner or responsible party shall comply with all other city codes and
applicable regulations.
(Ord.08-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
§ 96.07 NO OCCUPANCY OR TRESPASS
No person may trespass, occupy or reside, on a temporary or permanent basis, in any vacant building,
registered or not, without the owner's consent.
(Ord. 08-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
§ 96.08 VANDALISM OR REMOVAL OF ITEMS PROHIBITED
No person may vandalize or remove items from a vacant building or the property upon which it is
located, including, but not limited to, appliances, fixtures, electrical wiring, copper, or other similar
items without the owner's consent.
(Ord. 08-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
Vacant Buildings 55
§ 96.09 APPEAL
Any person or responsible party aggrieved by a decision rendered under this chapter by the
Compliance Official may appeal to the City Council. The appeal shall made be in writing, shall
specify the grounds for the appeal, and shall be submitted to the City Administrator within ten
business days of the decision that is basis of the appeal.
(Ord. 08-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
§ 96.99 PENALTY
Any person or responsible party who violates the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor. Nothing in this section, however, is deemed to limit other remedies or civil penalties
available to the city under this code or state law, including but not limited to, M.S. §§ 429.101 and
463.15 through 463.261, as they may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 08-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
56 Cokato - General Regulations
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
110. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
111. CABLE SERVICE
112. PAWN SHOPS, PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND
DEALERS AND THE LIKE
113. GENERAL LICENSING PROCEDURES
114. TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, PEDDLERS AND
SOLICITORS
115. TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING
1
2 Cokato - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 110: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
Regulation of Liquor
110.01 Adoption of state law by reference
110.02 City may be more restrictive
110.03 Definitions
110.04 License required
110.05 Types of liquor licenses
110.06 Number of licenses
110.07 Persons ineligible for licenses
110.08 License application
110.09 Fees
110.10 Investigation of applications
110.11 Hearing and issuance
110.12 Conditions of liquor licenses
110.13 Restrictions on issuance
110.14 Term and expiration of licenses
110.15 Applications for renewal
110.16 Transfer of licenses
110.17 Hours and days of sale
110.18 Suspension or revocation
110.19 Prohibited activities
110.20 Off-Sale Liquor Delivery
110.99 Penalty
REGULATION OF LIQUOR
§ 110.01 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE
Except as specified herein, the provisions of M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time
to time, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation, restrictions on
consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale and all other matters pertaining to the retail
sale, distribution and consumption of intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt liquor are hereby adopted
by reference and are
3
4 Cokato - Business Regulations
made a part of this subchapter as if set out in full. It is the intention of the Council that all future
amendments to M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by
reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this subchapter is adopted.
(Ord. 01-2007, passed 4-25-2007; Am. Ord. 05-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 110.02 CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE
The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 340A.509, as it may be amended from time
to time, to impose, and has imposed in this subchapter, additional restrictions on the sale and
possession of liquor within its limits beyond those contained in M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be
amended from time to time.
(Ord. 01-2007, passed 4-25-2007; Am. Ord. 05-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 110.03 DEFINITIONS
In addition to the definitions contained in M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be amended from time to time,
the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall have the meaning
ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Cokato, Minnesota.
LIQUOR. All alcoholic beverages including, but not limited to, intoxicating liquor and 3.2% malt
liquor.
SCHOOL. A premises wherein students are educated to satisfy the compulsory instruction
requirements of M.S. § 120A.22, as it may be amended from time to time, and which meets the
requirements of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Pub. Law No. 88-352.
(Ord. 01-2007, passed 4-25-2007; Am. Ord. 05-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 110.04 LICENSE REQUIRED
No person or entity, except wholesalers or manufacturers to the extent authorized by state license,
shall directly or indirectly, on any pretense or by any device, sell, barter, keep for sale, charge for
possession or otherwise dispose of liquor as part of a commercial transaction without first having
received a license to do so as provided in this subchapter.
(Ord. 01-2007, passed 4-25-2007; Am. Ord. 05-2012, passed 12-10-2012) Penalty, see § 110.99
Alcoholic Beverages 5
§ 110.05 TYPES OF LIQUOR LICENSES
(A) The city may issue the following types of liquor licenses pursuant to this subchapter:
(1) On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses;
(2) On-sale intoxicating liquor club licenses;
(3) On-sale 3.2% malt liquor licenses;
(4) Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses;
(5) Temporary on-sale 3.2% malt liquor licenses;
(6) On-sale wine licenses;
(7) Off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses;
(8) Off-sale 3.2% malt liquor licenses;
(9) Combination on-sale/off-sale licenses;
(10) Consumption and display permits;
(11) One-day consumption and display permits; and
(12) Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses.
(B) On-sale liquor licenses shall permit the consumption of liquor on the licensed premises only.
Off-sale licenses shall permit the sale of liquor in its original package for consumption off the
licensed premises only.
(Ord. 01-2007, passed 4-25-2007; Am. Ord. 05-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 110.06 NUMBER OF LICENSES
(A) The number of on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses issued by the Council shall be limited to five,
excluding licenses authorized under M.S. § 340A.413, Subdivision 4, as it may be amended from
time to time.
(B) The number of other liquor licenses the city may issue shall only be limited to the extent
provided in state law.
(Ord. 01-2007, passed 4-25-2007; Am. Ord. 05-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
6 Cokato - Business Regulations
§ 110.07 PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSES
(A) Only those persons, entities or establishments eligible under M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be
amended from time to time, to hold a particular type of license may apply for, be issued or hold that
type of license.
(B) No license shall be granted to or held by any person ineligible to hold a liquor license under
M.S. § 340A.402, as it may be amended from time to time, or to any person:
(1) Who is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the license is issued;
(2) Who is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien, or upon whom it is impractical
to conduct a background and financial investigation due to the unavailability of information;
(3) Who is or during the period of the license becomes the holder of a federal retail liquor
dealer’s special tax stamp for the sale of intoxicating liquor at any place unless there has also
been issued to him or her a local license to sell intoxicating liquor at the place; and
(4) Who is the spouse of a person ineligible for a license pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter or who, in the judgment of the Council, is not the real party in interest or beneficial
owner of the business operated, or to be operated, under the license.
(Ord. 01-2007, passed 4-25-2007; Am. Ord. 05-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 110.08 LICENSE APPLICATION
(A) Every application for a license shall be made on the form supplied by the city and shall be filed
with the City Clerk-Treasurer at least 30 days before Council action is required.
(B) Every application for the issuance or renewal of a license must include a copy of each summons
received by the applicant under M.S. § 340A.802, as it may be amended from time to time, during
the preceding year.
(C) Incomplete applications will not be considered.
(D) No person shall make a false statement in an application.
(E) Applicants are required to include a legal description of the property to be licensed, a site plan
of the property showing dimensions and locations of buildings, and a description of the compact and
contiguous premises within which liquor may be dispensed and consumed.
(F) Every application shall include proof of financial responsibility in the form and for at least the
amount prescribed by M.S. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 01-2007, passed 4-25-2007; Am. Ord. 05-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
Alcoholic Beverages 7
§ 110.09 FEES
Every application for a license must be accompanied by the fee applicable to that license. The license
fee and investigation fee shall be paid with cash or certified or cashier’s check. No application for a
license shall be considered until the required fees have been paid to the City Clerk-Treasurer. The
fee for a license shall be as established by ordinance and shall be in addition to the fee required by
the Commissioner of Public Safety, if any. A pro rata fee shall be applied to licenses issued for less
than one year, with any unexpired fraction of a month being counted as one month.
(Ord. 01-2007, passed 4-25-2007; Am. Ord. 05-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 110.10 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATIONS
(A) Preliminary investigation. In the case of an initial application for a license, an application for
transfer of a license or, if in the sound discretion of the Council it is in the public interest to do so,
an application for renewal of a license, the Council shall conduct a preliminary background and
financial investigation of the applicant or it may contract with the Commissioner of Public Safety
for the investigation. The applicant shall pay with the application an investigation fee of $500 which
shall be in addition to any license fee. If the cost of the preliminary investigation is less than $500,
the unused balance shall be returned to the applicant. The results of the preliminary investigation
shall be sent to the Commissioner of Public Safety if the application is for an on-sale intoxicating
liquor license or an on-sale wine license.
(B) Comprehensive background and financial investigation. If the results of a preliminary
investigation warrant further investigation, in the sound discretion of the Council, the Council may
conduct a comprehensive background and financial investigation. The Council may either conduct
the investigation itself or contract with the Commissioner of Public Safety for the investigation. The
investigation fee for this comprehensive background and financial investigation to be paid by the
applicant shall be $500, less any amount paid for the initial investigation if the investigation is to be
conducted within the state, and $10,000, less any amount paid for the initial investigation, if the
investigation is required outside the state. The unused balance of the fee shall be returned to the
applicant regardless of whether the application is approved or denied. The fee shall be paid in
advance of any investigation, and the amount actually expended on the investigation shall not be
refundable in the event the application is denied or withdrawn. The results of the comprehensive
investigation shall be sent to the Commissioner of Public Safety if the application is for an on-sale
intoxicating liquor license or an on-sale wine license.
(Ord. 01-2007, passed 4-25-2007; Am. Ord. 05-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 110.11 HEARING AND ISSUANCE
The Council shall investigate the facts set out in the application and not investigated in the
preliminary or comprehensive background and financial investigations. Opportunity shall be given
to any person to be heard for or against the granting of the license. Licenses are subject to the
applicable
8 Cokato - Business Regulations
restrictions on issuance contained in M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time.
After the investigation and hearing, the Council shall in its sound discretion grant or deny the
application. No license shall become effective until the Commissioner of Public Safety approves the
proof of financial security and consents to the issuance of the license when the approval or consent
is required by law.
(Ord. 01-2007, passed 4-25-2007; Am. Ord. 05-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 110.12 CONDITIONS OF LIQUOR LICENSES
(A) Every liquor license shall be granted subject to the following conditions and any other
applicable ordinance or state law.
(B) The failure of a licensee to meet any one of the conditions of the license specified below shall
result in a suspension of the license until the condition is met.
(1) The liquor license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the licensed establishment at
all times.
(2) Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of the place of business and the conditions of
sobriety and order in it. The act of any employee on the licensed premises is deemed the act of
the licensee as well, and the licensee shall be liable for all penalties provided by this subchapter
and the law equally with the employee.
(3) Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, Health Officer, city employee or any other
person designated by the Council to conduct compliance checks and to otherwise enter, inspect
and search the premises of the licensee without a warrant during business hours and after
business hours during the time when customers remain on the premises.
(4) No on-sale establishment shall display liquor to the public during hours when the sale of
liquor is prohibited.
(5) Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of state law and of this subchapter
is a continuing condition of any license.
(Ord. 01-2007, passed 4-25-2007; Am. Ord. 05-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 110.13 RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE
No liquor licenses shall be issued or renewed as follows:
(A) Each license shall be issued only to the applicant for the premises described in the application.
(B) Not more than one license shall be directly or indirectly issued within the city to any one person.
Alcoholic Beverages 9
(C) If the applicant has been convicted of any willful violation of this subchapter, M.S. Chapter
340A, as it may be amended from time to time, or if the applicant has had a liquor license issued in
the city revoked for cause, no license shall be issued until one year has elapsed after the conviction
or revocation.
(D) No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises on which real estate taxes,
assessments, utility charges, service charges or other financial claims of the city are delinquent and
unpaid.
(E) No license shall be issued for any place or any business ineligible for a license under state law.
(F) No on-sale liquor license shall be issued for a club that has not been in operation and eligible to
receive a license for at least six months immediately preceding the application for a license.
(G) No license shall be issued to any person who is not a resident of the state. If the applicant is a
corporation, all of the shareholders shall be residents of the state.
(H) No liquor license shall be granted for a premises that has a common entrance or exit with another
establishment except that a public concourse or public lobby shall not be construed as a common
entrance or exit.
(I) No license shall be issued for any building, room or place within 200 feet of any building space
that is used primarily and regularly for any public or private school or used primarily and regularly
for any church or place of worship, the distance to be measured in a straight line from the principal
public entrance of the school, church or place of worship to the main public entrance of the premises
for which a license is sought.
(J) A Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor license may be issued only to a restaurant, club, bowling
center or hotel with a seating capacity for at least 30 persons which holds an on-sale intoxicating
liquor license for consumption on the premises in conjunction with the sale of food.
(Ord. 01-2007, passed 4-25-2007; Am. Ord. 05-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 110.14 TERM AND EXPIRATION OF LICENSES
Licenses shall be issued for a maximum period of one year. All licenses, except temporary licenses,
shall expire on December 31 of each year. Consumption and display permits issued by the
Commissioner of Public Safety and the accompanying city consent to the permit, shall expire on
March 31 of each year.
(Ord. 01-2007, passed 4-25-2007; Am. Ord. 05-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
10 Cokato - Business Regulations
§ 110.15 APPLICATIONS FOR RENEWAL
At least 90 days before a license issued under this subchapter is to be renewed, an application for
renewal shall be filed with the City Clerk-Treasurer on the appropriate form. The decision whether
to renew a license rests within the sound discretion of the Council. No licensee has a right to have
the license renewed.
(Ord. 01-2007, passed 4-25-2007; Am. Ord. 05-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 110.16 TRANSFER OF LICENSES
No license issued under this subchapter may be transferred without the written approval of the
Council. Any transfer of stock of a corporate licensee is deemed to be a transfer of the license, and
a transfer of stock without prior Council approval is sufficient grounds for revocation of the license.
An application to transfer a license shall be treated the same as an application for a new license, and
all of the provisions of this subchapter applying to applications for a license shall apply.
(Ord. 01-2007, passed 4-25-2007; Am. Ord. 05-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 110.17 HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE
The hours of operation and days of sale shall be those set by M.S. § 340A.504, as it may be amended
from time to time, except that no licensee may sell on-sale liquor on the licensed premises between
the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. No Sunday sale of intoxicating liquor for consumption on the
premises shall be permitted without a Sunday sale license.
(Ord. 01-2007, passed 4-25-2007; Am. Ord. 05-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 110.18 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION
(A) The Council may suspend a license for up to 60 days, revoke a license or impose a civil fine not
to exceed $2,000 for each violation upon a finding that the licensee has failed to comply with any
applicable statute, regulation or ordinance relating to liquor. Any license found selling alcoholic
beverages to a minor shall be assessed civil penalties as set out in the city’s fee schedule ordinance.
(B) Except in cases of failure of financial responsibility, no suspension or revocation shall take
effect until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to M.S. §§ 14.57 to
14.69, as it may be amended from time to time, of the Administrative Procedure Act.
Alcoholic Beverages 11
(C) Lapse of required dram shop insurance shall effect an immediate suspension of any license
issued pursuant to this subchapter without further action of the Council.
(D) Notice of cancellation or lapse of a current liquor liability policy or bond, or withdrawal of
deposited cash or securities shall also constitute notice to the licensee of the impending suspension
of the license.
(E) The holder of a license who has received notice of the lapse of required insurance or bond, or
withdrawal of a required deposit, or of suspension or revocation of a license, may request a hearing
thereon and if a request is made in writing to the City Clerk-Treasurer, a hearing shall be granted for
the next regular meeting of the Council or the longer period as may be requested.
(F) A suspension under this section shall continue until the Council determines that the financial
responsibility requirements of this section have again been met.
(G) The Council may waive or modify the civil penalties set out in this section if it finds good cause
to do so and makes findings as to the reasons for doing so.
(Ord. 01-2007, passed 4-25-2007; Am. Ord. 05-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 110.19 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES
(A) Unlawful activities.
(1) It is unlawful for any licensee, permitee, owner or manager of any establishment licensed
under this subchapter to cause, commit, permit or allow in the licensed premises any of the
prohibited activities listed in this section or any similar activities, or to sell liquor in any
premises from which any prohibited activities may be viewed or heard.
(2) A violation of this section is grounds for the suspension or revocation, as the Council may
determine, of any liquor license or permit issued under this subchapter.
(B) (1) Findings. The Council finds that it is in the best interests of the public health, safety and
general welfare of the community that nudity, sexual conduct and certain shows be prohibited as
provided in this section on the premises of any establishment licensed under this subchapter. This is
to protect and assist the owners, operators and employees of the establishment, as well as patrons
and the public in general, from harm stemming from the physical immediacy and combination of
alcohol, nudity and sex. The Council especially intends to prevent any subliminal endorsement of
sexual harassment or activities likely to lead to the possibility of various criminal conduct, including
prostitution, sexual assault and disorderly conduct. The Council also finds that the prohibition of the
following on the premises of any establishment licensed under this subchapter, as set forth in this
section, reflects the prevailing community standards of the city. As a result of these findings, the
following are prohibited within a licensed premises.
12 Cokato - Business Regulations
(2) Nudity. It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person on the licensed
premises when the person does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts and genitals covered
with a non-transparent material. It is unlawful for any person to be on the licensed premises
when the person does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts and genitals covered with a
non-transparent material.
(3) Sexual conduct. It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person on the
licensed premises to engage in any acts by oneself or another or simulation of acts of
masturbation, homosexual intercourse, heterosexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, anal
intercourse or the physical contact with a person’s unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or,
if the person is a female, her breasts.
(4) Certain shows. It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow mud wrestling, wet
T-shirt contests, lingerie shows or displays, or strip-tease dancing on the licensed premises.
(5) Displays of the foregoing. The display of any of any of the foregoing by any means,
including, but not limited to, books, printed material, magazines, movies, pictures, videos,
plays, exhibitions, recordings, closed circuit television, productions or any other device or
contrivance in any way that is capable of being used or adapted to arouse interest, or to affect
the human senses, whether through the medium of reading, observation, sound or any other
means is also prohibited.
(C) Gambling. No gambling or any gambling device shall be permitted on any licensed premises
with the exception of lawful gambling on a licensed on-sale liquor premises by charitable nonprofit
organization licensed by the state and operated in compliance with all applicable statutes, rules and
ordinances.
(D) Restrictions on purchase and consumption. No person shall mix or prepare liquor for
consumption in any public place of business unless he or she has a license to sell on-sale, or a permit
from the Commissioner of Public Safety under the provisions of M.S. § 340A.414, as it may be
amended from time to time, which has been approved by the Council, and no person shall consume
liquor in any such place.
(E) Consumption in public places. No person shall consume liquor in any public park, on any
public street, sidewalk or alley, public or private parking lot, or in any place other than within the
licensed premises of an establishment licensed under this subchapter or where the consumption and
display of liquor is lawfully permitted.
(Ord. 01-2007, passed 4-25-2007; Am. Ord. 05-2012, passed 12-10-2012)
§ 110.20 OFF-SALE LIQUOR DELIVERY
(A) Prohibition. No off-sale establishment licenses under the City of Cokato shall deliver or permit
any employee to deliver any alcoholic beverages if:
(1) The licensee has not provided notice of delivery service to the license issuing authority.
Annual notice is required at the time of license renewal; and
Alcoholic Beverages 13
(2) The delivery driver is under 21 years of age; and
(3) It cannot be determined that the person receiving such beverage is of legal age to purchase
and consume alcoholic beverages under M.S. § 340A.503; and
(4) The order was not taken in person or by phone at the establishment licensed by the City of
Cokato. Orders placed over the internet or by text or email do not constitute “in person or by
phone” orders; and
(5) Delivery is to a place where display and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages is
prohibited.
(B) Records Required. Off-sale establishments are required to obtain an invoice signed by the
person receiving such alcoholic beverages. The invoice shall state the names and addresses of the
seller and person receiving the delivery, the quantity, size and brand of alcoholic beverages
delivered, and the time, date, and place of delivery. The invoice shall be kept by the off-sale
licensee for a period of one (1) year and shall be made available for inspection by the license issuing
authority and the Wright County Sheriff’s Department.
(C) Times of Delivery. No off-sale licensee shall deliver or permit any employee to deliver to a
residential address:
(1) Between 10 p.m. and 8 a.m.
(D) Suspension or Revocation of Delivery. The City may suspend or revoke the licensee’s delivery
services for violations of any requirements of this Chapter or violations of Minnesota Statutes
Chapter 340A as amended.
§ 110.99 PENALTY
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 01-2007, passed 4-25-2007; Res. 2007-13, passed 8-6-2007; Am. Ord. 05-2012, passed
12-10-2012)
CHAPTER 111: CABLE SERVICE
Section
General Provisions
111.001 Findings and intent
111.002 Short title
111.003 Definitions
Franchises
111.020 Generally
111.021 Use of rights-of-way
111.022 Tree trimming
111.023 Franchise term
111.024 Regulation of cable service
111.025 Initial franchise applications
111.026 Franchise renewal
Construction Standards
111.040 Registration, permits and construction codes
111.041 Repair of rights-of-way and property
111.042 Undergrounding of facilities
111.043 Erection, removal and joint use of poles
111.044 Safety requirements
System Design and Extension Provisions
111.060 System capacity and channels
111.061 Cable service availability
111.062 Nonstandard installations
111.063 Technical standards
111.064 System testing
111.065 FCC reports
111.066 Emergency alert system
14
15 Cokato - Business Regulations
Consumer Protection and Customer Service Standards
111.080 Regulation of cable service rates
111.081 Sales procedures
111.082 Telephone inquiries and complaints
111.083 Complaint and other service records
111.084 Subscriber contracts
111.085 Video programming
111.086 Billing and subscriber communications
111.087 Refunds and credits
111.088 Additional customer service requirements
Community Services
111.105 PEG access facilities
111.106 Service to public or educational institutions
Administration Provisions
111.120 Administration of franchise
111.121 Franchise fee
111.122 Access to records
Indemnification and Insurance
111.135 Indemnification of the city
111.136 Insurance
Franchise Transfer or Abandonment
111.150 Abandonment of service
111.151 System removal after abandonment, termination or forfeiture
111.152 Sale or transfer of franchise
Protection of Individual Rights
111.170 Discriminatory practices prohibited
111.171 Subscriber privacy
Unauthorized Connections and Modifications
111.185 Unauthorized connections or modifications prohibited
Cable Service 16
Enforcement of Cable Ordinances or Franchise
111.200 Violations or other occurrences giving rise to enforcement action
111.201 Franchise revocation
111.202 Compliance with federal, state and local laws
111.999 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.001 FINDINGS AND INTENT
The city finds that the delivery of cable service and related communications services may contribute
significantly to the communication needs and desires of residents of the city, benefit local economic
development and improve public and municipal services. The city’s intent in adopting this chapter
is to encourage further development of cable service and related communications services in the
city, and to ensure that all cable service providers are subject to comparable obligations and burdens.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.002 SHORT TITLE
This chapter will be known and cited as the Cable Ordinance.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.003 DEFINITIONS
(A) For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations have
the meaning given herein. Unless otherwise provided herein, terms, phrases and words contained in
this chapter shall have the meaning ascribed in the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq., or if not
defined herein or in the Cable Act, will have their normal and customary meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words in the singular number include the plural number. The words
“must” and “will” are always mandatory and not merely directory. The word “may” is directory and
discretionary and not mandatory.
(B) For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates
or requires a different meaning.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE. Has the meaning ascribed in Cable Act §§ 522(3) and 543(b)(7).
17 Cokato - Business Regulations
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM, CABLE SYSTEM or SYSTEM. Has the meaning
ascribed in Cable Act § 522(7) and M.S. § 238.02, Subdivision 3, as it may be amended from
time to time.
CABLE PROGRAMMING SERVICE. Has the meaning ascribed in Cable Act § 543(l)(2).
CABLE SERVICE. Has the meaning ascribed in Cable Act § 522(6).
CHANNEL. Has the meaning ascribed in Cable Act § 522(4).
CITY. The City of Cokato, Minnesota, a municipal corporation in the State of Minnesota.
COMMISSION. The Sherburne/Wright Counties Cable Communications Commission, a
municipal joint powers entity consisting of the following municipalities: Buffalo, Big Lake,
Dassel, Delano, Elk River, Maple Lake, Monticello, Rockford and Watertown.
DROP. The cable that connects the ground block on the subscriber’s terminal device to the
nearest feeder cable of the system.
FCC. The Federal Communications Commission, or its lawful successor.
FRANCHISE, CABLE FRANCHISE or FRANCHISE AGREEMENT. An agreement
between the city and any provider of cable service pursuant to this chapter granting
authorization to construct, operate and maintain a system and provide cable service in the city.
FRANCHISE FEE. Has the meaning ascribed in Cable Act § 542(g).
GRANTEE. Any recipient of a franchise and its agents and employees, lawful successors,
transferees or assignees.
GROSS REVENUES. All revenues, as determined in accordance with Generally Accepted
Accounting Principles (GAAP), received by a grantee or its affiliates from the operation of a
cable system to provide cable service in the city. By way of example and not limitation, GROSS
REVENUES shall include any advertising revenues received by a grantee or its affiliates in
connection with the provision of cable service. GROSS REVENUES shall not include revenues
received by a grantee or its affiliates from the provision of telecommunications services or other
non-cable services in the city, bad debt, credits, refunds and deposits paid to subscribers, or any
taxes, fees or assessments of general applicability collected by a grantee which are imposed
directly on a subscriber and which are collected by a grantee for the governmental unit including
any PEG capital fees. A franchise fee is not a tax, fee or assessment.
INSTALLATION. The connection of a system with the subscriber terminal device.
MPUC. The Minnesota Public Utilities Commission, or its lawful successor.
Cable Service 18
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS. Has the meaning ascribed in the FCC’s rules, 47 C.F.R.
76.309(c)(4).
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS. Has the meaning ascribed in the FCC’s rules, 47
C.F.R. 76.309(c)(4).
PEG ACCESS FACILITIES. Public, educational and governmental programming channels,
or any equipment or facilities for use of the channels.
PERSON. Has the meaning ascribed in Cable Act § 522(15).
RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY. The area on, below or above a public roadway,
highway, street, cart-way, bicycle lane and public sidewalk in which the local government unit
has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes and utility easements
of local government units. RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include the airwaves above a
right-of-way with regard to wireless or other non-wire telecommunications or broadcast
services.
RIGHT-OF-WAY ORDINANCE. An ordinance of general applicability adopted by the city
establishing requirements regarding regulation, management and use of rights-of-way,
including registration and permitting requirements.
STANDARD INSTALLATION. Any residential installation that can be completed using a
drop of 150 feet or less.
SUBSCRIBER. Any person who lawfully receives cable service via a system.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES. Shall have the meaning ascribed in 47 U.S.C.
§ 153(46).
TERMINAL DEVICE. An electronic device that converts signals to a form accessible by the
subscriber.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
FRANCHISES
§ 111.020 GENERALLY
(A) No person may construct, operate or maintain a cable system or provide cable service in the city
unless and until the person is granted a franchise. All franchises must be granted pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
(B) Any franchise granted hereunder will authorize a grantee to deliver cable service and construct,
operate and maintain a cable system in the rights-of-way in the city.
19 Cokato - Business Regulations
(C) All franchises shall be nonexclusive and city may grant additional franchises at any time. The
city will not grant an additional franchise on terms and conditions more favorable or less burdensome
than those in an existing franchise. The city may impose additional terms and conditions in any
additional franchise.
(D) In the event the city grants an additional franchise that a grantee believes is more favorable or
less burdensome than its existing franchise, the grantee shall have a right to petition for franchise
amendments to relieve the grantee of provisions making its franchise less favorable or more
burdensome. The grantee shall file a petition that:
(1) Identifies the competitor(s);
(2) Identifies the basis for the grantee’s belief that certain provisions of the additional franchise
are more favorable or less burdensome than its existing franchise; and
(3) Identifies the franchise provisions to be amended. The city shall not unreasonably deny
such a petition.
(E) This chapter and franchises granted pursuant hereto are intended to comply with M.S Chapter
238, as it may be amended from time to time. Any applicable requirement established by M.S.
§ 238.084, as it may be amended from time to time, not expressly incorporated in this chapter or a
franchise shall be deemed incorporated by reference in the franchise as though fully set forth therein.
(F) The performance of any grantee is subject to periodic evaluation by the city upon reasonable
notice to the grantee.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.021 USE OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY
(A) Use of rights-of-way to operate a cable system and provide cable service must not be
inconsistent with the terms and conditions by which the rights-of-way were created or dedicated.
Use of rights-of-way is subject to all applicable legal requirements including any right-of-way
ordinance enacted by the city; provided, however, that to the extent that rights, duties and obligations
regarding the use of rights-of-way are specifically addressed in a franchise, the franchise terms shall
prevail over any conflicting provisions of a right-of-way ordinance.
(B) The city may construct, maintain, repair or relocate sewers; grade, pave, maintain, repair,
relocate and/or alter any right-of-way; construct, repair, maintain or relocate water mains or
construct, maintain, relocate or repair any sidewalk or other public work.
(C) All system facilities, lines and equipment in the city must be located so as not to obstruct or
interfere with the proper use of rights-of-way, alleys and other public ways and places, and cause
minimum interference with the rights of property owners who abut any of the rights-of-way, alleys
and other public ways and places, and not interfere with existing public utility installations.
Cable Service 20
(D) To the extent required in a right-of-way ordinance, a grantee must file with the city strand maps,
plats or other records of the location of all facilities constructed in the city, including underground
facilities. A grantee must update the maps, plats and permanent records annually if changes have
been made in the system. Consistent with applicable state law, the grantee may identify the maps,
plats or other records as “confidential trade secret”, and the city shall comply with all state laws
regarding the protection and dissemination of the materials.
(E) If the city alters or changes the grade or location of any right-of-way, alley or other public way,
a grantee shall, at its own expense, upon reasonable notice by the city, remove and relocate poles,
wires, cables, conduits, manholes and other system fixtures, and in each instance comply with the
standards and specifications of the city. If the city reimburses other occupants of the right-of-way,
the affected grantee will be likewise reimbursed.
(F) A grantee shall not place poles, conduits or other system fixtures where the same will interfere
with any gas, electric, telephone, water or other utility fixtures and all poles, conduits or other
fixtures placed in any right-of-way shall be so placed as to comply with all lawful requirements of
the city.
(G) A grantee will, on request of any person holding a moving permit issued by the city, temporarily
move wires or fixtures to permit the moving of buildings with the expense of the temporary removal
to be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee will be given no less than ten business
days’ advance notice to arrange for the temporary changes.
(H) A grantee will be liable for the failure to exercise reasonable care during construction, operation
or maintenance of a system.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.022 TREE TRIMMING
A grantee is authorized to trim any trees upon and overhanging the rights-of-way, alleys, sidewalks
or public easements of the city so as to prevent the branches of the trees from coming in contact with
wires and cables of a system. The city may supervise tree trimming activities and condition the
authority to trim trees as it deems appropriate.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.023 FRANCHISE TERM
(A) Franchises will be granted for a term established in the franchise agreement.
(B) No franchise may be granted for a period exceeding 15 years from the date of acceptance by the
grantee.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
21 Cokato - Business Regulations
§ 111.024 REGULATION OF CABLE SERVICE
Any franchise agreement adopted pursuant to this chapter will define the contractual rights and
obligations of the city and the grantee; provided, however, that a grantee remains subject to the
lawful exercise of the city’s police power, ordinance-making authority and power of eminent
domain.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.025 INITIAL FRANCHISE APPLICATIONS
(A) Upon request or its own initiative, the city may initiate the cable franchise application process
required by M.S. § 238.081, as it may be amended from time to time. Any person desiring an initial
franchise must file an application with the city.
(B) The city will establish an application fee in an amount to offset the costs of processing
applications and awarding an initial franchise. The application fees will not constitute a franchise
fee.
(C) Upon receipt of an application for an initial franchise, city staff will prepare a report and
recommendations to the City Council regarding the application(s).
(D) A public hearing concerning applications will be held prior to rejection or acceptance of
applications and award of any initial franchises.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.026 FRANCHISE RENEWAL
(A) Franchise renewals will be conducted in accordance with applicable laws.
(B) To the extent authorized by applicable laws, the city may require reimbursement of its expenses
incurred in processing the renewal.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
§ 111.040 REGISTRATION, PERMITS AND CONSTRUCTION CODES
(A) Within 90 days of acceptance of an initial franchise, a grantee shall apply for any necessary
governmental permits, licenses, certificates and authorizations to construct, repair, replace, relocate,
operate, maintain or reconstruct a system. A grantee may submit permit applications as construction
Cable Service 22
progresses, as agreed upon with the city. A grantee must strictly adhere to all state and local laws
and Building and Zoning Codes currently or hereafter applicable to location, construction,
installation, operation or maintenance of the facilities used to provide cable service in the city.
(B) The city may inspect any construction or installation work performed pursuant to the provisions
of a franchise. The city may make such tests as it must find reasonably necessary to ensure
compliance with the terms of this chapter, the franchise and applicable provisions of local, state and
federal law.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.041 REPAIR OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND PROPERTY
(A) Any rights-of-way or other property disturbed or damaged during the construction, repair,
replacement, relocation, operation, maintenance or reconstruction of a cable system shall be
promptly and fully restored by the grantee performing the work, at its expense, to a condition as
good as that prevailing prior to the work.
(B) If a grantee fails to promptly perform the restoration required herein, the city shall have the
right, following ten business days= written notice to the grantee, to restore rights-of-way and other
public property to a condition as good as that prevailing prior to the grantee’s work. The city shall
be fully reimbursed by the grantee for its actual costs relating to the restoration.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.042 UNDERGROUNDING OF FACILITIES
(A) In all areas of the city where utility facilities are required to be placed underground, or where
all other utility lines are underground, a grantee must construct and install system facilities
underground.
(B) A grantee must bury new drops within a reasonable time period, subject to weather conditions.
In the event the ground is frozen, a grantee will be permitted to delay burial until the ground is
suitable for burial, which in no event must be later than June 30.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.043 ERECTION, REMOVAL AND JOINT USE OF POLES
(A) In any area of the city where facilities may be located above ground, a grantee must make use
of existing poles and other facilities to the extent technically and economically feasible.
(B) No poles, above-ground conduits, amplifier boxes, similar structures or other wire-holding
structures may be erected or installed by the grantee on public property without prior approval of
the city with regard to location, height, type and other pertinent aspects.
23 Cokato - Business Regulations
(C) All facilities are subject to applicable zoning and other land use regulations.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.044 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
(A) A grantee must at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care in the construction, installation
and maintenance of system facilities and must use ordinary and reasonable methods and devices for
preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the
public. All system facilities must at all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order and
repair so that the same must not menace or endanger the life or property of the city or any person.
(B) A grantee must install and maintain equipment and facilities in accordance with all applicable
federal and state laws and regulations, any right-of-way ordinance, the requirements of the National
Electric Safety Code and in the manner that they will not interfere with private radio, police and fire
communications or any installations of city or of any public utility serving city.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
SYSTEM DESIGN AND EXTENSION PROVISIONS
§ 111.060 SYSTEM CAPACITY AND CHANNELS
At a minimum, any franchise granted hereunder shall describe the grantee’s network in terms of the
total system capacity such as the total number of analog and digital video channels that can be
provided.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.061 CABLE SERVICE AVAILABILITY
(A) Each franchise will identify a required service area in which a grantee will be required to offer
cable service to all dwellings, homes and businesses, subject to a reasonable density threshold. Any
additional franchise will include a service area that is no more favorable or less burdensome than
the service area in an existing franchise.
(B) Any franchise granted hereunder may establish requirements for the extension of the system
and provision of cable service to areas that may be annexed by the city beyond the initially required
service area.
(C) Cable service shall not be denied to any group of potential residential cable subscribers because
of the income of the residents of the area in which the group resides.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
Cable Service 24
§ 111.062 NONSTANDARD INSTALLATIONS
A grantee must provide cable service to any person requesting other than a standard installation,
except that a grantee may charge for the incremental increase in material and labor costs incurred
above the cost of making a standard installation.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.063 TECHNICAL STANDARDS
Any system offering cable service in the city must comply, at minimum, with the technical standards
promulgated by the FCC relating to cable systems pursuant to Title 47, §§ 76.601 to 76.617, as may
be amended or modified from time to time.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.064 SYSTEM TESTING
(A) A grantee shall perform all system testing required pursuant to the FCC’s technical standards
and requirements. In the event the city identifies signal or system performance difficulties which
may constitute violations of applicable FCC technical standards, the grantee will be notified and
afforded ten days to correct problems or complaints. If the performance difficulty is not resolved
within ten days in the city’s sole determination, the city may require the grantee to demonstrate
compliance via testing or other means selected by the grantee.
(B) The city may test any system or facilities used to provide cable service in the city. The city will
seek to arrange its testing so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to the grantee and subscribers.
In the event that testing reveals that the source of the technical difficulty is within the grantee’s
reasonable control, the cost of the testing must be borne by the grantee. If the testing reveals the
difficulties to be caused by factors that are beyond the grantee’s reasonable control, the cost of the
testing must be borne by the city.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.065 FCC REPORTS
A grantee must, upon written request from the city, file all required FCC technical reports with the
city.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.066 EMERGENCY ALERT SYSTEM
A grantee must provide an emergency alert system (EAS) that complies with FCC requirements. A
grantee must further ensure that the city can insert, or direct the insertion of, brief audio and video
25 Cokato - Business Regulations
emergency messages simultaneously on all channels or a single channel to which subscribers are
directed. The city shall indemnify the grantee for city’s use of a cable system for emergency
messages.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
CONSUMER PROTECTION AND CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS
§ 111.080 REGULATION OF CABLE SERVICE RATES
The city may regulate rates for the provision of cable service to the extent allowed under federal or
state law(s). A grantee must file a list of current subscriber rates and charges with the city, which
list will be maintained on file with the city and will be available for public inspection. A grantee
must give the city and subscribers written notice of any change in a cable service rate or change no
less than 30 days prior to the effective date of the change.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.081 SALES PROCEDURES
(A) A grantee may not exercise deceptive sales procedures that violate state laws when marketing
any of its cable services within the city.
(B) A grantee may conduct marketing consistent with local ordinances and other applicable laws
and regulations.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.082 TELEPHONE INQUIRIES AND COMPLAINTS
(A) A grantee must maintain local, toll-free or collect call telephone access lines which will be
available to its subscribers 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
(B) A grantee must comply with the FCC’s customer service standards, a current copy of which is
attached to Ord. 2005-1, which is hereby adopted by reference.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.083 COMPLAINT AND OTHER SERVICE RECORDS
(A) Upon written request by the city, and subject to a grantee’s obligation to maintain the privacy
of certain information, a grantee must prepare and maintain written records of all written complaints
received and the resolution of the complaints, including the date of the resolution.
Cable Service 26
(B) Written complaint records must be on file at the office of a grantee. Upon written request by the
city, a grantee must provide the city with a written summary of the complaints and their resolution
and in a form mutually agreeable to the city and the grantee.
(C) Upon written request by the city, a grantee must provide detailed compliance reports on a
quarterly basis with respect to the objectively measurable service standards required in division (A)
above, the grantee will not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure
compliance with the telephone answering standards contained in this section unless a historical
record of complaints indicates a failure to comply.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.084 SUBSCRIBER CONTRACTS
A grantee must provide to the city, upon request, any standard form subscriber contract utilized.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.085 VIDEO PROGRAMMING
All franchises will comply with 47 U.S.C. § 544(b), regarding the broad categories of video
programming provided. Individual programming decisions may be made in the grantee’s sole
discretion.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.086 BILLING AND SUBSCRIBER COMMUNICATIONS
(A) A grantee must give the city and subscribers 30 days’ advance written notice of any changes in
rates, programming services or channel alignments.
(B) Bills must be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must clearly delineate all activity during
the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits. In case of a billing dispute, the
grantee must respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.087 REFUNDS AND CREDITS
(A) Credits must be issued no later than the subscriber’s next billing cycle following the
determination that a credit is warranted.
(B) In the event a subscriber establishes or terminates cable service and receives less than a full
month’s cable service, the grantee must prorate the monthly rate on the basis of the number of days
in
27 Cokato - Business Regulations
the period for which cable service was rendered to the number of days in the billing. Refund checks
will be issued promptly, but no later than the next billing cycle following the return of the equipment
supplied by the grantee if cable service is terminated.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.088 ADDITIONAL CUSTOMER SERVICE REQUIREMENTS
The city may adopt additional or modified customer service requirements to address subscriber
concerns or complaints to the extent permitted by law.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
COMMUNITY SERVICES
§ 111.105 PEG ACCESS FACILITIES
(A) Franchises will establish obligations to provide PEG access facilities to meet the community’s
needs and interests.
(B) The city will operate, administer and manage PEG access programming and the city may
delegate its PEG access authority and responsibilities to the Commission.
(C) All franchises must contain equivalent PEG access obligations on any franchised provider of
cable services.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.106 SERVICE TO PUBLIC OR EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
Franchises will establish obligations for the provision of free or reduced cost cable services to
identified public or educational institutions.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
ADMINISTRATION PROVISIONS
§ 111.120 ADMINISTRATION OF FRANCHISE
(A) The city will have continuing regulatory authority over cable systems, cable services and
franchise compliance. The city may delegate any and all regulatory authority to the Commission.
Cable Service 28
(B) A grantee must fully cooperate with the Commission in the exercise of regulatory authority
delegated by the city.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.121 FRANCHISE FEE
(A) A grantee must pay to the city a franchise fee in the amount established in the franchise
agreement.
(B) Each franchise fee payment must be accompanied by a report certified by an authorized
representative of the grantee, in form reasonably acceptable to the city, detailing the computation of
the payment. All amounts paid must be subject to audit and re-computation by the city and
acceptance of any payment must not be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the
correct amount.
(C) A grantee may designate that portion of a subscriber’s bill attributable to the franchise fee as a
separate line item on the bill.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.122 ACCESS TO RECORDS
(A) (1) The city may, upon reasonable notice and during normal business hours, and subject to the
privacy provisions of 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq., inspect at a mutually convenient location any records
of system operations maintained by a grantee that relate to a grantee’s compliance with its franchise,
including specifically the grantee’s gross revenue records.
(2) A grantee may identify and label documents as “confidential trade secret” in accordance
with § 111.021.
(B) A grantee must prepare and furnish to the city the reports as the city may reasonably request
with respect to operation of the system and provision of cable services in the city, or any other
operations, affairs, transactions or property subject to this franchise.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
INDEMNIFICATION AND INSURANCE
§ 111.135 INDEMNIFICATION OF THE CITY
(A) A grantee must indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its officers, boards, committees,
commissions, elected officials, employees and agents from and against any loss or damage to any
real or personal property of any person, or for any injury to or death of any person, arising out of or
in
29 Cokato - Business Regulations
connection with the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of a system or other
facilities used by a grantee to deliver cable service.
(B) A grantee must indemnify, defend and hold the city, its officers, boards, committees,
commissions, elected officials, employees and agents, harmless from and against all lawsuits,
claims, actions, liability, damages, costs, expenses or penalties incurred as a result of the award or
enforcement of its franchise.
(C) A grantee shall not be required to provide indemnification or defense for any intentional
misconduct, willful neglect or negligence by an indemnified party, for any enforcement action taken
by the city against a grantee, of for any claim based solely on the city’s operation of PEG access
facilities, delivery of PEG access programming or EAS messages originated by the city. Subject to
the limitations in M.S. Chapter 466, as it may be amended from time to time, the city shall indemnify,
defend and hold a grantee harmless from any damage resulting from any intentional misconduct,
willful neglect or negligence by the city, its officers, boards, committees, commissions, elected
officials, employees and agents, in utilizing PEG access facilities or channels, delivering EAS
messages originated by the city, or in connection with work performed on or adjacent to the system.
(D) With respect to each claim for indemnification:
(1) The city must promptly notify the grantee in writing of any suit, claim or proceeding which
gives rise to the right;
(2) The grantee must afford the city an opportunity to participate in any compromise,
settlement or other resolution or disposition of any suit, claim or proceeding; and
(3) The city must cooperate with reasonable requests of the grantee, at the grantee’s expense,
in its participation in a suit, claim or proceeding.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.136 INSURANCE
(A) A grantee must obtain and maintain in full force and effect, at its sole expense, a comprehensive
general liability insurance policy, in protection of the grantee and the city, its officers, elected
officials, boards, commissions, agents and employees for damages which may arise as a result of
operation of the system or delivery of cable service.
(B) The policies of insurance must be in the sum of not less than $1,000,000 for personal injury or
death of any one person, and $2,000,000 for personal injury or death of two or more persons in any
one occurrence, $500,000 for property damage to any one person and $2,000,000 for property
damage resulting from any one act or occurrence.
(C) The insurance policy must be maintained by grantee in full force and effect during the entire
term of the franchise. Each policy of insurance must contain a statement on its face that the insurer
will
Cable Service 30
not cancel the policy or fail to renew the policy, whether for non-payment of premium, or otherwise,
and whether at the request of the grantee or for other reasons, except after 60 days’ advance written
notice have been provided to the city.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
FRANCHISE TRANSFER OR ABANDONMENT
§ 111.150 ABANDONMENT OF SERVICE
A grantee may not discontinue the provision of cable service without having first given three months
written notice to the city.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.151 SYSTEM REMOVAL AFTER ABANDONMENT, TERMINATION OR
FORFEITURE
(A) In the event of termination or forfeiture of the franchise or abandonment of the system, the city
may require the grantee to remove all or any portion of its system from all rights-of-way and public
property within the city; provided, however, that the grantee will not be required to remove its system
to the extent it lawfully provides telecommunications services over the system.
(B) If the grantee has failed to commence removal of its system, or the part thereof as was designated
by the city, within 120 days after written demand for removal is given, or if the grantee has failed to
complete the removal within 12 months after written demand for removal is given, the city may
apply funds secured by the franchise toward removal.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.152 SALE OR TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE
(A) No sale or transfer of ownership of a grantee or fundamental corporate change in a grantee as
defined in M.S. § 238.083, as it may be amended from time to time, nor sale of transfer of a franchise,
is permitted without city approval. Any sale or transfer of stock in a grantee creating a new
controlling interest constitutes a sale or transfer of ownership. A controlling interest includes
majority stock ownership or a lesser amount sufficient to confer actual working control in whatever
manner exercised. City approval shall not be required where a grantee grants a security interest in
its franchise or system to secure an indebtedness.
(B) A grantee must file a written request with the city prior to any transaction described above. The
city will approve or deny a transfer request within 120 days of receipt of a written request. The city
will not unreasonably withhold its approval.
31 Cokato - Business Regulations
(C) In no event will a transaction be approved unless any proposed new grantee becomes a signatory
to, and assumes all rights and obligations under, the franchise.
(D) (1) In the event of any proposed transaction described above, the city will have the right to
purchase the system.
(2) In the event a grantee has received a bona fide offer for purchase of its system, the city shall
have the right to purchase for the price which the proposed assignee or transferee agreed to pay.
(3) The city will be deemed to have waived its right to purchase the system in the following
circumstances:
(a) The city does not notify the grantee in writing, within 60 days of notice, that it intends
to exercise its right of purchase; or
(b) The city approves the transaction.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
PROTECTION OF INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS
§ 111.170 DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED
No grantee may deny cable service or otherwise discriminate against citizens or businesses on the
basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, status as to public assistance, affectional
preference or disability.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.171 SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY
(A) A grantee must comply with the subscriber privacy-related requirements of 47 U.S.C. § 551.
(B) No signals of a Class IV Channel may be transmitted from a subscriber terminal for purposes
of monitoring individual viewing patterns or practices without the express written authorization of
the subscriber.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
Cable Service 32
UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
§ 111.185 UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS OR MODIFICATIONS PROHIBITED
(A) It is unlawful for any person, without the express consent of the grantee, to make, possess or
assist anybody in making or possessing, any connection, extension or division, whether physically,
acoustically, inductively, electronically or otherwise, with or to any segment of a grantee’s system.
(B) It is unlawful for any person to willfully interfere, tamper, remove, obstruct or damage, or assist
thereof, any part or segment of a system for any purpose.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
ENFORCEMENT OF CABLE ORDINANCES OR FRANCHISE
§ 111.200 VIOLATIONS OR OTHER OCCURRENCES GIVING RISE TO
ENFORCEMENT ACTION
(A) In order to take enforcement action pursuant to this chapter or a franchise, the city must provide
the grantee with written notice of the violation or other occurrence giving rise to the city’s action.
(B) The grantee shall have 30 days subsequent to receipt of the notice to cure the violation or
occurrence giving rise to the city’s action. Alternatively, the grantee may, within 14 days of receipt
of notice from the city, notify city in writing that there is a dispute as to whether a violation or failure
has in fact occurred. The written notice by the grantee to the city shall specify with particularity the
matters disputed by the grantee.
(C) In the event a grantee does not timely cure to the city’s satisfaction the violation or other
occurrence giving rise to the city’s action, or timely disputes whether a violation has occurred, the
city will schedule a public hearing affording the grantee due process. The city will endeavor to
schedule the hearing for a date within 90 days of the initial violation notice. Notice of the hearing
must be provided to the grantee.
(D) At the completion of the hearing, the city will issue written findings of fact and its final
determination.
(E) In the event the city determines that no violation has taken place, the city will rescind the notice
of violation in writing.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
33 Cokato - Business Regulations
§ 111.201 FRANCHISE REVOCATION
(A) In addition to all other rights and remedies that the city possesses pursuant to law, equity and
the terms of the franchise agreement, the city may revoke or terminate the franchise, and all rights
and privileges pertaining thereto, in accordance with § 111.200 if the city determines that:
(1) The grantee has violated any material requirement or provision of this chapter or a franchise
and has failed to timely cure;
(2) The grantee has attempted to evade any of the material provisions of this chapter or a
franchise;
(3) The grantee has practiced fraud or deceit upon the city or a subscriber; or
(4) The grantee has filed for bankruptcy.
(B) During any revocation proceeding and any appeal period, the franchise will remain in full force
and effect unless the term thereof sooner expires.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.202 COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL, STATE AND LOCAL LAWS
The city and grantee will conform to federal and state laws and rules regarding cable service or the
system as they become effective.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
§ 111.999 PENALTY
(A) Except as noted in division (B) below, any person violating any provision of this chapter shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(B) Any person found guilty of violating § 111.185 may be fined not less than $20 and the costs of
the action nor more than $500 and the costs of the action for each and every subsequent offense.
(Ord. 2005-1, passed 1-31-2005)
CHAPTER 112: PAWN SHOPS, PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS
AND THE LIKE
Section
General Provisions
112.01 Definitions
112.02 Exemptions
Licenses
112.15 License required
112.16 Multiple dealers
112.17 License fee
112.18 Application
112.19 Bond
112.20 Site plan
112.21 Investigations
112.22 Public hearing
112.23 Granting of license
112.24 Persons ineligible for license
112.25 County license
112.26 Places ineligible for license
112.27 Physical features of the site
112.28 Conditional licenses
112.29 Hours of operation
112.30 License limitations
112.31 Term; expiration; pro-rata fee
112.32 Records
Items and Goods
112.45 Prohibited items
112.46 Stolen goods
112.47 Videotaping and signage
112.48 Purchased goods holding period
112.49 Receipt for goods received
112.50 Record of goods sold or redeemed
34
35 Cokato - Business Regulations
Miscellaneous Provisions
112.65 Law enforcement orders
112.66 Prohibited acts
112.67 License denial, suspension or revocation
112.68 Pawn redemption period
112.69 Payments by check
112.70 Inspections
112.71 Applicability
112.99 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or
requires a different meaning.
AUCTION HOUSE DEALER. A person whose regular business includes auctioning used goods.
The AUCTION HOUSE DEALER may receive used goods to auction, but may not purchase the
items for auction.
CONSIGNMENT HOUSE DEALER. A person whose regular business includes receiving, but
not purchasing, tangible property with the intention to sell the property and divide the proceeds with
the owner.
PAWNBROKER. A person who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal property, or other
valuable thing, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other valuable thing on
condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price, or who loans money secured by chattel
mortgage on personal property, taking possession of the property or any part thereof so mortgaged,
but does not include a bank, savings association, credit union or industrial loan and thrift company
defined as such by federal or state law.
PRECIOUS METALS DEALER. A person engaged in the business of buying secondhand items
containing more than 1% by weight of silver, gold or platinum.
SECONDHAND GOODS DEALER. A person whose regular business includes purchasing and
selling, tangible personal property (excluding motor vehicles) previously used, rented, owned or
leased.
Pawn Shops, Pawnbrokers, Secondhand Dealers and the Like 36
TRADERS. A person(s) whose regular business primarily consists of receiving tangible property
in trade for other tangible property in stock.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
§ 112.02 EXEMPTIONS
This chapter does not apply to or include the following:
(A) The sale of secondhand goods where all of the following conditions are present:
(1) The sale is held on property principally occupied as a dwelling by the seller or owned,
rented or leased by a charitable or political organization;
(2) The items offered for sale are owned by the occupant;
(3) The sale does not exceed a period of 72 consecutive hours;
(4) Not more than four sales are held either by the same person or on the same property in any
12-month period; and
(5) None of the items offered for sale has been purchased for resale or received on consignment
for purpose of resale.
(B) Sales of motor vehicles;
(C) The sale of secondhand books, magazines, films, bona fide antiques or collectibles;
(D) The sale of goods at an auction held by a licensed auctioneer if occurring not more than twice
in a 12-month period;
(E) The business of buying or selling secondhand goods where the business is incidental to and not
the primary business of a person;
(F) A bulk sale of property from a merchant, manufacturer or wholesaler having an established
place of business or of goods sold at open sale from bankrupt stock;
(G) Firearms, including antique firearms, sold by firearms dealers holding currently valid federal
firearms dealer licenses permitting them to deal in the sales;
(H) Sales made by the sheriff or other public officials in discharge of their official duties; or
(I) Sales made by assignees or receivers appointed in this state to make sales for the benefit of
creditors.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
37 Cokato - Business Regulations
LICENSES
§ 112.15 LICENSE REQUIRED
(A) Pawnbroker. No person may conduct, operate or engage in the business of a pawnbroker w
ithout first obtaining a pawnbroker’s license.
(B) Secondhand goods dealer. No person may conduct, operate or engage in the business of
secondhand goods dealer without having first obtained a secondhand goods dealer license.
(C) Consignment house dealer. No person may conduct, operate or engage in the business of a
consignment house dealer without first obtaining a consignment house license.
(D) Auction house dealer. No person may conduct, operate or engage in the business of an auction
house dealer without first obtaining an auction house license.
(E) Trader’s license. No person may conduct, operate or engage in the business of trading without
first obtaining a trading license.
(F) Precious metals dealer’s license. No person may conduct, operate or engage in the business
of a precious metals dealer without first obtaining a trading license.
(G) Separate licenses required. A person must obtain a separate license for each of the above
activities for which he or she engages in.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
§ 112.16 MULTIPLE DEALERS
(A) Multiple sales locations. The owner of a business, at which two or more secondhand goods
dealers are engaged in business by maintaining separate sales space and identifying themselves to
the public as individual dealers, may obtain a multiple secondhand goods dealer license for that
location. A multiple license may not be issued unless the following requirements are met:
(1) The businesses must have a single name and address;
(2) The businesses must operate in a compact and contiguous space;
(3) The businesses must be under the unified control and supervision of the one person who
holds the license; and
Pawn Shops, Pawnbrokers, Secondhand Dealers and the Like 38
(4) Sales must be consummated at a central point or register operated by the owner of the
business, and the owner must maintain a comprehensive account of all sales.
(B) Compliance. The holder of a secondhand goods dealer license under this section for a business
with more than one dealer at the same location must comply with all of the requirements of this
section, including the responsibility for law enforcement reporting and record keeping in the same
manner as any other dealer licensed under this section. A dealer licensed under this section is
responsible to its customers for stolen or misrepresented goods sold at its place of business in the
same manner as any other dealer licensed under this section.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
§ 112.17 LICENSE FEE
The annual license fee for pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers and the like will be set by City Council
by ordinance.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
§ 112.18 APPLICATION
(A) Contents. A license applicant must complete an application form provided by the City Clerk
Treasurer. The application must be in a form and request information of the applicant as determined
by the City Council.
(B) Execution. If the applicant is a natural person, the application must be signed and sworn to by
the person; if a corporation, by an agent authorized to sign; if a partnership, by a partner.
(C) Fees. The application must be accompanied by the required license fee. The fee will be
returned to the applicant if the application is rejected.
(D) False statements. It is unlawful to knowingly make a false statement in the license application.
In addition to all other penalties, the license may be subsequently revoked by the City Council for a
violation of this section.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
§ 112.19 BOND
(A) A pawnbroker license will not be issued unless the applicant files with the City Clerk Treasurer
a bond with corporate surety, cash or a United States government bond in the amount of $5,000.
(B) The bond must be conditioned on the licensee obeying the laws and ordinances governing the
licensed business and paying all fees, taxes, penalties and other charges associated with the business.
39 Cokato - Business Regulations
(C) The bond must provide that it is forfeited to the city upon a violation of law or ordinance.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
§ 112.20 SITE PLAN
The application for a pawnbroker, secondhand goods or an auction house dealer license must be
accompanied by the following:
(A) A legal description of the property upon which the proposed licensed premises is situated;
(B) A plot plan including an “as built” survey showing existing and proposed buildings, if any,
street curbs, parking areas and the like;
(C) The exact location of the licensed premises on the property, customer and employee parking
areas, accesses onto the property and entrances into the premises;
(D) The location of and distance from the nearest religious institution, school, hospital and
residence; and
(E) A current floor plan of the licensed premises.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
§ 112.21 INVESTIGATIONS
(A) Conduct. The city, prior to the granting of an initial or renewed pawnbroker, secondhand goods
dealer, consignment dealer, auction house dealer, trader or precious metals dealer license, will
conduct a preliminary background and financial investigation of the applicant. Any person having a
beneficial interest in the license may be investigated. The investigation shall be conducted by the
Sheriff’s Department or other law enforcement agency and the results reported to the City Council.
The investigation must verify that facts stated in the application, and must report all convicted
violations of state law, federal law or municipal ordinances involving the applicant, interested
persons or the license premises while under that applicant’s proprietorship. A full background
investigation is required for pawn brokers, secondhand goods dealers and precious metals dealers.
(B) Fee. The fee charged by the city to an applicant for a pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealers,
precious metals dealers, consignment shop, auction house or traders license for the costs of an
investigation is set by City Council by ordinance. The applicant will be notified of the investigation
fee prior to the City Council’s final action on the license application. The investigation fee is payable
upon terms established by the city.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
Pawn Shops, Pawnbrokers, Secondhand Dealers and the Like 40
§ 112.22 PUBLIC HEARING
A pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, consignment house dealer, auction house dealer, trader or
precious metals dealer license will not be issued or renewed without a public hearing. Any person
having an interest in or who will be affected by the proposed license will be permitted to testify at
the hearing. The public hearing must be preceded by at least ten days’ published notice specifying
the location of the proposed licensed business premises.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
§ 112.23 GRANTING OF LICENSE
After review of the license application and investigation report and following the public hearing, if
required, the City Council may grant or refuse the application for a new or renewed pawnbroker, or
secondhand goods dealer, consignment house dealer, auction house dealer, trader or precious metals
dealer licenses. A license will not be effective unless the application fee and bond, if applicable,
have been filed with the City Clerk Treasurer.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
§ 112.24 PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE
A pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, consignment house dealer, auction house dealer, trader or
precious metals dealer license will not be issued to:
(A) A person not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien;
(B) A person under 18 years of age;
(C) Subject to the provisions of law, a person who within five years of the license application date
has been convicted of receiving stolen property, sale of stolen property or controlled substance,
burglary, robbery, theft, damage or trespass to property, or any law or ordinance regulating the
business of pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, consignment house dealer, auction house dealer,
trader or precious metals dealer;
(D) A person who within five years of the license application date had a pawnbroker, secondhand
goods dealer, consignment house dealer, auction house dealer or trader or precious metals dealer
license revoked;
(E) A person whom the City Council determines not to be of sufficient good moral character and
repute; or
(F) When the City Council determines, after investigation and public hearing, that issuance or
renewal of the license would adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
41 Cokato - Business Regulations
§ 112.25 COUNTY LICENSE
Pawnbrokers, secondhand goods dealers and precious metals dealers must be licensed by Wright
County if required by law.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
§ 112.26 PLACES INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE
A license will not be issued or renewed under this section for any of the following reasons:
(A) If taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the city or the State of Minnesota on the
licensee’s business premises are delinquent and unpaid;
(B) If the premises for which a license has been applied is within 300 feet of a school or religious
institution;
(C) Where operation of a licensed premises would violate zoning ordinances; and
(D) Where the applicant’s present license was issued conditioned upon the applicant making
specified improvements to the licensed premises or the property of the licensed premises, which
improvements have not been completed.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
§ 112.27 PHYSICAL FEATURES OF THE SITE
Licensed pawnbrokers, secondhand goods dealers, precious metals dealers and auction house dealers
shall:
(A) Have no exterior loudspeaker, nor any public address system that is audible from any residential
parcel;
(B) Store all merchandise and conduct all business transactions within an enclosed building.
Merchandise may be temporarily displayed immediately outside the business establishment
provided that it is maintained in a neat and orderly fashion, does not pose a threat to the public health,
safety or welfare, and does not interfere with the use of any sidewalk, street or other public way; and
(C) Install and maintain burglar alarms for the business establishment and for all locations where
goods are stored.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
Pawn Shops, Pawnbrokers, Secondhand Dealers and the Like 42
§ 112.28 CONDITIONAL LICENSES
The Council may grant an application for a new or renewed pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer,
consignment dealer, auction house dealer, trader or precious metals dealer license conditioned upon
the applicant making reasonable improvements to the proposed business premises or the property
upon which the business premises is situated. The Council, in granting a conditional license, will
specify when the modifications must be completed. Failure to comply with the conditions of the
license is grounds for the City Council to refuse to renew the license.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
§ 112.29 HOURS OF OPERATION
Pawnbrokers, secondhand goods dealers, consignment dealers, auction house dealers, traders and
precious metals dealers shall not be open for business between 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following
day.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
§ 112.30 LICENSE LIMITATIONS
(A) A license will be issued to the applicant only and only for the business premises as described in
the application.
(B) The license is effective only for the premises and person specified in the approved license
application.
(C) Amendments to this section occurring during any license year shall be applicable to all licenses
then in force and the licensee shall comply with the amendments within 30 days of the effective
dates or as otherwise provided by the Council.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
§ 112.31 TERM; EXPIRATION; PRO-RATA FEE
(A) The license is issued for a period of one year beginning on January 1 except that if the
application is made during the license year, a license may be issued for the remainder of the licensed
year for a monthly pro-rated fee.
(B) An unexpired fraction of a month will be counted as a complete month.
(C) The license expires on December 31 at midnight. The investigation fee may not be pro-rated.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
43 Cokato - Business Regulations
§ 112.32 RECORDS
In addition to any other records required in this section, a licensed secondhand goods dealer,
pawnbroker, consignment house dealer, auction house dealer, trader or precious metals dealer at
the time of receipt of an item, must immediately record, in ink or other indelible medium in a
book or word processing unit, the following information:
(A) An accurate description of the item including, but not limited to, any trademark, identification
number, serial number, model number, brand name or other identifying mark on the item;
(B) The purchase price;
(C) Date, time and place of receipt;
(D) Full name, address, telephone number and date of birth of the person from whom the item was
received;
(E) No forms of identification shall be accepted other than the identification number from any of
the following forms of identification of the person from whom the item was received:
(1) Valid photo Minnesota driver’s license;
(2) Valid photo Minnesota identification card;
(3) Valid photo identification issued by the state of residency of the person from whom the
item was received;
(4) Photo military identification; or
(5) Current passport.
(F) The books as well as the goods received must be open for inspection by the Sheriff’s Department
or other law enforcement agency at reasonable times. Records required by this section must be stored
and maintained by the licensee for a period of at least three years.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
ITEMS AND GOODS
§ 112.45 PROHIBITED ITEMS
(A) Unless a serial number is recorded for an item to be pawned or sold, or the amount of the pawn
is less than $25, a pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, consignment house, auction house dealer,
Pawn Shops, Pawnbrokers, Secondhand Dealers and the Like 44
trader or precious metals dealer is prohibited from pawning, receiving or taking any of the items
listed below without acceptable proof of ownership. A photocopy of any document(s) presented to
the licensee shall be retained by the licensee until the item is redeemed or following the expiration
of the redemption period. The proof must be provided to the Sheriff’s Department or other law
enforcement agency upon request and must be disclosed on the daily report:
(1) Sound or video equipment;
(2) Automotive electronic equipment; and
(3) Cameras.
(B) A pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, consignment house dealer, auction house dealer,
trader or precious metals dealer is prohibited from pawning, receiving or taking any items with a
serial number identification or operation identification symbol which have been obliterated or
defaced.
(C) A consignment house dealer, auction house dealer or trader may not deal with precious jewelry,
gems or precious metals.
(D) A pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, consignment dealer, auction house dealer, trader or
precious metals dealer may not receive as a pledge or otherwise accept for consignment, sale or trade
any firearms or weapons, including but not limited to revolvers, pistols, sawed-off shotguns,
automatic rifles, blackjacks, switchblade knives or other similar weapons or firearms. Ordinary
kitchen utensils or cutlery are not prohibited.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
§ 112.46 STOLEN GOODS
A pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, consignment dealer, auction house dealer, trader or
precious metals dealer must report to the Sheriff’s Department or other appropriate law enforcement
agency any article pledged or received, or sought to be pledged or received, if the licensee has reason
to believe that the article was stolen or lost.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
§ 112.47 VIDEOTAPING AND SIGNAGE
(A) Videotaping. A pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer or precious metals dealer must
videotape all transactions and have the ability to make a still photo of each customer. The camera
must be situated in such a manner as to record a clear view of the customer and items being
transacted. The video tape must be in color and electronically record the date and time. The video
tape records and still photos must be retained for a minimum of 120 days. Specific video tape records
or video tapes shall be provided to the Sheriff’s Department or other law enforcement agency upon
request.
45 Cokato - Business Regulations
(B) Signage. The licensee must display a sign, in a conspicuous place in the premises and of
sufficient size, which informs all patrons that all transactions are reported to a law enforcement
agency.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
§ 112.48 PURCHASED GOODS HOLDING PERIOD
(A) Any secondhand goods items purchased (other than reconditioned items or items purchased at
wholesale) by a pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer or precious metals dealer may not be sold or
otherwise transferred for a period of 30 days after the date of purchase.
(B) The holding period may not be waived by any person.
(C) This section does not prohibit the immediate sale by licensed secondhand goods dealers of items
acquired from pawnbrokers following the expiration of the redemption period.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
§ 112.49 RECEIPT FOR GOODS RECEIVED
A licensed pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, pawnbroker consignment dealer, auction house
dealer, trader or precious metals dealer must provide a receipt to the seller, pawner or consignor of
any items which includes:
(A) The address and phone number of the business;
(B) The date on which the item was received by the business;
(C) A description of the item received, consigned or taken in pawn and the amount paid to the
pledger or the seller in exchange for the item pawned or sold;
(D) The seller’s, pawner’s or co-signer’s signature. The pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer,
consignment dealer, auction house dealer, trader or precious metals dealer must retain a copy of this
receipt;
(E) If applicable, the last regular business day by which the item must be redeemed by the pledger
without risk that the item will be sold and the amount necessary to redeem the pawned item on that
date;
(F) If applicable, the annual rate of interest charged on pawned items received; and
(G) The name and address of the seller, pawner or pledger.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
Pawn Shops, Pawnbrokers, Secondhand Dealers and the Like 46
§ 112.50 RECORD OF GOODS SOLD OR REDEEMED
A licensed pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, consignment dealer, auction house dealer or
precious metals dealer must keep a record showing date of sale and sale price for all items.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 112.65 LAW ENFORCEMENT ORDERS
The licensee shall retain possession of any item when ordered to do so by a law enforcement officer.
If the order is oral, it shall terminate within 72 hours after having been given, unless during the
period a written order is delivered to the licensee directing that the item continue to be held and
stating the reason therefore. The requirement of this section shall terminate if the item ordered to be
held has not been seized or released by a law enforcement agency within 120 days following the
date of the written order.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
§ 112.66 PROHIBITED ACTS
(A) Minors. A minor may not sell or consign, or attempt to sell or consign goods with a
pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, consignment dealer, auction house dealer, trader or precious
metals dealer.
(B) Identification. A pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, consignment house dealer, auction
house dealer, trader or precious metals dealer may not receive any goods, unless the person from
whom the item is received presents identification as required by § 112.32(E).
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
§ 112.67 LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION
A license under this section may be denied, suspended or revoked by the Council after a public
hearing where the licensee is granted the opportunity to be heard, for one or more of the following
reasons:
(A) The operating of the business is in conflict with any provision of this code;
(B) The operation of the business is in conflict with any health, building, building maintenance,
zoning or any other provision of this code or law;
47 Cokato - Business Regulations
(C) The licensee or the business premises fails to conform with the standards for license application
contained in this section;
(D) The licensee has failed to comply with one or more provisions of this section or any statute, rule
or ordinance pertaining to the businesses of pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer or precious
metals dealer;
(E) Fraud, misrepresentation or bribery in securing a license;
(F) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the course of the applicant’s business; and
(G) Subject to the provisions of law, violation within the proceeding five years of any state or federal
law relating to receiving stolen property, burglary, robbery, theft, damage or trespass to property,
sale of a controlled substance or stolen good or operation of a business.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
§ 112.68 PAWN REDEMPTION PERIOD
(A) A person who pawns an item shall have at least 30 days to redeem the item before it may be
sold.
(B) An individual may redeem an item pawned 72 hours after the item was received on deposit,
excluding Sundays and legal holidays.
(C) The redemption period may not be waived by the person. The final redemption date must appear
on the pawn ticket. This section does not prohibit the immediate sale by licensed secondhand goods
dealers of items acquired from pawnbrokers following the expiration of the redemption period.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
§ 112.69 PAYMENTS BY CHECK
When a pawnbroker, secondhand goods dealer, consignment house dealer, auction house dealer or
precious metals dealer buys or otherwise receives an item at the licensed place of business, payment
must be made by check made payable to a named payee who is the actual intended seller.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
§ 112.70 INSPECTIONS
A peace officer or any properly designated employee or agent of the city or the State of Minnesota
may enter, inspect and search business premises licensed under this section, during business hours,
without a warrant.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
Pawn Shops, Pawnbrokers, Secondhand Dealers and the Like 48
§ 112.71 APPLICABILITY
The licenses required by this part shall be applied for within 30 days of the effective date of this part.
If the licenses are not obtained within the 60-day period, the designated business shall cease
operating within the city, unless the Council extends the time for issuance of the license. All other
provisions of this chapter shall be effective and complied with within 60 days after the effective date
of this part.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
§ 112.99 PENALTY
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. passed 6-9-1997)
49 Cokato - Business Regulations
CHAPTER 113: GENERAL LICENSING PROCEDURES
Section
Cigarette Sales
113.25 License required
113.26 License fee
113.27 Restrictions
113.99 Penalty
CIGARETTE SALES
§ 113.25 LICENSE REQUIRED
No person shall directly, indirectly or by means of any device keep for retail sale, sell at retail or
otherwise dispose of any cigarette, cigarette paper or cigarette wrapper at any place in the City of
Cokato unless a license therefore has been obtained from the Council on application to the City
Clerk Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 505.01)
§ 113.26 LICENSE FEE
The annual fee for every license shall be in an amount set by City Council by ordinance. Every
license shall expire on December 31 of the year for which it is issued.
(Prior Code, § 505.02)
§ 113.27 RESTRICTIONS
(A) No license shall be issued except to a person of good moral character.
(B) No license shall be issued for the sale of cigarettes at a movable place of business, nor shall
any one license be issued for the sale of cigarettes at more than one place of business.
50
51 Cokato - Business Regulations
(C) No person shall sell or give away, or permit any vending machine to be used to sell any cigarette,
cigarette paper or cigarette wrapper to any person below the age of 18 years.
(D) No person shall keep for sale, sell or dispose of any cigarette containing opium, morphine,
jimson weed, weed, belladonna, strychnia, cocaine, marijuana or any other deleterious or poisonous
drug except nicotine.
(Prior Code, § 505.03)
§ 113.99 PENALTY
Cigarette sales. Any person who violates any provision of §§ 113.25 through 113.27 is guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. Additionally, if the Council finds that any licensed dealer has failed to exercise
adequate supervision over the sale of cigarettes to persons under the age of 18 years, after the
statutorily required notice and hearing, the Council shall revoke the license. After revocation, the
licensee may not reapply until the date that the license would have expired without revocation.
Before granting the new license, the Council must be assured, in writing, that adequate supervision
will be maintained. After receiving the written assurance, the Council may grant or reject the
application at its discretion.
(Prior Code, § 505.04)
CHAPTER 114: TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
114.01 Purpose
114.02 Definitions
114.03 License required
114.04 Application
114.05 Application fee
114.06 Review of license
114.07 Grounds for denial of license
114.08 Exemptions
114.09 Door-to-door advocates exemption
114.10 Prohibited activities
114.11 Licenses not transferable
114.12 Use of property
114.13 Exclusion of peddlers, solicitors and door-to-door advocates
114.14 Suspension or revocation
114.15 Hours of solicitations
114.99 Penalty
§ 114.01 PURPOSE
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and welfare by protecting the
privacy of residents of the city and by discouraging fraudulent sale of or solicitation for goods or
services or fraudulent solicitation on behalf of organizations or causes and by protecting against
persons of criminal intent who travel from place to place in the city under a guise of legitimacy.
(Ord. 06-2010, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 114.02 DEFINITIONS
For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
52
53 Cokato - Business Regulations
DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCATE. A person who goes door-to-door for the primary purpose of
disseminating religious, political, social or other ideological materials or advocating such beliefs.
For purposes of this chapter, door-to-door advocacy includes door-to-door canvassing and
pamphleting for non-commercial purposes.
PEDDLER. Any person who goes from house to house, place to place or street to street conveying
or transporting goods, wares or merchandise or offering or exposing the same for sale, or making
sales and delivering articles to purchasers.
PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation, organization, society or association acting as
a peddler, solicitor, transient merchant or door-to-door advocate.
PROFESSIONAL FUNDRAISER. Any person who, for compensation, performs any solicitation
for a religious, political, social or charitable organization.
SOLICITOR. Any person who goes from house to house, place to place, or street to street soliciting
or taking orders for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise of any nature for future delivery, or for
services to be performed in the future, regardless of whether such individual has, carries or exposes
for sale a sample of the subject of such order or whether advance payment on such orders is collected.
Solicitation shall include any effort to obtain orders even though such may not initially purport to
be the case.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any person who engages in, does or transacts any temporary and
transient business in the city, either in one locality or in traveling from place to place in the city
selling goods, wares or merchandise, and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, hires,
leases, occupies or uses a building, structure, tent, vacant lot, vehicle or railroad car for the exhibition
and sale of such goods, wares or merchandise.
(Ord. 06-2010, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 114.03 LICENSE REQUIRED
Except as provided in § 114.08, no person shall engage in or follow the business of a peddler,
solicitor or transient merchant without first having obtained a license therefor from the city.
(Ord. 06-2010, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 114.04 APPLICATION
Application for a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant license shall be made to the City
Clerk-Treasurer on forms provided by the city. The application shall contain at least the following
information and shall be signed by the applicant:
Transient Merchants, Peddlers and Solicitors 54
(A) Name and physical description of the applicant, along with valid photo identification;
(B) Any other names under which the applicant does conduct or has conducted business;
(C) Complete permanent home and local address of the applicant and, for transient merchants, the
local address from which proposed sales will be made;
(D) Permanent and local telephone numbers of the applicant and the cellular phone number at which
the applicant may be reached while working;
(E) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold;
(F) The name and address of the employer, principal or supplier of the applicant, together with
credentials therefrom establishing their relationship;
(G) A Minnesota Tax Identification Number or Federal Tax Identification Number or a sufficient
explanation to why one is not required;
(H) The dates and hours of the day during which the business will be carried on;
(I) The source of supply of the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale
thereon, the location of such goods or products at the time of the application, and the proposed
method of delivery;
(J) If a transient merchant, written permission of the owner of the property from which sales will
be conducted;
(K) A photograph of the applicant taken within the previous six months, which shall be
approximately two inches by two inches and show the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear
and distinguishable manner;
(L) A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any misdemeanor, gross
misdemeanor or felony for violation of any statute, law, or ordinance, other than traffic violations,
the date and nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor;
(M) The names of other municipalities, not to exceed five in number, where the applicant carried on
similar business immediately preceding the date of application and the address from which such
business was conducted in those municipalities;
(N) If a transient merchant, a copy of the license issued by Wright County;
55 Cokato - Business Regulations
(O) If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the vehicle, together with state of registration and
license number or other means of identification;
(P) The required fee; and
(Q) Any other information reasonably required by the city in order to conduct an investigation of
the applicant.
(Ord. 06-2010, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 114.05 APPLICATION FEE
The application fee for a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant license shall be set by ordinance in
the city fee schedule. The fee shall be nonrefundable regardless of whether the license is issued or
denied.
(Ord. 06-2010, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 114.06 REVIEW OF LICENSE
(A) Upon receipt of a completed application for a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant license,
including the required fee, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall transmit a copy of the application to the
Wright County Sheriff or such other officer providing police services to the city (the "Chief of
Police") and such other public officials as the City Clerk-Treasurer may deem appropriate, who shall
conduct an investigation. The Chief of Police or designee has authority to conduct a criminal history
and driver's license check on the applicant through the State of Minnesota Bureau of Criminal
Apprehension.
(B) Within five days of receipt of a report from the Chief of Police and other public officials
recommending approval of the license application, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall issue the license.
The license shall have one copy of the applicant's photograph attached to it, which shall be exhibited
by the applicant upon request by a police officer or any person in the city contacted by the applicant
in connection with the licensed activity. Licenses shall be valid for 30 days. The City Clerk-
Treasurer shall maintain a record of all licenses issued hereunder.
(C) Within five days of receipt of a report from the Chief of Police or other public official
recommending denial of the license application, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall deny the application
and notify the applicant in writing of the denial. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the City
Clerk-Treasurer to deny a license may appeal such denial to the City Council by submitting a written
request to the City Clerk-Treasurer within 15 business days of receipt of notification of the denial.
The City Council shall hear the applicant's appeal at its next regular meeting occurring not sooner
than ten days after receipt of the appeal by the city.
(Ord. 06-2010, passed 9-13-2010)
Transient Merchants, Peddlers and Solicitors 56
§ 114.07 GROUNDS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE
The following shall be grounds for denial of an application for a peddler, solicitor or transient
merchant license:
(A) Omission or misrepresentation of any material fact or information on the application;
(B) Revocation or suspension within the previous five years of any peddler, solicitor or transient
merchant license in any jurisdiction;
(C) Failure or refusal to consent to a background check;
(D) Conviction within the previous ten years of any crime involving fraud, deceit or
misrepresentation in any trade or business or of any crime which reflects adversely on the applicant's
suitability to conduct business or of any crime involving any form of actual or threatened physical
harm to another;
(E) Intent to sell or take orders for the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise or services which are
illegal or injurious to the public health, safety or welfare; or
(F) Revocation or suspension by any jurisdiction of any other license or permit required to conduct
business.
(Ord. 06-2010, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 114.08 EXEMPTIONS
(A) This chapter shall not apply to the following:
(1) Sale of personal property at wholesale to dealers in such articles;
(2) Sale or delivery of newspapers or making contact for the purpose of establishing a delivery
route for newspapers;
(3) Delivery by merchants of goods purchased in the regular course of business;
(4) Sale of the products of the farm or garden occupied or cultivated by the seller;
(5) Sale to dealers by commercial travelers or selling agents in the usual course of business;
(6) Sale or delivery of items of food or drink to householders on a regular route;
57 Cokato - Business Regulations
(7) A sale required by statute or by order of any court, or a bona fide auction sale pursuant to
law;
(8) A garage, rummage or similar sale involving household or other items owned and used by
the seller;
(9) Solicitation by an organization, society, association or corporation solely of its own
members;
(10)Non-commercial door-to-door advocates not engaged in the sale of any goods or service;
or
(11) Distribution of materials door to door free of charge.
(B) Exemption from the requirements of this chapter does not include exemption from any other
applicable provision of the Code of Ordinances unless an exemption under such other provision also
applies.
(Ord. 06-2010, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 114.09 DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCATES EXEMPTION
(A) No license shall be required under this chapter for any person going door-to-door for the purpose
of advocating any religious, political, social or other position or belief protected by the federal or
state constitution. This exemption does not apply and such person is required to obtain a license if
the exercise of the person's constitutional rights are merely incidental to a commercial activity.
(B) A professional fundraiser working on behalf of an otherwise exempt door-to-door advocate is
not exempt from the licensing requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 06-2010, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 114.10 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES
No peddler, solicitor, transient merchant or door-to-door advocate shall conduct business or
activities in any of the following manners:
(A) Calling attention to any goods or services by means of blowing a horn or whistle, ringing a bell,
crying out, using amplified sound or any other noise in an unreasonably audible manner;
(B) Obstructing vehicular or pedestrian traffic on any street or other right-of-way;
Transient Merchants, Peddlers and Solicitors 58
(C) Stating, implying or doing anything to suggest that the license issued by the city is or constitutes
an endorsement by the city or any of its officers or employees of the goods, services or activities
being offered;
(D) Conducting business or activities other than during permitted hours;
(E) Failing to produce a license and identification when requested by a police officer or any person
in the city contacted by the license or certificate holder in connection with the business or activity;
(F) Using the license of another person or a false license;
(G) Making false or misleading statements or claims about the goods or services being offered;
(H) Remaining on the property of another after being requested to leave;
(I) Failing to heed any no solicitation or similar notice posted on the property;
(J) Selling or taking orders for the sale of any goods or services which are illegal or injurious to the
public health, safety or welfare; or
(K) Conducting business or activities in any manner which a reasonable person would find
threatening, intimidating or abusive.
(Ord. 06-2010, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 114.11 LICENSES NOT TRANSFERABLE
No license or certificate issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable. Each individual shall
be separately licensed or certified when more than one individual is involved in a sales or advocacy
activity.
(Ord. 06-2010, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 114.12 USE OF PROPERTY
No person licensed or certified under this chapter has an exclusive right to any specific location on
public property, nor shall a stationary location thereon be permitted. No person licensed or certified
under this chapter shall operate in a congested area or where he or she may impede or interfere with
traffic. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to permit persons licensed or certified hereunder to
use private property without the consent of the owner thereof.
(Ord. 06-2010, passed 9-13-2010)
59 Cokato - Business Regulations
§ 114.13 EXCLUSION OF PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND DOOR-TO-DOOR
ADVOCATES
Any person who wishes to exclude peddlers, solicitors and door-to-door advocates from premises
he or she occupies may place upon or near the usual entrance to such premises a conspicuous printed
placard or sign bearing a notice that peddlers, solicitors and door-to-door advocates are prohibited.
No peddler, solicitor or door-to-door advocate shall enter in or upon any premises or attempt to enter
in or upon any premises where such a placard or sign is placed and maintained notwithstanding the
fact that he or she may have obtained a license or certificate under the provisions of this chapter. No
person other than the occupant shall remove, damage or deface such placard or sign.
(Ord. 06-2010, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 114.14 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION
Any license may be suspended or revoked by the Chief of Police upon reasonable evidence the
person is or has become ineligible for a license under § 114.07 or for any violation of § 114.10. The
Chief of Police shall notify the person of the suspension or revocation in writing at the person's
permanent address or place of business and by attempting to contact the person by telephone at the
addresses and telephone numbers provided under § 114.04. Any person aggrieved by the suspension
or revocation of a license under this section may appeal the suspension or revocation to the City
Council in the manner specified in § 114.06.
(Ord. 06-2010, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 114.15 HOURS OF SOLICITATIONS
Peddlers, solicitors and door-to-door advocates may engage in sales or activities daily between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., or until sundown, whichever occurs first.
(Ord. 06-2010, passed 9-13-2010)
§ 114.99 PENALTY
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 06-2010, passed 9-13-2010)
CHAPTER 115: TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING
Section
115.01 Findings and purpose
115.02 Places ineligible for use for tattooing, body piercing or body art
115.03 Conflicting provisions
115.99 Penalty
§ 115.01 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE
The city finds that the location of establishments in which tattooing, body piercing and other forms
of body art are conducted must be regulated to prevent them having a deleterious effect on
surrounding uses and the community as a whole. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the
location of businesses which engage in tattooing, body piercing or other forms of body art to prevent
their location near other specified uses or the concentration of such uses in a single area. Other
aspects of licensing related to tattooing, body piercing and body art shall be regulated by state law.
(Ord. 05-2010, passed 8-17-2010)
§ 115.02 PLACES INELIGIBLE FOR USE FOR TATTOOING, BODY PIERCING OR
BODY ART
No property, building, site or other location may be used to conduct tattooing, body piercing or body
art if any of the following apply:
(A) Any tax, special assessment or any other financial claim or charge of the state, county, city,
school district, or other governmental entity or subdivision is delinquent or unpaid;
(B) The property is not properly zoned for the use;
(C) The premises is licensed for the furnishing of alcoholic beverages or is an adult establishment
or is located in the same building as a premises licensed for the furnishing of alcoholic beverages or
an adult establishment; or
60
61 Cokato - Business Regulations
(D) The premises is located within 300 feet of, in the same building as, or on the same legally
subdivided lot, tract or parcel of land as any of the following uses: place of religious worship or
observance, school, daycare, hospital, half-way house, currency exchange, theater, residence,
pawnshop, secondhand goods dealer, massage parlor or another tattoo, body piercing or body art
establishment.
(Ord. 05-2010, passed 8-17-2010)
§ 115.03 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS
In any case in which a provision of this chapter is found to conflict with any other city ordinance or
code, regulation or requirement, the provision which establishes the higher or more restrictive
standard shall prevail.
(Ord. 05-2010, passed 8-17-2010)
§ 115.99 PENALTY
Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 05-2010, passed 8-17-2010)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter
130. OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
131. HUMAN RIGHTS
1
2 Cokato - General Offenses
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
Section
130.01 Use of weapons
130.02 Curfew
130.99 Penalty
§ 130.01 USE OF WEAPONS
(A) Restrictions. No person except a police officer in the performance of duty shall, within the
city, discharge any gun, pistol or firearm of any description or carry any such weapon unless it is
dismounted, broken apart or carried in a case in such a manner that it cannot be discharged. This
division does not prevent the carrying of a handgun within the city under a permit subject to the
restrictions imposed by law.
(B) Air rifles, slingshots. No person shall use or discharge any air rifle or slingshot within the city.
(C) Offense by parents, guardians. It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of any person under
the age of 18 years to knowingly permit the person to violate any provision of this section.
(D) Concealed weapons. No person shall carry any dagger, dirk, firearm or other sharp or
dangerous weapon concealed about his or her person except as permitted by state law.
(Prior Code, § 803.01) Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.02 CURFEW
(A) Restrictions. No person under the age of 17 years, when not accompanied by his or her parents
or guardian, shall loiter or be upon the streets, sidewalks or any public place in the city after the hour
of 10:00 p.m. or before the hour of 5:00 a.m. the succeeding morning.
(B) Offense by parents, guardians. It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of any person under
the age of 17 years to knowingly permit the person to violate any provision of this section.
(Prior Code, § 803.02)
(C) Exemptions. This section does not apply to a minor who is:
3
4 Cokato - General Offenses
(1) Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
(2) On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or
stop;
(3) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
(4) Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an
employment activity, without any detour or stop;
(5) Involved in an emergency;
(6) On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door
neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's
presence;
(7) Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by
adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop,
an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility
for the minor;
(8) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such
as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or
(9) Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance
with state law.
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed
shall be subject to § 10.99.
(B) The violation of § 130.02 shall be a petty misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 803.02)
CHAPTER 131: HUMAN RIGHTS
Section
131.01 Findings, declaration of policy and purpose
131.02 Definitions
131.03 Exemptions
131.04 Acts of discrimination
131.05 Responsibilities and duties of city employees
§ 131.01 FINDINGS, DECLARATION OF POLICY AND PURPOSE
(A) Findings. The Council finds that discrimination because of race, color, creed, religion, national
origin, sex, marital status, status with regard to public assistance or disability adversely affects the
health, welfare, peace and safety of the community. Discriminatory practices that threaten the rights,
privileges and opportunities of any city resident or non-resident are hereby declared to be unlawful,
and the adoption of this chapter is deemed to be an exercise of the police power of the city to protect
such rights.
(B) Declaration of policy and purpose. It is the public policy of the City of Cokato and the purpose
of this chapter:
(1) To encourage all citizens, whether individual or corporate, to join in establishing and
preserving full and true equality among all residents and visitors;
(2) To declare as civil rights, the rights of all persons to equal opportunities in obtaining
employment, education, housing, public accommodations and public services without regard to
their race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, status with regard to public
assistance or disability;
(3) To prevent and prohibit any and all discriminatory practices based on race, color, creed,
religion, national origin, sex, marital status, status with regard to public assistance or disability
with respect to education, employment, housing, public accommodations and public services;
(4) To protect all persons from unfounded charges of discrimination; and
5
6 Cokato - General Offenses
(5) To effectuate the foregoing policy by means of public information and education,
mediation, conciliation and enforcement.
(Prior Code, § 804.01)
§ 131.02 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or
requires a different meaning.
ACTS OF DISCRIMINATION. Any act described in § 131.04.
COMMISSION. The Cokato City Council.
DISABILITY. A mental or physical condition that constitutes a handicap.
DISCRIMINATION. Any act or attempted act which, because of race, color, creed, religion,
national origin, sex, marital status, status with regard to public assistance or disability, causes the
unequal treatment or involuntary separation or segregation of any person, or denies, prevents, limits
or otherwise adversely affects, or if accomplished would deny, prevent, limit or otherwise adversely
affect the benefit or enjoyment by any person of any educational, employment, housing, public
accommodation or public service opportunity.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS. A public or private institution and includes an academy,
college, nursery, school system and a business, nursing, professional, secretarial, technical,
vocational school, and includes an agent of an educational institution.
EMPLOYEE. Any and all persons who perform services for any employer for compensation,
whether in the form of wages, salary, commission or otherwise.
EMPLOYER. Any person within the City of Cokato who hires or employs any employee whose
services are to be partially or wholly performed in the City of Cokato.
LABOR ORGANIZATION. Any organization that exists wholly or partly for one or more of the
following purposes:
(1) Collective bargaining;
(2) Dealing with employers concerning grievances, terms or conditions of employment; or
(3) Mutual aid or protection of employees.
Human Rights 7
NATIONAL ORIGIN. The place of birth of an individual or of any of his or her lineal ancestors.
PERSON. Includes partnership, association, corporation, legal representative, trustee, trustee in
bankruptcy, receiver, and the state and its departments and political subdivisions.
PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS. A business, accommodation, refreshment, entertainment,
recreation or transportation facility of any kind, whether licensed or not, whose goods, services,
facilities, privileges, advantages or accommodations are extended, offered, sold or otherwise made
available to the public.
PUBLIC SERVICES. Any public facility, department, agency, board or commission owned,
operated or managed in the city by or on behalf of the State of Minnesota or any subdivision thereof,
including the City of Cokato, and includes any public utility providing services in the city.
REAL ESTATE BROKER or SALESPERSON. Respectively, a real estate broker as defined by
M.S. § 82.17, Subdivision 4, as it may be amended from time to time, and a real estate salesperson
as defined by M.S. § 82.17, as it may be amended from time to time.
REAL PROPERTY. Real estate, lands, tenements and hereditaments, corporal and incorporeal.
RELIGIOUS OR DENOMINATIONAL EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS. An educational
institution which is operated, supervised, controlled or sustained primarily by a religious or
denominational organization, or is one which is stated the parent church body to be and is, in fact,
officially related to that church by being represented on the board of the institution, and by providing
substantial financial assistance and which has certified, in writing, to the board that it is a religious
or denominational educational institution.
STATUS WITH REGARD TO PUBLIC ASSISTANCE. The condition of being a recipient of
federal, state or local assistance, including medical assistance, or of being a tenant receiving federal,
state or local subsidies, including rental assistance or rent supplements.
(Prior Code, § 804.02)
§ 131.03 EXEMPTIONS
(A) Employment. The provisions of § 131.04(A) shall not apply to:
(1) The employment of any individual:
(a) By his or her parent, grandparent, spouse, child or grandchild; or
(b) In the domestic service of any person.
8 Cokato - General Offenses
(2) A religious or fraternal corporation, association or society, with respect to qualifications
based on religion, when religion shall be a bona fide occupational qualification for employment;
and
(3) The employment of one person in place of another, standing by itself, shall not be evidence
of an unfair discriminatory practice. It is not an unfair employment practice for an employer,
employment agency or labor organization:
(a) To require a person to undergo physical examination for purpose of determining the
person’s capability to perform available employment; or
(b) To conduct an investigation as to the person’s medical history for the purpose of
determining the person’s capability to perform available employment.
(B) Real property. The provisions of § 131.04(B) shall not apply to:
(1) Rooms in a temporary or permanent residence home run by a nonprofit organization if the
discrimination is by sex; or
(2) The rental by an owner or occupier of a one-family accommodation in which he or she
resides of a room or rooms in the accommodation to another person or persons if the
discrimination is by sex, marital status or status with regard to public assistance. Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to require any person or group of persons selling, renting or leasing
property to modify the property in any way, or exercise a higher degree of care for a person
having a disability than for a person who does not have a disability; nor shall this chapter be
construed to relieve any person or persons of any obligations generally imposed on all persons
regardless of any disability in a written lease, rental arrangement or contract of purchase or sale,
or to forbid distinctions based on the inability to fulfill the terms and conditions, including
financial obligations of the lease, agreement or contract.
(C) Education. It is not an unfair discriminatory practice for a religious or denominational
institution to limit admission or give preference to applicants of the same religion. The provisions
of § 131.04(E), relating to sex, shall not apply to a private educational institution, branch or level of
a private educational institution, in which students of only one sex are permitted to enroll. Nothing
in this chapter shall be construed to require any education institution to provide any special service
to any person because of the disability of the person or to modify in any manner its buildings,
grounds, facilities or admission procedures because of the disability of any person. Nothing in this
chapter shall prohibit an educational institution from discriminating on the basis of academic
qualifications or achievements or requiring from applicants’ information that relates to academic
qualifications or achievements.
(D) Public accommodations. The provisions of § 131.04(C), relating to sex, shall not apply to the
facilities as restrooms, locker rooms and other similar places.
(E) Disability. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any program, service, facility
or privilege afforded to a person with a disability that is intended to habilitate, rehabilitate or
accommodate that person.
(Prior Code, § 804.03)
Human Rights 9
§ 131.04 ACTS OF DISCRIMINATION
(A) Employment. Except when based on a bona fide occupational qualification, it is unfair
employment practice:
(1) For a labor organization, because of race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex, marital
status, status with regard to public assistance or disability to do the following:
(a) Deny full and equal membership rights to a person seeking membership or to a
member;
(b) Expel a member from membership; and
(c) Discriminate against a person seeking membership or a member with respect to his or
her hire, apprenticeship, tenure, compensation, terms, upgrading, conditions, facilities or
privileges of employment or otherwise to discriminate against a person or member.
(2) For an employer, because of race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex, marital status,
status with regard to public assistance or disability to do the following:
(a) Refuse to hire or to maintain a system of employment which unreasonably excludes a
person seeking employment;
(b) Discharge an employee; or
(c) Discriminate against a person with respect to his or her hire, tenure, compensation,
terms, upgrading, conditions, facilities or privileges of employment.
(3) For an employment agency, because of race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex,
marital status, status with regard to public assistance or disability to do the following:
(a) Refuse or fail to accept, register, classify properly or refer for employment or otherwise
to discriminate against a person; or
(b) Comply with a request from an employer for referral of applicants for employment if
the request indicates directly or indirectly that the employer fails to comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
(4) For an employer, employment agency or labor organization, before a person is employed
by an employer or admitted to membership in a labor organization, to:
(a) Require the person to furnish information that pertains to race, color, creed, religion,
national origin, sex, marital status, status with regard to public assistance or disability,
unless, for the purpose of national security, information pertaining to national origin is
required by the United States,
10 Cokato - General Offenses
this state or a political subdivision or agency of the United States or this state, or for the
purpose of compliance with the Public Contracts Act or any rule, regulation or laws of the
United States or of this state requiring information pertaining to race, color, creed, religion,
national origin, sex, marital status, status with regard to public assistance or disability is
required by the United States, a political subdivision or agency of the United States; or
(b) Cause to be printed or published a notice or advertisement that relates to employment
or membership and discloses a preference, limitation, specification or discrimination based
on race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, status with regard to
public assistance or disability.
(B) Real property. It is unfair discriminatory practice:
(1) For an owner, lessee, sublessee, assignee or managing agent of, or other person having the
right to sell, rent or lease any real property, or any agent of any of these to do the following:
(a) Refuse to sell, rent or lease or otherwise deny to or withhold from any person or group
of persons any real property because of race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex,
marital status, status with regard to public assistance or disability;
(b) Discriminate against any person or group of persons because of race, color, creed,
religion, national origin, sex, marital status, status with regard to public assistance or
disability in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any real
property or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith; or
(c) In any transaction involving real property, to print, circulate, post or cause to be
printed, circulated or posted any advertisement, signs or use any form of application for the
purchase, rental, or lease of real property or make any record or inquiry in connection with
the prospective purchase, rental or lease of real property which expresses, directly or
indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, color, creed, religion,
national origin, sex, marital status, status with regard to public assistance, or disability or
any intent to make any limitation, specification or discrimination.
(2) For a real estate broker, real estate salesperson or employee, or agent thereof to do the
following:
(a) Refuse to sell, rent or lease or to offer for sale, rental or lease any real property to any
person or group of persons or to negotiate for the sale, rental or lease of any real property
to any person or group of persons because of race, color, creed, religion, national origin,
sex, marital status, status with regard to public assistance or disability, or represent that real
property is not available for inspection, sale, rental or lease when in fact it is so available,
or otherwise deny or withhold any real property or any facilities or real property to or from
any person or group of persons because of race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex,
marital status, status with regard to public assistance or disability;
Human Rights 11
(b) Discriminate against any person because of his or her race, color, creed, religion,
national origin, sex, marital status, status with regard to public assistance or disability in
the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, rental or lease of real property, or in the
furnishing of facilities or service in connection therewith; or
(c) Print, circulate or post or cause to be printed, circulated or posted any advertisement
or sign, or use any form of application for the purchase, rental or lease of any real property
to make any record or inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase, rental or lease
of any real property, which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification or
discrimination as to race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, status
with regard to public assistance or disability or any intent to make any limitation,
specification or discrimination.
(3) For a person, bank, banking organization, mortgage company, insurance company or other
financial institution or lender to whom application is made for financial assistance for the
purchase, lease, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any real
property or any agent or employee thereof to do the following:
(a) Discriminate against any person or group of persons because of race, color, creed,
religion, national origin, sex, marital status, status with regard to public assistance or
disability of the person or group of persons or of the prospective occupants or tenants of
the real property in the granting withholding, extending, modifying or renewing, or in the
rates, terms, conditions or privileges of any financial assistance or in the extension of
services in connection therewith; and/or
(b) Use any form of application for the financial assistance or make any record or inquiry
in connection with applications for the financial assistance which expresses, directly or
indirectly any limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, color, creed, religion,
national origin, sex, marital status, status with regard to public assistance or disability or
any intent to make any limitation, specification or discrimination.
(4) For any real estate broker or real estate salesperson, for the purpose of inducing a real
property transaction from which the person, his or her firm or any of its members may benefit
financially, to represent that a change has occurred, will or may occur in the composition with
respect to race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, status with regard to
public assistance or disability of the owners or occupants in the block, neighborhood or area in
which the real property is located, and to represent, directly or indirectly, that this change will
or may result in undesirable consequences in the block, neighborhood or area in which the real
property is located, including but not limited to the lowering of property values, an increase in
criminal or antisocial behavior, or a decline in the quality of schools or other public facilities.
(C) Public accommodations. It is an unfair discriminatory practice:
(1) Deny any person the full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges,
advantages and accommodations of a place of public accommodation because of race, color,
creed, religion, national origin, sex or disability; and/or
12 Cokato - General Offenses
(2) For a taxicab company to discriminate in the access to, full utilization of or benefit from
service because of a person’s disability.
(D) Public services. It is an unfair discriminatory practice to discriminate against any person in the
access to, admission to, full utilization of or benefit from any public service because of race, color,
creed, religion, national origin, sex, marital status or status with regard to public assistance or
disability.
(E) Educational institution. It is unfair discriminatory practice to do the following:
(1) Discriminate in any manner in the full utilization of or benefit from any educational
institution, or the service rendered thereby to any person because of race, color, creed, religion,
national origin, sex, marital status, status with regard to public assistance or disability;
(2) Exclude, expel or otherwise discriminate against a person seeking admission as a student,
or a person enrolled as a student because of race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex,
marital status, status with regard to public assistance or disability; and/or
(3) Make or use a written or oral inquiry, or form of application for admission that elicits or
attempts to elicit information, or to make or keep a record, concerning the race, color, creed,
religion, national origin, sex, marital status or disability of a person seeking admission, except
as permitted by regulations of the Department.
(F) Aiding, abetting and obstruction. It is an unfair discriminatory practice for any person:
(1) Intentionally to aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce a person to engage in any of the practices
forbidden by this chapter;
(2) Intentionally to attempt to aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce a person to engage in any of
the practices forbidden by this chapter; and/or
(3) To intentionally obstruct or prevent any person from complying with the provisions of this
chapter.
(G) Reprisals. It is an unfair discriminatory practice for any employer, labor organization,
employment agency, lessor, public accommodation, public service or educational institution to
intentionally engage in any reprisal against any person because that person:
(1) Opposed a practice forbidden under this chapter or has filed a charge, testified, assisted or
participated in any matter in an investigation, or criminal prosecution under this chapter; or
(2) Associated with a person or group of persons of a different race, color, creed, religion or
national origin.
(Prior Code, § 804.04) Penalty, see § 131.99
Human Rights 13
§ 131.05 RESPONSIBILITIES AND DUTIES OF CITY EMPLOYEES
All elected and appointed officials, commissioners, agents and employees, of the City of Cokato,
including civil service employees, and whether serving with or without compensation, shall observe
the terms and provisions of this chapter and shall, except as expressly prohibited by law, respond to
requests by the Commission for information and for access to data and records for the purpose of
investigating complaints filed with the Commission.
(Prior Code, § 804.05)
14 Cokato - General Offenses
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
Chapter
150. BUILDING CODE
151. FLOOD PLAIN
152. SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
153. ZONING REGULATIONS
1
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING CODE
Section
Codes Adopted
150.01 Building Code
150.02 Contents of Building Code; codes adopted by reference
150.03 Organization and enforcement
Permits, Inspections, Fees and Surcharges
150.15 Rules
150.16 Surcharges
Smoke Detection in Existing Rental Properties
150.30 Definitions
150.31 Detection requirements
150.32 Type
150.33 Existing properties
150.34 Installation
150.35 Exceptions
150.36 Pre-emption
150.37 Tampering
150.38 Enforcement
150.99 Penalty
CODES ADOPTED
§ 150.01 BUILDING CODE
(A) The Minnesota State Building Code, one copy of which is on file in the office of the City Clerk,
has been adopted by M.S. § 326B.121, as it may be amended from time to time, as a Uniform
Building Code applicable throughout the state.
(B) The code is hereby confirmed as the Building Code of the City of Cokato and incorporated in
this chapter as completely as if set out in full.
2
3 Cokato - Land Usage
§ 150.02 CONTENTS OF BUILDING CODE; CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE
The Minnesota State Building Code adopted under § 150.01 includes the following:
(A) Minn. Rules Ch. 1300, Minnesota Building Code Administration;
(B) Minn. Rules Ch. 1301, Building Official Certification;
(C) Minn. Rules Ch. 1302, State Building Code Construction Approvals;
(D) Minn. Rules Ch. 1303, Conditional Provisions;
(E) Minn. Rules Ch. 1305, Adoption of the International Building Code;
(F) Minn. Rules Ch. 1306, Special Fire Protection Systems;
(G) Minn. Rules Ch. 1307, Elevators and Related Devices;
(H) Minn. Rules Ch. 1309, Adoption of the International Residential Code;
(I) Minn. Rules Ch. 1311, Minnesota Conservation Code for Existing Buildings;
(J) Minn. Rules Ch. 1315, Adoption of the National Electrical Code;
(K) Minn. Rules Ch. 1325, Solar Energy Systems;
(L) Minn. Rules Ch. 1330, Fallout Shelters;
(M) Minn. Rules Ch. 1335, Flood proofing Regulations;
(N) Minn. Rules Ch. 1341, Minnesota Accessibility Code;
(O) Minn. Rules Ch. 1346, Minnesota Mechanical Code;
(P) Minn. Rules Ch. 1350, Manufactured Homes;
(Q) Minn. Rules Ch. 1360, Prefabricated Structures;
(R) Minn. Rules Ch. 1361, Industrialized/Modular Buildings;
Building Code 4
(S) Minn. Rules Ch. 1370, Storm Shelters (Manufactured Home Parks);
(T) Minn. Rules Ch. 4715, Minnesota Plumbing Code; and
(U) Minn. Rules Chs. 7670, 7672, 7674, 7676, and 7678, Minnesota Energy Code.
(Minn. Rules Part 1300.0050) (Prior Code, § 901.01(B))
§ 150.03 ORGANIZATION AND ENFORCEMENT
(A) The organization of the Building Department and enforcement of the code shall be conducted
within the guidelines established by Minn. Rules, Chapter 1300.
(B) The Administration Department shall be the Building Code Department of the City of Cokato.
(C) The Administrative Authority shall be a state certified Building Official so designated by the
appointing authority.
(D) The appointing authority shall be the City Council of the City of Cokato.
(Prior Code, § 901.02)
PERMITS, INSPECTIONS, FEES AND SURCHARGES
§ 150.15 RULES
(A) Rules. The issuance of permits, conduction of inspection and collection of fees shall be as
provided for in Minn. Rules, Part 1300.0160.
(B) Fees. The City Council shall annually establish fees for building permits.
(Prior Code, § 901.03)
§ 150.16 SURCHARGES
(A) In addition to the permit fee required by this subchapter, the applicant shall pay a surcharge in
the amount fixed by state law.
(B) The amount required shall be remitted quarterly to the Minnesota Department of
Administration.
(Prior Code, § 901.04)
Statutory reference:
State surcharge, see M.S. § 326B.148 and Minn. Rules Part 1300.0160(10)
5 Cokato - Land Usage
SMOKE DETECTION IN EXISTING RENTAL PROPERTIES
§ 150.30 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates
or requires a different meaning.
APARTMENT BUILDINGS. Buildings containing three or more living units with independent
cooking and bathroom facilities, whether designated as apartment house, tenement, garden
apartment or by any other name.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. A licensed peace officer, Fire Chief or Building Official
designated with the power to cite property owners for noncompliance with this chapter and/or federal
or state mandates.
DUPLEXES. Buildings containing two living units with independent cooking and bathroom
facilities.
EXISTING. Buildings on structures which are already in existence on the date when this chapter
becomes effective.
MOTEL/LODGING, ROOMING HOUSE or MIXED USE PROPERTIES. The entire building
in which separate sleeping rooms are rented, providing sleeping accommodations for either transient
or permanent basis, with or without meals but without separate cooking facilities for individual
occupants.
SINGLE-FAMILY RENTAL PROPERTY. All buildings containing one living unit with
independent cooking and bathroom facilities, whether designated as a dwelling, house, mobile home
or any other name.
(Prior Code, § 901.06(1))
§ 150.31 DETECTION REQUIREMENTS
Approved single-station or multiple-station smoke detectors, continuously powered by the
building’s electrical service, shall be installed in accordance with §150.34 in subdivisions in every living
unit within existing apartment buildings, existing duplexes, existing single-family rental property, mixed
use properties and in every sleeping room within existing lodging and rooming houses regardless of the
number of stories or number of living units or sleeping units. When activated, the detector(s) shall initiate
an alarm that is audible in the sleeping rooms of that living unit or in the sleeping areas of that sleeping
room. The living unit or sleeping room detector(s) shall be in addition to any sprinkler system or other
detection system that may be installed in the building. (Exceptions: single-station smoke detection is not
required where the building is equipped with a total automatic smoke detection.)
(Prior Code, § 901.06(2))
Building Code 6
§ 150.32 TYPE
The detector shall be of a type that consists of a superior quality that uses alternating current power
with a nine-volt direct current battery back-up.
(Prior Code, § 901.06(3))
§ 150.33 EXISTING PROPERTIES
Apartments, duplexes, single-family rental units, lodging and rooming houses and mixed use
properties shall be required to install smoke detectors no later than December 31, 1994. After that
date, the Code Enforcement Officer may inspect any property for noncompliance.
(Prior Code, § 901.06(4))
§ 150.34 INSTALLATION
(A) Single-station or multiple-station smoke detectors shall be installed in accordance with MFPA
74, Standard for the Installation, Maintenance, and Use of Household Fire Warning Equipment, and
Appendix 1A of the Uniform Fire Code.
(B) If, due to the configuration of the living unit or sleeping room, two or more smoke detectors are
required within the living unit or sleeping room, they shall be arranged so that the activation of any
detector causes the operation of an alarm that shall be clearly audible throughout the living unit,
sleeping room and mixed use properties over background noise with all intervening doors closed.
(C) The detector(s) shall sound an alarm only within an individual living unit, sleeping room and
mixed use property and shall not activate the building protective signaling and control system, if
any.
(Prior Code, § 901.06(5))
§ 150.35 EXCEPTIONS
Single-station smoke detection is not required where the building is equipped with a total automatic
smoke detection system throughout.
(Prior Code, § 901.06(6))
§ 150.36 PRE-EMPTION
If any model fire prevention, life safety, Building Code or standard recognized in or by the State of
Minnesota is or becomes more stringent or restrictive than the requirements of this chapter, the
requirements of the code or standard shall be added to and/or supersede the requirements of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 906.01(7))
7 Cokato - Land Usage
§ 150.37 TAMPERING
Whoever tampers with any smoke detector installed pursuant to this chapter so as to render the same
inoperable for a period of time longer than is necessary to repair same or for the period of time to
disable the detector while the same is making an audible noise due to heat or smoke while someone
is in the living unit and cooking, which the cooking causes the detector to go off, is guilty of a petty
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 906.01(8)) Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.38 ENFORCEMENT
The Code Enforcement Officer shall be directed to cite property owners without smoke detection
equipment in accordance with § 150.99.
(Prior Code, § 906.01(9))
§ 150.99 PENALTY
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of § 10.99 as
established by state law and which changes from time to time.
Statutory reference:
Building Code; violation of deemed misdemeanor, see Minn. Rules Ch. 1300, Part 1300.0150
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD PLAIN
Section
General Provisions
151.001 Statutory authorization
151.002 Statement of purpose
151.003 Warning of disclaimer of liability
151.004 Adoption of Flood Insurance Rate Map
151.005 Lands to which chapter applies
151.006 Interpretation
151.007 Definitions
Conflict with Pre-Existing Zoning Regulations and General Compliance
151.020 The Flood Plain District as Overlay Zoning District
151.021 Compliance
Standards
151.035 Permitted uses in the flood plain
151.036 Standards for flood plain permitted uses
151.037 Flood plain evaluation
151.038 State flood plain management standards
Subdivisions
151.055 Subdivisions
Administrative Regulations
151.070 Permit required
151.071 State and federal permits
151.072 Certified of lowest floor elevations
151.073 Variances
151.074 Nonconformities
151.999 Penalty
8
9 Cokato - Land Usage
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.001 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION
The Legislature of the State of Minnesota has, in M.S. Chapters 103F and 394 for counties or Chapter
462 for municipalities, as it may be amended from time to time, delegated the authority to local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Minnesota Statutes
Chapter 103F, as it may be amended from time to time, further stipulates that communities subject
to recurrent flooding must participate and maintain eligibility in the National Flood Insurance
Program. Therefore, the City of Cokato, Minnesota does ordain as follows in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 9-9-1991)
§ 151.002 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
The purpose of this chapter is to maintain the community’s eligibility in the National Flood
Insurance Program and to minimize potential losses due to periodic flooding including loss of life,
loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base, all
of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
(Ord. passed 9-9-1991)
§ 151.003 WARNING OF DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY
(A) This chapter does not imply that areas outside of the Flood Plain District, or land uses permitted
within the districts, will be free from flooding and flood damages.
(B) This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Cokato or any officer or employee
thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decisions lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. passed 9-9-1991)
§ 151.004 ADOPTION OF FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP
(A) The Flood Insurance Rate Map for the City of Cokato, dated August 19, 1985, developed by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, is hereby adopted by reference as the Official Flood Plain
Zoning District Map and made a part of this chapter.
(B) This map was previously entitled the “Flood Hazard Boundary Map” dated August 19, 1985.
(Ord. passed 9-9-1991)
Flood Plain 10
§ 151.005 LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES
This chapter shall apply to all lands designated as flood plain within the jurisdiction of the City of
Cokato.
(Ord. passed 9-9-1991)
§ 151.006 INTERPRETATION
(A) The boundaries of the Flood Plain District shall be determined by scaling distances on the
official Flood Plain Zoning District Map.
(B) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the Flood Plain
District, the City Council shall make the necessary interpretation based on elevations on the regional
(100-year) flood profile, if available.
(C) If 100-year flood elevations are not available, the community shall:
(1) Require a flood plain evaluation consistent with § 151.037 to determine a 100-year flood
elevation for the site; or
(2) Base its decision on available hydraulic/hydrologic or site elevation survey data which
demonstrates the likelihood the site is within or outside of the flood plain.
(Ord. passed 9-9-1991)
§ 151.007 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or
requires a different meaning.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. A use, structure or the same lot with, and of a nature
customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure.
EASEMENT. Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor or base subgrade
(below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of the depth of excavation below ground level.
FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway.
FLOOD PLAIN. The channel or beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or watercourse
which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood. FLOOD PLAIN areas within
the city shall encompass all areas designated as Zone P on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
FLOODWAY. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and those portions of
the adjoining flood plain which are reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood discharge.
11 Cokato - Land Usage
OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection,
excavation, dredged soil, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill,
structure, stockpile of sand, gravel or other material, or matter in, along, across or projecting into
any channel, watercourse, lake bed or regulatory flood plain which may impede, retard or change
the direction of flow, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by flood water.
REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood which is representative of large floods known to have occurred
generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur, or an average
frequency in magnitude of the 100-year recurrence interval. REGIONAL FLOOD is synonymous
with the term “base flood” used in the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. An elevation no lower than one foot
above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by
encroachments on the flood plain that result from designation of a floodway.
STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground or on-site
utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins,
manufactured homes, travel trailers/vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in this
chapter and other similar items.
(Ord. passed 9-9-1991)
CONFLICT WITH PRE-EXISTING ZONING REGULATIONS AND GENERAL COMPLIANCE
§ 151.020 THE FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT AS OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT
The Flood Plain Zoning District shall be considered an Overlay Zoning District to all existing land
use regulations of the community. The uses permitted in §§ 151.035 through 151.038 shall be
permitted only if not prohibited by any established, underlying zoning district. The requirements of
this chapter shall apply in addition to other legally established regulations of the community, and
where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
(Ord. passed 9-9-1991)
§ 151.021 COMPLIANCE
(A) No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be located, extended,
converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.
(B) Within the floodway and flood fringe, all uses not listed as permitted uses in §§ 151.035 through
151.036 shall be prohibited.
Flood Plain 12
(C) In addition, a caution is provided here that:
(1) New manufactured homes, replacement manufactured homes and certain travel trailers and
travel vehicles are subject to the general provisions of this chapter and specifically §§ 151.035
through 151.037;
(2) Modifications, additions, structural alterations or repair after damage to existing
nonconforming structures and nonconforming uses of structures or land are regulated by §§
151.004 through 151.007 and specifically § 151.074; and
(3) As-built elevations for elevated structures must be certified by ground surveys as stated in
§§ 151.070 through 151.072.
(Ord. passed 9-9-1991) Penalty, see § 151.999
STANDARDS
§ 151.035 PERMITTED USES IN THE FLOOD PLAIN
The following uses of land are permitted uses in the Flood Plain District.
(A) Any use of land which does not involve a structure, an addition to the outside dimensions to an
existing structure or an obstruction to flood flows such as fill, excavation or storage of materials or
equipment.
(B) Any use of land involving the construction of new structures, the placement or replacement of
manufactured homes, the addition to the outside dimensions of an existing structure or obstructions
such as fill or storage of materials or equipment, provided these activities are located in the flood
fringe portion of the flood plain. These uses shall be subject to the development standards in §
151.036 and the flood plain evaluation criteria in § 151.037 for determining floodway and flood
fringe boundaries.
(C) Travel trailers and travel vehicles are regulated by the ordinance passed September 9, 1991.
(Ord. passed 9-9-1991)
§ 151.036 STANDARDS FOR FLOOD PLAIN PERMITTED USES
(A) Fill. Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be properly protected by the use of
riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method. The Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) has established criteria for removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain
structures properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA’s requirements
incorporate
13 Cokato - Land Usage
specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot
developments. These standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a
change of special flood hazard area designation will be requested.
(B) Storage of materials and equipment.
(1) The storage or processing of materials that are, in times of flooding, flammable, explosive
or potentially injurious to human, animal or plant life, is prohibited.
(2) Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily removable from the area
within the time available after a flood warning or if placed on fill to the regulatory flood
protection elevation.
(C) Draining abilities. No use shall be permitted which will adversely affect the capacity of the
channels or floodways of any tributary to the main stream, any drainage ditch, or any other drainage
facility or system.
(D) Building elevation regulations. All structures, including accessory structures, additions to
existing structures and manufactured homes, shall be constructed on fill so that the basement floor,
or first floor if there is no basement, is at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. The
finished fill elevation must be no lower than one foot below the regulatory flood protection elevation
and shall extend at such elevation at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the structure constructed
thereon.
(E) All uses. Uses that do not have vehicular access at or above an elevation not more than two feet
below the regulatory flood protection elevation to lands outside of the flood plain shall not be
permitted unless granted a variance by the Board of Adjustment. In granting a variance, the Board
shall specify limitations or the period of use or occupancy of the use and only after determining that
adequate flood warning time and local emergency response and recovery procedures exist.
(F) Commercial and manufacturing uses. Accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad tracks and
parking lots may be at elevations lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation. However, a
permit for the facilities to be used by the employees or the general public shall not be granted in the
absence of a flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area would be
inundated to a depth greater than two feet or be subject to flood velocities greater than four feet per
second upon occurrence of the regional flood.
(G) On-site sewage treatment and water supply systems. Where public utilities are not provided:
(1) On-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
flood waters into the systems; and
(2) New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood
waters,
Flood Plain 14
and they shall not be subject to impairment or contamination during times of flooding. Any
sewage treatment system designed in accordance with the state’s current statewide standards
for on-site sewage treatment systems shall be determined to be in compliance with this section.
(H) Anchoring. All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
(Ord. passed 9-9-1991) Penalty, see § 151.999
§ 151.037 FLOOD PLAIN EVALUATION
(A) (1) Upon receipt of an application for a permit, manufactured home park development or
subdivision approval within the Flood Plain District, the City Administrator shall require the
applicant to furnish sufficient site development plans and a hydrologic/hydraulic analysis by a
qualified engineer or hydrologist specifying the nature of the development and whether the proposed
use is located in the floodway or flood fringe and the regulatory flood protection elevation for the
site.
(2) Procedures consistent with Minn. Rules Parts 6120.5600 (Technical Standards and
Requirements for Flood plain Evaluation) and 6120.5700 (Minimum Flood plain Management
Standards for Local Ordinances) shall be followed during the technical evaluation and review
of the development proposal.
(B) (1) The City Administrator shall submit one copy of all information required by division (A)
above to the respective Department of Natural Resources Area Hydrologist for review and comment
at least 20 days prior to the granting of a permit or manufactured home park
development/subdivision approval by the community.
(2) The City Administrator shall notify the respective Department of Natural Resources Area
Hydrologist within ten days after a permit or manufactured home park development subdivision
approval is granted.
(Ord. passed 9-9-1991)
§ 151.038 STATE FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
All utilities and transportation facilities, including railroad tracks, roads and bridges, shall be
constructed in accordance with state flood plain management standards contained in Minn. Rules
Parts 6120.5000 through 6120.6200.
(Ord. passed 9-9-1991)
15 Cokato - Land Usage
SUBDIVISIONS
§ 151.055 SUBDIVISIONS
(A) No land shall be subdivided and no manufactured home park shall be developed or expanded
where the site is determined to be unsuitable by the Mayor and/or City Council and the Planning and
Zoning Commission for reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment
facilities. The City Council and Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the
subdivision/development proposal to insure that each lot or parcel contains sufficient area outside
of the floodway for fill placement for elevating structures, sewage systems and related activities.
(B) In the Flood Plain District, applicants for subdivision approval, development of a manufactured
home park or manufactured home park expansion shall provide the information required in
§ 151.037(A). The City Administrator shall evaluate the proposed subdivision or mobile home park
development in accordance with the standards established in §§ 151.036 through 151.038.
(C) For all subdivisions in the flood plain, the floodway and flood fringe boundaries, the regulatory
flood protection elevation and the required elevation of all access roads shall be clearly labeled or
all required subdivision drawings and platting documents.
(D) The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing
the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated on fill above the
100-year flood elevation. FEMA’s requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope
protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should be
investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a charge of special flood hazard area
designation will be requested.
(E) This section is not intended as a substitute for a comprehensive city or county subdivision
ordinance. It can, however, be used as an interim control until the comprehensive subdivision
ordinance can be amended to include necessary flood plain management provisions.
(Ord. passed 9-9-1991) Penalty, see § 151.999
ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS
§ 151.070 PERMIT REQUIRED
A permit issued by the Building Inspector shall be secured prior to the construction, addition or
alteration of any building or structure, prior to the use or change of use of a building, structure or
land, prior to the change or extension of a nonconforming use and prior to excavation or the
placement of an obstruction within the flood plain.
(Ord. passed 9-9-1991)
Flood Plain 16
§ 151.071 STATE AND FEDERAL PERMITS
Prior to granting a permit or processing an application for a variance, the City Administrator shall
determine that the applicant has obtained all necessary state and federal permits.
(Ord. passed 9-9-1991)
§ 151.072 CERTIFIED OF LOWEST FLOOR ELEVATIONS
The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a registered professional engineer,
registered architect or registered land surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were
accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The Building Inspector shall
maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) for all new structures and
alterations or additions to existing structures in the Flood Plain District.
(Ord. passed 9-9-1991)
§ 151.073 VARIANCES
(A) A VARIANCE means a modification of a specific permitted development standard required in
an official control, including this chapter, to allow an alternative development standard not stated as
acceptable in the official control, but only as applied to a particular property for the purpose of
alleviating a hardship, practical difficulty or unique circumstance as defined and elaborated upon in
a community’s respective planning and zoning enabling legislation.
(B) The Board may authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, the relief or variance from the terms
of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest and only for those circumstances such as
hardship, practical difficulties or circumstances unique to the property under consideration, as
provided for in the respective enabling legislation for planning and zoning for cities or counties as
appropriate.
In the granting of the variance, the Board of Adjustment shall clearly identify in writing the specific
conditions that existed consistent with the criteria specified in the respective enabling legislation
which justified the granting of the variance.
(C) Variances from the provisions of this chapter may be authorized where the Board of Adjustment
has determined the variance will not be contrary to the public interest and the spirit and intent of this
chapter. No variance shall allow, in any district, a use prohibited in that district or permit a lower
degree of flood protection then the regulatory flood protection elevation. Variances may be used to
modify permissible methods of flood protection.
(D) The Board shall submit by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the
application for proposal or variance sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will receive at
least ten days’ notice of the hearing. A copy of all decisions granting a variance shall be forwarded
by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten days of the action.
17 Cokato - Land Usage
(E) Appeals from any decision of the Board may be made, and as specified in this Community’s
Official Controls and also Minnesota Statutes.
(F) The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant for a variance that:
(1) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in
increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage as is set by City Council; and
(2) The construction below the 100-year or regional flood level increases risks to life and
property. The notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions. A
community shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for its issuance
and report the variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to the Administrator of
the National Flood Insurance Program.
(Ord. passed 9-9-1991)
§ 151.074 NONCONFORMITIES
A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the passage or amendment
of this chapter but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter may be continued,
subject to the following conditions:
(A) No such use shall be expanded, charged, enlarged or altered in a way which increases its
nonconformity;
(B) An alteration within the inside dimensions of a nonconforming use or structure is permissible
provided it will not result in increasing the flood damage potential of that use or structure;
(C) The cost of all structural alterations or additions both inside and outside of a structure to any
nonconforming structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure unless the conditions of this section are satisfied. The cost of all structural alterations
and additions constructed since the adoption of the community’s initial flood plain controls must be
calculated into today’s current cost, which will include all costs such as construction materials and
a reasonable cost placed or all manpower or labor. If the current cost of all previous and proposed
alterations and additions exceeds 50% of the current market value of the structure, then the structure
must meet the standards of
§§ 151.035 through 151.036 for new structures; and
(D) If any nonconforming use of a structure, land or nonconforming structure is destroyed by any
means, including floods, to an extent of 50% or more of its market value at the time of destruction,
it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. The Mayor and
City Council may issue a permit for reconstruction if the use is located outside the floodway and,
upon reconstruction, is adequately elevated of fill in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 9-9-1991)
Flood Plain 18
§ 151.999 PENALTY
A violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements
(including violations of conditions and safeguards established in correction with grants of variance)
shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(A) In responding to a suspected ordinance violation, the Zoning Administrator and local
government may utilize the full array of enforcement actions available to it including, but not limited
to, prosecution and fines, injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a
request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance availability to the
guilty party. The community must act in good faith to enforce these official controls and to correct
ordinance violations to the extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
(B) When an ordinance violation is either discovered by or brought to the attention of the Zoning
Administrator, the Zoning Administrator shall immediately investigate the situation and document
the nature and extent of the violation of the official control. As soon as is reasonably possible, this
information will be submitted to the appropriate Department of Natural Resources and Federal
Emergency Management Agency Regional Office along with the community’s plan of action to
correct the violation to the degree possible.
(Ord. passed 9-9-1991)
CHAPTER 152: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
152.001 Title
152.002 Intent and purpose
152.003 Scope and legal authority
152.004 Amendments
152.005 Administration
152.006 Rules
152.007 Definitions
Plat Procedures
152.025 Pre-application meeting
152.026 Preliminary plat
152.027 Final plat
Data Requirements; Standards
152.040 Data for preliminary plat
152.041 Data for final plat
152.042 Subdivision design standards
152.043 Streets
152.044 Blocks
152.045 Lots
152.046 Alleys
Resource Control
152.060 Sewage disposal
152.061 Erosion and sediment control
152.062 Drainage
152.063 Easements
152.064 Density control
19
Subdivision Regulations 20
Improvements
152.080 Improvements listed and described
152.081 Payment for installation of improvements
152.082 Required agreement providing for proper installment of improvements
152.083 Financial guarantee
152.084 Construction plans
Land Division or Combination
152.100 Land division or combination
152.101 Small subdivisions
152.102 Lot combinations
Administration
152.115 Modifications, exceptions and variances
152.116 Applicability
152.117 Easements
152.118 Registered land surveys
152.119 Conveyance by metes and bounds
152.120 Building permits
152.999 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 TITLE
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the City of Cokato Subdivision Regulations.
(Prior Code, § 904.01)
§ 152.002 INTENT AND PURPOSE
All subdivisions of land hereafter submitted for approval shall fully comply, in all respects, with the
regulations set forth herein. It is the purpose of these regulations to:
(A) Encourage well planned, efficient and attractive subdivisions by establishing adequate standards
for design and construction;
21 Cokato - Land Usage
(B) Provide for the health and safety of residents by requiring the necessary services such as
properly designed streets and adequate sewage and water service;
(C) Place the cost of improvements against those benefitting from their construction; and
(D) Secure the rights of the public with respect to public lands and waters.
(Prior Code, § 904.02)
§ 152.003 SCOPE AND LEGAL AUTHORITY
(A) Rules and regulations. The rules and regulations governing plats and subdivisions of land
contained herein shall apply within the community and other land as permitted by state statutes. In
the event of overlapping jurisdiction within the prescribed area, the extent of jurisdiction shall be
determined and agreed upon between this community and the other municipality or municipalities
concerned. Except in the case of re-subdivision, this chapter shall not apply to any lot or lots forming
a part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the County Recorder prior to the effective date of
this chapter, nor is it intended by this chapter to repeal, annul or in any way impair or interfere with
existing provisions of other laws or ordinances except those specifically repealed by, or in conflict
with this chapter, or with restrictive covenants running with the land. Where this chapter imposes a
greater restriction upon the land than is imposed or required by the existing provisions of law,
ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
(B) Two-mile extension of subdivision regulations. The City of Cokato herein extends the
application of subdivision regulations to surrounding unincorporated territory located within two
miles of the City of Cokato city limits, pursuant to M.S. § 462.358, as it may be amended from time
to time.
(Prior Code, § 904.03)
§ 152.004 AMENDMENTS
The provisions of this chapter may be amended by the Cokato City Council in accordance with the
state enabling statutes.
(Prior Code, § 904.04)
§ 152.005 ADMINISTRATION
The Cokato City Council or any Zoning Administrator that it may designate shall administer this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 904.06)
Subdivision Regulations 22
§ 152.006 RULES
(A) Words used in the present tense include the past and future tense; the singular numbers include
the plural and the plural include the singular; the word “shall” is mandatory, and the words “should”
and “may” are permissive.
(B) In the event of conflicting provisions in the text of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 904.10)
§ 152.007 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or
requires a different meaning.
ATTORNEY. The attorney employed by the city unless otherwise stated.
BLOCK. The enclosed area within the perimeter of roads, property lines or boundaries of the
subdivision.
BOULEVARD. The portion of the street right-of-way between the curb line and the property line.
BUTT LOT. A lot at the end of a block and located between two corner lots.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT. A subdivision development planned and constructed so as to group
housing units into relatively tight patterns while providing a unified network of open space and
wooded areas, and meeting the overall density regulations of this chapter and Chapter 153.
COMMUNITY. City of Cokato.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. A Comprehensive Plan prepared by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, with input from the community, and adopted by the City Council which includes a
compilation of policy statements, goals, standards and maps indicating the general locations
recommended for the various functional classes of land use and for the general physical development
of the community and includes any plan or parts thereof.
CONTOUR MAP. A map on which irregularities of land surface are shown by lines connecting
points of equal elevations. Contour interval is the vertical height between contour lines.
COPY. A print or reproduction made from a tracing.
CORNER LOT. A lot bordered on at least two sides by streets.
COUNTY. Wright County, Minnesota.
COUNTY BOARD. The Wright County Board of Commissioners.
23 Cokato - Land Usage
DEVELOPMENT. The act of building structures and installing site improvements.
DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS. Lots which have a front line abutting on one street and a back or
rear line abutting on another street.
DRAINAGE COURSE. A water course or indenture for the drainage of surface water.
EASEMENT. A grant by an owner of land for a specific use by persons other than the owner.
ENGINEER. The registered engineer employed by the community unless otherwise stated.
FINAL PLAT. The final map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider’s plan or subdivision is
presented to the County Board for approval and which, if approved, will be submitted to the County
Recorder.
GOVERNING BODY. City of Cokato.
KEY MAP. A map drawn to comparatively small scale which definitely shows the area proposed to
be platted and the areas surrounding it to a given distance.
LOT. A parcel or portion of land in a subdivision or plat of land, separated from other parcels or
portions by description as on a subdivision or record of survey map, for the purpose of sale, lease or
separate use thereof.
METES AND BOUNDS DESCRIPTION. A description of real property which is not described
by reference to a lot or block shown on a map, but is described by starting at a known point and
describing the bearings and distances of the lines forming the boundaries of the property or
delineates a fractional portion of a section, lot or area by described lines or portions thereof.
MINIMUM SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS. The guides, principles and specifications
for the preparation of subdivision plans indicating among other things, the minimum and maximum
dimensions of the various elements set forth in the plan.
NATURAL WATERWAY. A natural passageway in the surface of the earth so situated and having
a topographical nature that surface water flows through it from other areas before reaching a final
ponding area.
OWNER. An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust or any other
legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence
and maintain proceedings to be subdivided the same under these regulations.
PEDESTRIAN WAY. A public right-of-way across or within a block, to be used by pedestrians.
PERSON. Any individual, firm, association, syndicate or partnership, corporation, trust or any other
legal entity.
Subdivision Regulations 24
PLAT. A map or drawing that graphically delineates the boundary of land parcels for the purpose
of identification and record of title. The PLAT is a recorded legal document and must conform to all
Minnesota State Laws.
PRELIMINARY PLAT. The preliminary map, drawing or chart indicating the proposed layout of
the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council for
consideration.
PRIVATE STREET. A street serving as vehicular access to two or more parcels of land which is
not dedicated to the public but is owned by one or more private parties.
PROTECTIVE COVENANTS. Contracts entered into between private parties and constituting a
restriction on the use of all private property within a subdivision for the benefit of the property
owners, and to provide mutual protection against undesirable aspects of development which would
tend to impair stability of values.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. The land covered by a public road or other land dedicated for public use or for
certain private use, such as land over which a power line passes.
SKETCH PLAN. A drawing showing the proposed subdivision of property. This plan is not
necessarily drawn to scale and exact accuracy is not a requirement.
STREET. A public way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare,
arterial parkway, throughway road, avenue, land, place or however otherwise designated.
ALLEY. A minor way which is used primarily for secondary vehicular service access to the back,
the side or properties abutting on a street.
ARTERIAL STREET. A street or highway with access restrictions designed to carry large volumes
of traffic between various sectors of the county and beyond.
COLLECTOR STREET. A street which carries traffic from local streets to arterial.
CUL-DE-SAC. A minor street with only one outlet and having a turn-around.
LOCAL STREET. A street of limited continuity used primarily for access to the abutting properties
and the local need of a neighborhood.
SERVICE STREET. Marginal access street, or otherwise designated, is a minor street, which is
parallel and adjacent to a thoroughfare and which provides access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic.
STREET WIDTH. The shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of-way of a street.
25 Cokato - Land Usage
SUBDIVIDER. Any person commencing proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision of
land hereunder for himself or herself or for another.
SUBDIVISION. The dividing of any parcel of land into two or more parcels.
PLATTED SUBDIVISION. If any resultant parcel is less than five acres in area and less than 300
feet in width and the subdividing was done for the purpose of transfer of ownership to effectuate
building development, or if a new street or road is involved, regardless of the size of the parcel
and/or its width, subsequent parcels must be platted in accordance with the terms and the procedure
of the city Subdivision Regulations.
UNPLATTED SUBDIVISION. A division of any parcel of land into two or more parts wherein all
parts are at least five acres and at least 300 feet in width and where no new road is involved. These
do not require platting.
SURVEYOR. The County Surveyor.
TRACING. A plat or map drawn on transparent paper or cloth which can be reproduced by using
regular reproduction procedure.
ZONING ORDINANCE. A zoning ordinance or resolution controlling the use of land as adopted
by the city or county.
(Prior Code, § 904.11)
PLAT PROCEDURES
§ 152.025 PRE-APPLICATION MEETING
(A) Prior to the preparation of a preliminary plat, the subdividers or owners may meet with the
Zoning Administrator and other appropriate officials in order to be made fully aware of all applicable
ordinances, regulations and plans in the area to be subdivided. At this time or at subsequent informal
meetings, the subdivider may submit a general sketch plan of the proposed subdivision and
preliminary proposals for the provision of water supply and waste disposal. The sketch plan can be
presented in simple form but should show that consideration has been given to the relationship of
the proposed subdivision to existing community facilities that would serve it, to neighboring
subdivisions and developments, and to the topography of the site.
(B) The subdivider is urged to avail himself or herself of the advice and assistance of the local
Planning and Zoning Commission and appropriate planning staff at this point in order to save time
and effort, and to facilitate the approval of the preliminary plat.
(Prior Code, § 904.20) (Am. Ord. 03-2009, passed 10-13-2009)
Subdivision Regulations 26
§ 152.026 PRELIMINARY PLAT
(A) After the pre-application meeting, the subdividers or owners shall file with the Zoning
Administrator and file five hard copies plus one digital copy of a preliminary plat and a cash fee per
ordinance. This fee will be used for expenses of the city in connection with the review of the plat.
(B) The Zoning Administrator shall refer copies of the preliminary plat to the appropriate agencies
and/or individuals for their review and report.
(C) Within 45 days after the plat was filed and after reports and certifications have been received as
requested, the Cokato Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
preliminary plat after notice of the time and place thereof has been published once in the official
newspaper at least ten days before the day of the hearing. This shall constitute the public hearing on
the plat as required by state law. Within 15 days of the date of the public hearing, the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall make its report to the City Council.
(D) The Cokato Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Zoning Administrator may forward
to the City Council a favorable, conditional or unfavorable report, and the reports shall contain a
statement of findings and recommendations.
(E) The City Council shall act as the approval authority. If the City Council disapproves the
preliminary plat, the grounds for any disapproval shall be set forth in the minutes of the Board
meeting and reported to the owners or subdividers.
(F) The approval of a preliminary plat is an acceptance of the general layout as submitted and
indicates to the subdivider that he or she may proceed toward final plat in accordance with the terms
of approval and provisions of this chapter.
(G) During the intervening time between approval of the preliminary plat and the signing of the
final plat, the subdivider must submit acceptable engineering plans for all required improvements.
(H) In the case of all subdivisions, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend denial
of, and the City Council shall deny approval of a preliminary or final plat if it makes any of the
following findings:
(1) That the proposed subdivision is in conflict with adopted applicable general and specific
plans of the city;
(2) The design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is in conflict with any adopted
component of the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Cokato;
27 Cokato - Land Usage
(3) The physical characteristics of this site, including but not limited to topography, vegetation,
susceptibility to erosion and siltation, susceptibility to flooding, water storage, drainage and
retention, are such that the site is not suitable for the type of development or use contemplated;
(4) The site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development;
(5) The design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial
environmental damage;
(6) The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public
health problems; and
(7) The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements of
record or with easements established by judgment of a court.
(Prior Code, § 904.21)
§ 152.027 FINAL PLAT
(A) The owners or subdividers shall file five hard copies plus one digital copy of the final plat with
the Zoning Administrator. If this is not done within 90 days, the preliminary plat will be considered
void unless for good cause an extension is requested in writing by the subdivider and granted by the
City Council. The owners or subdividers shall also submit at this time an up-to-date certified
abstract, title or registered property report.
(B) The final plat shall have incorporated all changes recommended by the Zoning Administrator,
the County Engineer regarding county roads and the City Council as conditions to approval of the
preliminary plat, but in all other respects it shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved. It may
constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposed to record
and develop at that time, provided that such a portion conforms with all requirements of this chapter.
(C) The Zoning Administrator shall refer copies of the final plat to the appropriate agencies and/or
individuals for their review and report. The report of these agencies and persons shall be submitted
to the City Council within 30 days of the date of submission of the plat and the City Council shall
act on the final plat within 60 days of submission of the plat.
(D) Upon approval of the final plat by the City Council, the subdivider shall record the final plat
with the Wright County Recorder, as provided for by that office, within 60 days after the approval.
Otherwise the approval of the final plat shall be considered void. The subdivider shall, within 30
days of recording, furnish the City Council with one black line print and a reproducible print of the
final plat showing evidence of the recording.
(Prior Code, § 904.22)
Subdivision Regulations 28
DATA REQUIREMENTS; STANDARDS
§ 152.040 DATA FOR PRELIMINARY PLAT
(A) Identification and description.
(1) Proposed name of subdivision, which shall not duplicate or be similar in pronunciation or
spelling to the name of any plat heretofore recorded in the county;
(2) Location by section, township, range and by legal description;
(3) Name of municipality;
(4) Names and addresses of the record owner and any agent having control of the land,
subdivider, land surveyor, engineer and designer of the plan;
(5) Graphic scale not less than one inch to 100 feet;
(6) North point;
(7) Key map including area within one mile radius of plat;
(8) Date of preparation; and
(9) A current abstract of title or a registered property certificate along with any unrecorded
documents and an opinion of title by the subdivider’s attorney.
(B) Existing conditions.
(1) Boundary line of proposed subdivision, clearly indicated and to a close degree of accuracy;
(2) Existing zoning classifications for land within and abutting the subdivision. A general
statement on the approximate acreage and dimensions of the lots. Location, right-of-way width
and names of existing or platted streets or other public ways, parks and other public lands,
permanent buildings and structures, easements, sections and corporate lines within the plan and
to a distance 150 feet beyond shall also be indicated;
(3) Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided land, within 150 feet, identified
by name and ownership, including all contiguous land owned or controlled by the subdivider;
(4) Topographic data, including contours at vertical intervals of ten feet, water courses,
marshes, rock outcrops, power transmission poles and lines and other significant features shall
also be shown. USGS datum shall be used for all topographic mapping where feasible;
29 Cokato - Land Usage
(5) An accurange soil survey of the subdivision prepared by a qualified person. Soil percolation
tests may also be required if conditions warrant it;
(6) A central water and sewer system feasibility study to be completed by a registered civil
engineer, if a central water and sewer system is determined to be feasible. Where a central sewer
system is found to be unfeasible, a qualified soil scientist from the SCS shall report on the
feasibility of individual home sewer systems and shall include soil borings and percolation tests
as needed to verify conclusions; and
(7) A survey prepared by a qualified person identifying tree coverage in the proposed
subdivision in terms of type, weakness, maturity, potential hazard, infestation, vigor, density
and spacing.
(C) Subdivision design features.
(1) Layout of proposed streets showing the right-of-way widths, centerline gradients, typical
cross sections and proposed names of streets. The name of any street heretofore used in the
county or its environs shall not be used unless the proposed street is a logical extension of an
already named street, in which event the same name shall be used. Locations and widths of
proposed alleys and pedestrian ways;
(2) Layout, numbers and preliminary dimensions of lots and blocks;
(3) Minimum front and side street building setback lines; and
(4) When lots are located on a curve, the width of the lot at the building setback line. Areas,
other than streets, alleys, pedestrian ways and utility easements, intended to be dedicated or
reserved for public use, including the size of the area or areas in acres.
(D) Other information.
(1) Statement of the proposed use of lots stating type of residential buildings with number of
proposed dwelling units and type of business or industry, so as to reveal the effect of the
development on traffic, fire hazards and congestion of population;
(2) Provision for surface water disposal, drainage and flood control;
(3) If any zoning changes are contemplated, the proposed zoning plan for the areas. Where the
subdivider owns property adjacent to that which is being proposed for the subdivision, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall require that the subdivider submit a sketch plan of the
remainder of the property so as to show the possible relationships between the proposed
subdivision and the future subdivision. In any event, all subdivisions shall be shown to relate
well with existing or potential adjacent subdivisions;
Subdivision Regulations 30
(4) Potential re-subdivision and use of excessively deep or wide (over 200 feet) lots shall be
indicated in a satisfactory manner;
(5) A plan for soil erosion and sediment control both during construction and after development
has been completed. The plan shall include gradients of waterways, design of velocity and
erosion control measures, and landscaping of the erosion and sediment control system;
(6) A vegetation preservation and protection plan that shows those trees proposed to be
removed, those to remain, the types and locations of trees and other vegetation that are to be
planted; and
(7) A water feasibility study shall also be required to determine if water is readily available.
The other information as may be required by the Zoning Administrator or the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 904.30)
§ 152.041 DATA FOR FINAL PLAT
(A) The plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor who is registered in the State of Minnesota and
shall comply with the provisions of Minnesota State Statutes and these regulations.
(B) Surveying requirements of the final plat shall be under the regulation of the County Surveyor.
(C) The subdivider or owner shall provide a map showing location and size of existing sewers, water
mains, culverts or other underground facilities within the preliminary plan area and to a distance of
150 feet beyond. The data as grades, invert elevations and locations of catch basins, manholes,
hydrants and street pavement width and type, shall also be shown.
(D) The subdivider or owner shall prepare a map showing all existing and proposed private
restrictions.
(E) Title opinion by a practicing attorney-at-law based upon an examination of an abstract of the
records of the Wright County Recorder of the Register of Titles for the lands included within the
plat and showing the title to be in the name of the owner of the subdivider. The date of continuation
of the abstract examined or the date of the examination of the records shall be within 30 days prior
to the date the final plat is filed with the County Auditor. The owner or subdivider shown in the title
opinion shall be the owner of record of the platted lands on the date or recording of the plat with the
County Recorder.
(F) Execution by all owners of any interest in the land and any holders of a mortgage therein of the
certificate required by Minnesota Statutes, and which certificate shall include an accurate legal
description of any area to be dedicated for public use and shall include a dedication to the county of
sufficient easements to accommodate utility services in the form as shall be approved by the County
Attorney.
(Prior Code, § 904.31)
31 Cokato - Land Usage
§ 152.042 SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
(A) The Planning and Zoning Commission in its review of the preliminary plat, will take into
consideration the requirements of the community and the best use of the land being subdivided.
(B) The proposed subdivision shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan adopted by the City of
Cokato.
(C) The arrangement, character, extent, width and location of all streets shall be considered in their
relation to existing and planned streets, to reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographic conditions,
to runoff of storm water, to public convenience and safety and in their appropriate relation to the
proposed uses of the land to be served by the streets. Wherever possible and necessary, the
arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall provide for the continuation of existing streets in
adjoining areas. Where adjoining unsubdivided areas may be subdivided, the arrangement of streets
in a new subdivision shall make provision for the proper projection of streets into adjoining areas by
carrying the new streets to the boundaries of the new subdivision at appropriate locations.
(Prior Code, § 904.40)
§ 152.043 STREETS
(A) Widths. Street right-of-way widths shall be as determined in the Comprehensive Plan and
official map, and where applicable, shall conform to county and state standards for trunk highways.
If there is no such plan or standard, right-of-way widths shall conform to the following minimum
dimensions:
(1) Street;
(2) Right-of-way width;
(3) Major arterial: 250 feet;
(4) Minor arterial: 150 feet;
(5) Collectors: 60 to 80 feet;
(6) Local: 50 feet;
(7) Marginal access roads: 30 feet;
(8) Cul-de-sac streets: 60 feet;
(9) Cul-de-sac turn-around radius: 60 feet;
(10) Street intersections; and
Subdivision Regulations 32
(11) Insofar as practical, streets shall intersect at right angles. In no case shall the angles formed
by the intersection of two streets be less than 60 degrees. Intersections having more than four
corners shall be prohibited. Adequate land for future intersection and interchange construction
needs shall be dedicated.
(B) Tangents. A tangent of at least 300 feet shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial
and collector streets.
(C) Deflections. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at one point by more than ten
degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius adequate to ensure a slight distance of not
less than 500 feet for arterial streets, 300 feet for collectors and 100 feet for all other streets. The
Planning and Zoning Commission may allow greater or lesser sight distances at the recommendation
of the Engineer.
(D) Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall be avoided for local
streets.
(E) Local streets. Minor streets shall be laid out so that their use by through traffic is discouraged.
(F) Cul-de-sac. The maximum length of a street terminating in a cul-de-sac shall be 500 feet,
measured from the centerline of the street of origin to the end of the right-of-way.
(G) Centerline gradients. All centerline gradients shall be at least 0.5% and shall not exceed the
following:
(1) Arterial streets and collector streets: 5%; and
(2) Minor streets and marginal access streets: 8%.
(H) Access to arterial streets. In the case where a proposed plat is adjacent to a limited access
highway (arterial), there shall be no direct vehicular or pedestrian access from individual lots to the
highways. As a general requirement, access arterial streets shall be at intervals of not less than
one-fourth mile and through existing and established crossroads where possible.
(I) Platting of small tracts. In the platting of small tracts of land fronting on arterial streets where
there is no convenient access to existing entrances and where access from the plat would be closer
than one-fourth mile from an existing access point, a temporary entrance permit may be granted.
Provision shall be made in the plats for the connection of roads to neighboring land. As the
neighboring land is platted and developed and access becomes possible at a preferred location, the
temporary entrance permits shall become void.
(J) Half streets. Half streets shall be prohibited except where it will be practical to require the
dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided, in which case the dedication
of a half street may be permitted. The probable length of time elapsing before dedication of the
remainder shall be considered in this decision.
33 Cokato - Land Usage
(K) Private streets. Private streets may be permitted, however, they must conform to the same
standards as public streets.
(L) Hardship to owners of adjoining property. The street arrangements shall not be such as to cause
hardship to owners of adjoining property in platting their own land and providing convenient access
to it.
(Prior Code, § 904.41)
§ 152.044 BLOCKS
The length, width and acreage of blocks shall be sufficient to provide for convenient access,
circulation, control and safety of street design. Blocks may be longer than 1,300 feet or shorter than
300 feet only if the Zoning Administrator agrees that exceptions are warranted.
(Prior Code, § 904.42)
§ 152.045 LOTS
(A) Size. The lot dimensions shall be such as to comply with the minimum lot areas specified in
Chapter 153.
(B) Side lot line. Side lines of lots shall be substantially at right angles to straight street lines or
radial to curved street lines. Lots shall be graded so as to provide drainage away from building
locations.
(C) Natural features. In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be shown for all natural
features, such as tree growth, wetlands, steep slopes, water courses, historic spots or similar
conditions and plans adjusted to preserve those which proposed development.
(D) Lot remnants. All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after subdividing of a larger
tract must be added to adjacent lots rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels.
(E) Double frontage lots. Double frontage lots with frontage on two parallel streets or reverse
frontage shall not be permitted except where lots back an arterial or collector street. The lots shall
have an additional depth of at least ten feet in order to allow for screen planting along the back lot
line.
(F) Septic tank and drainfield locations. On large lots (one acre or more) septic tanks and
drainfields, when permitted, shall be located in such a way as to allow future subdivision of the land.
(Prior Code, § 904.43)
§ 152.046 ALLEYS
(A) Location requirements. A public or private alley shall be provided in a block where
commercially zoned property abuts a major thoroughfare of a major street. Alleys in residential areas
Subdivision Regulations 34
other than those zoned for multiple-use will not be permitted except for special permission of the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
(B) Widths. Alleys, where permitted by the City Council, shall be at least 18 feet in width.
(C) Grades. All centerline gradients in alleys shall be at least 0.5% and shall not exceed 8%.
(Prior Code, § 904.44)
RESOURCE CONTROL
§ 152.060 SEWAGE DISPOSAL
For proposed plats in rural areas, the size and relative location of on-site soil absorption sewer
systems shall be governed by the sewage disposal standards as stated in § 153.050.
(Prior Code, § 904.45)
§ 152.061 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
The following guidelines shall be applied in the subdivision and construction of land areas.
(A) The development shall conform to the natural limitations presented by topography and soil so
as to create the least potential for soil erosion.
(B) Erosion and siltation control measures shall be coordinated with the different stages of
development. Appropriate control measures shall be installed prior to development when necessary
to control erosion.
(C) Land shall be developed in increments of workable size such that adequate erosion and siltation
controls can be provided as construction progresses. The smallest practical area of land shall be
exposed at any one period of time.
(D) (1) When soil is exposed, the exposure shall be for the shortest feasible period of time.
(2) Where the topsoil is removed, sufficient arable soil shall be set aside for re-spreading over
the developed area.
(3) The soil shall be restored to a depth of four inches and shall be of a quality at least equal to
the soil quality prior to development.
(Prior Code, § 904.46)
35 Cokato - Land Usage
§ 152.062 DRAINAGE
(A) The natural drainage system shall be used as far as is feasible for the storage and flow of runoff.
(B) The following requirements shall also apply:
(1) Storm water drainage shall be discharged to marshlands, swamps, retention basins or other
treatment facilities. Diversion of storm water to marshlands or swamps shall be considered for
existing or planned surface drainage. Marshlands and swamps used for storm water shall
provide for natural or artificial water level control;
(2) No existing ditch, stream, drain or drainage canal shall be deepened, widened, rerouted or
filled without written permission from the City Council;
(3) Where artificial channels must be constructed to augment the natural drainage system, the
channels, as well as the natural drainage ways, may be planned as part of a recreation trail
system;
(4) Channels shall be designed to be aesthetically compatible for recreational trail use; and
(5) The drainage system shall be constructed and operational as quickly as possible during
construction.
(Prior Code, § 904.47)
§ 152.063 EASEMENTS
All easements shall be dedicated by appropriate language on the plat as required by M.S. § 505.02,
Subdivision 2.
(A) Provided for utilities.
(1) Easements at least 12 wide, centered on rear and other lot lines, shall be provided for
utilities where necessary.
(2) They shall have continuity of alignment from block to block.
(B) Drainage.
(1) Easements shall be provided along each side of the centerline of any water course or
drainage channel, whether or not shown in the Comprehensive Plan, to a width sufficient to
provide proper maintenance and protection and to provide for storm water runoff from a tenyear
storm of one hour duration.
Subdivision Regulations 36
(2) Where necessary, drainage easements corresponding with lot line shall be provided.
(3) The easements for drainage purposes shall not be less than 20 feet in width.
(Prior Code, § 904.48)
(C) Vacation of Drainage and Utility Easements
(1) Vacation of any drainage and/or utility easements, once established, may be accomplished
by application to the Zoning Administrator and approved in accordance with the provisions of
MS § 462.358 subd. (7) and MS § 412.851.
§ 152.064 DENSITY CONTROL
(A) Dedication of steep slopes, drainage ways and wetlands to the city shall be encouraged.
(B) If the Minnesota Department of Health Home Sewer System Standards can be met, a density
credit may be granted allowing smaller lot sizes than would normally be allowed in the district in
those areas which are relatively flat and where a private sewer system can properly function.
(C) The City Council shall determine the density credit to be granted.
(Prior Code, § 904.49)
IMPROVEMENTS
§ 152.080 IMPROVEMENTS LISTED AND DESCRIBED
Prior to the approval of a final plat, the subdivider shall have agreed in the manner set forth below
to install in conformity with construction plans approved by the City Engineer and in conformity
with all applicable standards and ordinances, the following improvements on the site.
(A) Monuments. Monuments of a permanent character, as required by M.S. § 505.021, Subdivision
10, shall be placed at each corner or angle on the outside boundary of the subdivision; and pipes or
steel rods shall be placed at each corner of each lot and each intersection of street centerline.
(B) Streets. The full width of the right-of-way of each street and alley dedicated in the plat shall be
graded. All streets and alleys shall be an adequate sub-base and shall be improved with an
all-weather permanent surface in accordance with the design standards specified by the city. Except
in areas where lot widths exceed 100 feet or topography or tree cover dictates otherwise, grading
shall provide for easy installation of sidewalks at some future date.
(C) Paving. The City Council may require that all streets and alleys be improved with a concrete
or bituminous surface. Paving shall be required if central sewer and water services are provided. If
central sewer and water services will not be provided for at least ten years, paving may be required.
If center sewer and water services are to be provided within ten years, paving should not be required
until after the central sewer and water services are installed. The city may require a cash deposit to
be used for paving the streets after central sewer and water services are provided. Streets to be paved
shall be surfaced for five-ton axle weight capacity.
37 Cokato - Land Usage
(D) Concrete curb and gutter. Concrete curb and gutter may be required for all paved streets.
(E) Sidewalks. Sidewalks may be required along both sides of all streets in areas where residential
density equals or exceeds three dwelling units per net acre of residentially used land or in commercial
areas.
(F) Water supply. Where a municipal water supply is available within a reasonable distance, the
subdivider may be required to provide a connection to the municipal system. The feasibility of this
requirement shall be evaluated based on the cost of constructing the connection weighed against the
cost of installing individual wells and the likelihood of an eventual municipal connection in the
future. Where a municipal connection is determined to be unfeasible, the subdivider shall either:
(1) Install a system providing each lot with an adequate supply of potable water; or
(2) State on his or her final plat that purchasers of individual lots will be required to install
their own approved wells.
(G) Street lighting. Street lighting of a type approved by the community may be required at all
intersections within the subdivision.
(H) Sewage treatment and disposal. If and when a community sewage treatment system is provided,
all new subdivisions shall be required to hook up to the community sewer system. All new private
sewage treatment systems shall conform to the standards for septic tanks and drainfields set forth in
§ 153.050.
(I) Drainage. A system that will adequately take care of the surface water runoff within the
subdivision shall be provided. Storm sewers and culverts shall be installed where necessary in
conjunction with the grading of streets. Cross drains shall be provided to accommodate all natural
water flow and shall be of sufficient length to permit full-width roadways and required side slopes.
Drainage ditches shall be sodded to prevent erosion.
(J) Street signs. Street signs of standard design approved by the City Council shall be installed at
each street intersection.
(K) Public utilities. All utility lines for telephone and electrical service shall be placed in rear line
easements when carried on overhead poles.
(L) Park land dedication. In every plat or subdivision of land allowing development for residential
uses, a reasonable portion of the land, but not less than 10%, shall be set aside and dedicated by the
tract owner or owners to the general public as open space for park and playground purposes, public
open space or storm water holding areas or ponds. The land shall be suitable for public use as parks
and playgrounds or for one of the afore described purposes, and the city shall not be required to
accept land which will not be usable for parks and playgrounds or which would require extensive
expenditures on the part of the public to make them usable. The city shall have the option to require
cash contribution in lieu of setting aside dedicated land or in requiring a part of the land and the
balance of the land value
Subdivision Regulations 38
in cash. Any money so paid to the city shall be placed in a special fund and used only for the
acquisition of land for parks and playgrounds or the development of existing park and playground
sites or debt retirement in connection with land previously acquired for parks and playgrounds. For
purposes of this chapter, FAIR MARKET LAND VALUE is defined as the market value of the land
within the plat or subdivision as of the date presented to the City Council for preliminary approval,
or if no preliminary approval be given or required, as of the date so presented for final approval, as
determined by the City Assessor in the same manner as he or she determines, the market value of
land for tax purposes, excluding, in determining the value, all value added to the land by
improvements other than utilities, streets and other public improvements serving the land, but
including in the determination the highest and best used to which the land can be put under the
zoning districts then about to be transferred.
(Prior Code, § 904.50)
§ 152.081 PAYMENT FOR INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS
The required improvements to be furnished and installed by the subdivider, which are listed and
described above, are to be furnished and installed at the sole expense of the subdivider and at no expense
to the public; provided, however, that in the case of an improvement, the cost of which would be general
policy of the governing body be assessed only in part to the improved property and the remaining cost
paid out of general tax levy. The City Council may make provision for payment of a portion of the cost
by the subdivider and the remaining portion of the cost by the city. If any improvement installed within
the subdivision will be of substantial benefit to lands beyond the boundaries of the subdivision, the City
Council may make provision for causing a portion of the cost of the improvement representing in the
case the subdivider will be required only to pay for the portions of the whole cost of the improvements
as will represent the benefit to the property within the subdivision.
(Prior Code, § 904.60)
§ 152.082 REQUIRED AGREEMENT PROVIDING FOR PROPER INSTALLMENT OF
IMPROVEMENTS
(A) Prior to installation of any required improvements and prior to approval of the final plat, the
subdivider shall enter into a contract in writing with the city requiring the subdivider to furnish and
construct the improvements at his or her sole cost in accordance with the plans, specifications and
usual contract conditions all approved by the City Council which shall include provisions for
supervision of details of construction by the Zoning Administrator and grant to the administration
the authority to correlate the work to be done under the contract by any subcontractor authorized to
proceed thereunder and with any other work being done or contracted by the city in the vicinity. The
agreement shall require the subdivider to make an escrow deposit or in lieu thereof to furnish the
performance bond as specified in Chapter 153.
(B) The amount of the deposit and the penal amount of the bond shall equal the Zoning
Administrator’s estimate of the total cost of the improvements to be furnished under the contract,
including the cost of inspection by the city. The time for completion of work and the several parts
thereof
39 Cokato - Land Usage
shall be determined by the City Council upon recommendation of the Zoning Administrator after
consultation with the subdivider and shall be reasonable in relation to the work to be done, the season of
the year, and proper correlation with construction activity in the subdivision.
(Prior Code, § 904.61)
§ 152.083 FINANCIAL GUARANTEE
The contract, provided by this chapter, above, shall require the subdivider to make an escrow deposit
or, in lieu thereof, furnish the performance bond as follows.
(A) Escrow deposit. An escrow deposit shall be made with the city, including cost of inspection by
the Zoning Administrator of all improvements to be furnished and installed by the subdivider
pursuant to the contract, and which have not been completed prior to the approval of the final plat;
but the city shall be entitled to reimburse itself out of the deposit for any cost and expense incurred
by the city for completion of the work in case of default of the subdivider under the contract and for
any damages sustained by the city on account of any breach thereof. Upon completion of the work
and termination of any liabilities to the city or the subdivider under the contract, the balance
remaining of the deposit shall be refunded to the subdivider.
(B) Performance bond. In lieu of making an escrow deposit above described, the subdivider may
furnish the city with a public contract of performance bond, in the form prescribed by statute, with
corporate surety in a penal sum equal to the total cost as estimated by the Zoning Administrator
including cost of inspection of all improvements to be furnished and installed by the subdivider
pursuant to the contract and which have not been completed prior to the approval of the final plat.
The bond shall be approved by the City Attorney and filed with the City Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 904.62)
§ 152.084 CONSTRUCTION PLANS
(A) Construction plans for the required improvements, conforming in all respects to the standards
of the city and the applicable ordinances, shall be prepared at the subdivider’s expense by a
professional engineer who is registered in the State of Minnesota, and the plans shall contain his or
her seal.
(B) The plans, together with the quantity of construction items, shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator for his or her approval and for his or her estimate of total cost of the required
improvements; upon approval they shall become a part of the contract required in this chapter.
(C) The tracings of the plans approved by the city, plus two prints, shall be furnished to the city to
be filed by the city.
(Prior Code, § 904.63)
Subdivision Regulations 40
LAND DIVISION OR COMBINATION
§ 152.100 LAND DIVISION OR COMBINATION
(A) In any case where the division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels for the purpose
of transfer of ownership or building development does not come within the definitions of
SUBDIVISION, as defined by this chapter, a description of the land division shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator.
(B) No building permit shall be issued until the description has been received by the Zoning
Administrator and approved by the City Council. In the cases of any land divisions or combinations
involving more than two lots of record, such division or combination shall be reviewed by the
Planning and Zoning Commission, who shall make a recommendation to the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 904.80)
§ 152.101 SMALL SUBDIVISIONS
(A) Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the
strict letter of the provisions of these regulations, the City Council shall have the power to vary the
requirements established in harmony with the general purpose and intent thereof, so that the public
health, safety and general welfare may be secured and substantial justice done.
(B) In particular, for small subdivisions of a minor nature in size or complexity, certain requirements
of these regulations may be waived if the City Council, following consideration by the Zoning
Administrator, so determines, and following compliance with procedures as follows.
(1) Simple lot split. When one parcel or lot of record is divided to result in two lots or parcels,
the submission of topographic maps, soil tests and other data may be waived if approved by the
Zoning Administrator. Transfer of title, or the process of subdividing, may be by filing of a final
plat, certificate of survey or registered land survey.
(2) Creation of three to five lots. When any parcel of land is divided to result in from three to
not more than five lots, submission requirements such as soil tests and topography information
shall be as required by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Transfer of title or the process of
subdivision may be by filing of a final plat or registered land survey. Additional information
may, however, be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission or Zoning Administrator
following review of the preliminary plan.
(Prior Code, § 904.81)
§ 152.102 LOT COMBINATIONS
(A) For small combinations of a minor nature in size or complexity, certain requirements of these
regulations may be waived if the City Council, following consideration by the Zoning
Administrator, so determines, and following compliance with procedures as follows.
(1) Simple Lot Combination. Adjacent, platted lots of record with a simple lot and block
legal description may be combined upon petition to the Zoning Administrator and approval of
the
41 Cokato - Land Usage
City Council. A registered land survey and legal description depicting the proposed
combination may be required.
(2) Other Combinations. Combinations of more than two lots, or combinations that involve
metes and bounds legal descriptions may be requested by petition to the Zoning Administrator.
Combinations requested under this subdivision may be completed following review and
recommendation by the Zoning Administrator and the Planning and Zoning Commission, and
approval of the City Council. Filing of a plat or registered land survey may be required.
ADMINISTRATION
§ 152.115 MODIFICATIONS, EXCEPTIONS AND VARIANCES
The City Council may grant a variance upon receiving a report from the Planning and Zoning
Commission in any particular case where the subdivider can show by reason of exceptional
topography or any other physical conditions that strict compliance with these regulations would
cause exceptional and undue hardship, provided the relief may be granted without detriment to the
public welfare and without impairing the intent and purpose of these regulations. The Planning and
Zoning Commission may recommend variations from the requirements of this chapter in specific
which, in its opinion, do not affect the Comprehensive Plan or the intent of this chapter. Any
modifications thus recommended shall be entered in the minutes of the Planning and Zoning
Commission in setting forth the reasons which justify the modifications. The City Council may
approve variances from these requirements in specific cases which in its opinion meets the above
requirements and do not adversely affect the purposes of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 904.70)
§ 152.116 APPLICABILITY
Nothing herein shall be so construed as to direct or imply that these regulations apply only to
residential subdivisions. All subdivisions, be they commercial, industrial, public land use or
otherwise, shall be a subdivision regardless of the proposed land use if falling within the definition
of a subdivision as defined herein.
(Prior Code, § 904.71)
§ 152.117 EASEMENTS
(A) All easements for public purposes shall be provided at locations approved by the governing
body. The easements may be for utilities, drainage, flood plain protection, lake shore access, walking
trails and the like. However, all easements other than utility and drainage easements must be
conveyed and recorded at the County Recorder prior to plat approval. No plat shall be approved that
may for any reason be detrimental to local, county or regional utility plan.
(B) Over-sizing of utilities to provide future service for more intense development of the land or to
provide future service to other areas may be required.
(Prior Code, § 904.72)
Subdivision Regulations 42
§ 152.118 REGISTERED LAND SURVEYS
New building sites shall not be created without a registered land survey and/or plat.
(Prior Code, § 904.90)
§ 152.119 CONVEYANCE BY METES AND BOUNDS
Land parcels may be conveyed by metes and bounds property description; however, no building
permit may be issued for any parcel that has not been surveyed.
(Prior Code, § 904.91)
§ 152.120 BUILDING PERMITS
No building permits will be issued for the construction of any building or structure on any lot in the
subdivision, as defined herein, that has been approved for platting until all requirements of this
chapter have been fully complied with.
(Prior Code, § 904.950)
§ 152.121 BUILDING ENTITLEMENTS
(A) It is presumed that all parcels of record existing on the date of adoption of this ordinance that
are zoned for residential use shall be eligible to have one single-family home (“Building
Entitlement”) constructed on that parcel, subject to compliance with all other requirements of this
ordinance except for lot size requirements.
(B) Every parcel of land containing up to forty (40) acres zoned for residential use shall have one
Building Entitlement on that parcel.
(C) For parcels larger than forty (40) acres, the number of Building Entitlements shall equal one
per 40 acres as rounded to the nearest 40 acres. By way of example, both 65 acres and 99 acres
rounds to 80 acres, granting two single-family Building Entitlements to either of those properties.
(D) When a parcel is annexed to the City, the parcel is considered undeveloped for the purpose of
this calculation regardless of the number of lots that may have been created while under the
Township’s jurisdiction.
(E) In the event that a subdivision is proposed that results in any parcel no longer having the
number of Building Entitlements that would be anticipated under paragraphs A or B above, then a
condition of approval of the subdivision shall be that a document is recorded against the property
documenting the remaining number of Building Entitlements for that parcel.
§ 152.122 EXPIRATION OF ZONING APPROVALS
(A) Automatic Expiration. Unless otherwise specified by the City Council at the time it is
authorized, an amendment, conditional use permit, interim use permit, Planned Unit
43 Cokato - Land Usage
Development, variance, or site and building plan approval shall be null and void and expire if the
applicant fails to implement such approval and fulfill each and every condition attached thereto
within one (1) year from the date of its authorization unless an extension of time is granted.
(B) Extensions. Extensions of time granted under this section may be granted upon petition to the
Zoning Administrator and approval by the City Council.
§ 152.999 PENALTY
(A) Any person, firm, corporation or voluntary association which violates or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof,
shall be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment as established by state law and which changes from
time to time. Each day a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(B) Any firm, person or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, or who sells,
leases or offers for sale or lease any lot, block or tract of land herewith regulated before all the
requirements of these regulations have been complied with, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction thereof, be subject to fine and/or imprisonment. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 904.975)
CHAPTER 153: ZONING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
153.001 Short title
153.002 Purposes
153.003 Legal authority
153.004 Geographic jurisdiction
153.005 Rules
153.006 Definitions
153.007 Date of effect
General Regulations
153.015 Interpretation
153.016 Application of regulations
153.017 Zoning districts
153.018 Zoning maps
153.019 Nonconforming uses and structures
153.020 Accessory buildings and structures
Districts
153.030 One-Family Residential District (R-1)
153.031 One- and Two-Family Residential (R-2)
153.032 One-Family Residential (R-3)
153.033 Central Business (C-1)
153.034 Highway Business (C-2)
153.035 Industry (I)
153.036 Flood Plain Overlay (F)
153.037 Shoreland Overlay (S)
153.038 Shoreland alterations
44
45 Cokato - Land Usage
Zoning Regulations
153.050 Sewage treatment
153.051 Water supply
153.052 Planning regulations
153.053 Notification procedures
Special Regulations
153.065 Off-street parking requirements
153.066 Off-street loading and unloading requirements
153.067 Commercial and industrial screening
153.068 Signs
153.069 Manufactured homes and manufactured home courts
153.070 Landscaping
153.071 Residential yard storage
153.072 Refuse
153.073 Traffic visibility
153.074 Farm operations
153.075 Building design
153.076 Junk yards
153.077 Glare
153.078 Residual features
153.079 Drainage
153.080 Building relocation
153.081 Dwelling below ground level
153.082 Completion of dwellings
153.083 Zero lot line housing
153.084 Fencing
153.085 Temporary Health Care Dwellings
153.086 Telecommunication Towers and Facilities
153.087 Swimming Pools
Administration and Enforcement
153.095 Zoning Administrator
153.096 Appeals and the Board of Adjustment and Appeals
153.097 Conditional use permits
153.098 Variances
153.099 Zoning amendments
153.100 Enforcement
153.999 Penalty
Zoning Regulations 46
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 SHORT TITLE
This chapter shall be known as the Cokato Zoning Ordinance, shall be cited as such and will be
referred to herein as this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 903.01)
§ 153.002 PURPOSES
The basic purpose of this chapter is to insure and to promote the public health, safety, comfort and
general welfare of the city in accordance with the community’s adopted long range development
goals, plans and policies. Toward this end, this chapter shall divide the city into use districts and
shall establish regulations pertaining to the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration
and use of structures and land within the city.
(Prior Code, § 903.01)
§ 153.003 LEGAL AUTHORITY
This chapter is enacted in pursuance of the authority granted by M.S. §§ 462.351 to 462.364 and the
like.
(Prior Code, § 903.01)
§ 153.004 GEOGRAPHIC JURISDICTION
The geographic jurisdiction of this chapter shall be the entire area within the corporate limits of the
City of Cokato, Minnesota.
(Prior Code, § 903.01)
§ 153.005 RULES
Words used in the present tense shall include the future. Words used in the singular shall include the
plural and the plural the singular. The word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary. The word
“may” is permissive. The word “lot” shall include the words “plot” or “site”. The words “if
pertinent” and “if deemed necessary” pertain to discretionary decisions of the Zoning Administrator,
Planning and Zoning Commission, or City Council.
(Prior Code, § 903.02)
47 Cokato - Land Usage
§ 153.006 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or
requires a different meaning.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE. Any subordinate building or use, which is customarily
incident to the principal building or use.
AGRICULTURE. The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, forestry, horticulture and gardening,
including the keeping or raising of domestic animals and fowl.
ALLEY. A public right-of-way which normally affords a secondary means of access to abutting
property.
ALTERATION. Any change in size, shape, character or use of a building or structure.
APARTMENT. A dwelling unit within a multiple-family dwelling or within a nonresidential
structure.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. A building designed primarily for the supplying of motor
fuel, oil, lubrication and accessories to motor vehicles.
BILLBOARD. A sign which has an area exceeding 150 square feet and which is usually owned by
an advertising company and leased to any person to advertise commodities, services, entertainment
or other activity.
BOARDING HOUSE. Any dwelling, other than a hotel, where meals or lodging and meals for
compensation are provided for five or more persons, pursuant to previous arrangement and not to
anyone who may apply.
BUILDING. Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels
or movable property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to the land.
BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the average grade around the building
(points measured every 10 feet around the building), to the top cornice of a flat roof, to the deck line
of a mansard roof, to a point on the roof directly above the highest point of a shed roof, to the
uppermost point on a round roof, and to the mean elevation between the eave and peak for the highest
pitched, hipped or gambrel roof. If the average grade exceeds the building’s grade along the front of
the lot by more than three feet, the lowest grade shall be used. Structures or other necessary
mechanical appurtenances not used for human occupancy, such as chimneys, cupolas, domes,
monuments, parapet walls, spires, steeples, or towers, covering not more than 25 percent of the roof
area of the building, may exceed the permitted building height in the district in which the site is
located. In no event shall such structures or appurtenances extend beyond 150% of the permitted
building height in said district.
BUILDING, NONCONFORMING. A building so constructed or so located on a lot that it does
not comply with the building requirements or with the minimum lot requirements of the district
within which it is located.
Zoning Regulations 48
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A non-accessory building in which a primary use of the lot on which it
is located is conducted.
COMMERCE. An enterprise that involves the offering of a product, service or entertainment for
compensation.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT. A business that customarily offers goods, services or
entertainment for compensation to clientele within automobiles. (Example: automobile service
stations,
drive-in restaurants and outdoor theaters, but not drive-in cleaners where the customer must leave
his or her automobile to pick up or deliver goods.)
DURABLE MATERIAL (AS PERTAINING TO GROUND SURFACING). A hard surfaced
material such as concrete or asphalt but not including gravel or crushed rock.
DWELLING. A building, or portion thereof, designed or used predominantly for residential
occupancy, including one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and multiple-family dwellings;
but not including hotels, motels, boarding and rooming houses or tourist homes.
DWELLING, ATTACHED. One that is joined to another dwelling or building at one or more
sides by a party wall or walls.
DWELLING, DETACHED. One which is entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot.
DWELLING, EARTH SHELTERED. A detached dwelling unit insulated by earth,
embankment, overburden or both on more than 60% of its outer surface, excluding floor areas
and architecturally designed and landscaped for privacy living areas to be located below ground
level and designed to harmonize with its surroundings naturally.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY (APARTMENT HOUSE). A residential building or
portion thereof containing three or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY. A residential structure containing one dwelling unit only.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX). A residential structure containing two dwelling
units only.
DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms containing complete kitchen facilities, permanently
installed, which are arranged, designed, used or intended for use exclusively as living quarters
for one family and not more than an aggregate of two roomers or boarders.
EFFICIENCY UNIT. A dwelling unit with one primary room which doubles as a living room,
dining room and bedroom.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES. Underground or overhead gas, electrical steam or water transmission or
distribution systems, collection, communications, supply or disposal systems including poles, wires,
mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals,
hydrants or other similar equipment and accessories in conjunction therewith.
49 Cokato - Land Usage
ESTABLISHMENT, COMMERCIAL. A place of business carrying on operations, the ownership
and management of which are separate and distinct from those of any other places of business located
on the same zoning lot.
FAMILY. One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption or a group of not more than
persons not so related, maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit.
FENCE. A structure constructed of wood, metal, wire mesh or masonry erected or provided
enclosure but not protection from the elements (as distinguished from BUILDING).
FLOOD. A temporary rise in stream flow or stage that results in inundation of the areas adjacent to
the channel.
FLOOD FREQUENCY. The average frequency, statistically determined, for which it is expected
that a specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
FLOOD FRINGE. A combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties
and structures subject to flooding primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages.
FLOOD PROOFING. A combination of structural provisions, changes or adjustments to properties
and structures subject to flooding primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages.
FLOODWAY. The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining flood plains,
which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the regional flood.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building
or buildings measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the centerline of party walls
separating two buildings. In particular, FLOOR AREA shall include:
(1) Basement space if at least one-half of the basement story is above established curb level or,
where the curb level has not been established, above the average level of the finished grade;
(2) Elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor;
(3) Floor space used for mechanical equipment where the structural headroom exceeds seven
and one-half feet, except equipment, open or enclosed, located on the roof, i.e., bulk needs,
water tanks and cooling towers;
(4) That part of the attic floor space where the structural headroom exceeds seven and one-half
feet;
(5) Interior balconies and mezzanines;
(6) Enclosed porches, but not terraces and breeze ways; and
(7) Accessory uses, other than floor space devoted exclusively for accessory off-street parking
or loading.
Zoning Regulations 50
FLOOR AREA RATIO. The numerical value obtained through dividing the gross floor area of a
building or buildings by the total area of the lot or parcel of land on which the building or buildings
are located.
HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation or profession carried on within a dwelling unit by the
occupant as a secondary use including but not limited to the occupations as beauty parlors,
dressmaking and alterations, preparation of foodstuffs and confectionery, handicraft, professional
offices, artists studio and the renting of rooms for lodging or serving of meals for compensation.
INDUSTRY. An enterprise that involves the production, assembly, processing or storage of
materials, goods or products.
JUNK YARD. An open area where waste or scrap materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored,
baled, packed, disassembled or handled including but not limited to scrap iron and other metals,
paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. A JUNK YARD includes an automobile wrecking or
dismantling yard but does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings.
LOADING SPACE. An off-street space on the same lot with a building or contiguous to a group of
buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading
merchandise or materials, and which abuts on a street or other appropriate means of access.
LOT. A piece, parcel or plat of land intended for building development or as a unit for transfer of
ownership.
LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the intersection of two streets the interior angle of the
intersection not exceeding 135 degrees.
LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT AREA. The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front side and rear lot line of a lot
measured within the lot boundaries.
LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front line and the rear lot line of a lot
measured within the lot boundaries.
LOT LINE. A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate ownership, except
that, where any portion of the lot extends into the abutting street or alley, the lot line shall be
deemed to be the street or alley line.
LOT WIDTH. The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured within
the lot boundaries.
MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which in the
traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected
on-site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used
51 Cokato - Land Usage
as a dwelling without permanent foundation when connected by the required utilities, and includes
the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained herein; except that the term
includes any structure which meets all the requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer
voluntarily files a certificate required by the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under M.S. Chapter 327, as it
may be amended from time to time.
MANUFACTURED HOME LOT. A parcel of land within a manufactured home park for the
placement of a single manufactured home and the exclusive use of its occupants.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. A parcel of land under single ownership that has been planned
and improved for the placement of manufactured homes for non-transient use. Each manufactured
home park shall contain space for 40 or more semi-permanent manufactured homes.
MANUFACTURED HOME STAND. That part of an individual lot that has been reserved for the
placement of a manufactured home.
MOTEL. A building or group of detached, semi-detached or attached buildings on a lot containing
guest rooms or dwellings, each of which has a separate outside entrance leading directly from the
outside of the building, with garage and parking space conveniently located to each unit, and which
is designed, used or intended to be used primarily for the accommodation of automobile transients.
MOTELS do not include hotels, boarding houses or manufactured home parks.
OFFICE BUILDING. A building designed or used primarily for office purposes, no part of which
is used for manufacturing or for dwelling purposes other than by a watchperson or janitor.
OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL. A room or rooms used for the carrying on of a profession.
PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE. A suitably surfaced and permanently maintained area off the
public street right-of-way, whether within or outside of a building of sufficient size to store one
standard automobile, but in no event less than 200 square feet, exclusive of passageways, driveways
or other means of circulation or access.
ROOMING HOUSE. A building designed for or used as a single-family or two-family dwelling,
all or a portion of which contains rooming units that accommodate three or more persons who are
not members of the keeper’s family. Rooms, meals or both, are provided for compensation on a
monthly or weekly basis.
SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between a building and the street or lot line,
disregarding steps, unroofed porches and overhangs.
SIGN. Any device for visual communication that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject
thereof to the attention of the public, but not including any flag, badge or insignia of any
governmental agency, or of any civic, charitable, religious, patriotic, fraternal or similar
organization. The device may be either stationary or movable.
Zoning Regulations 52
SIGN, ADVERTISING. A sign which directs attention to a commodity, service or
entertainment, that is sold or offered either elsewhere or upon the premises where the sign is
located, or to which it is affixed.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL. A sign for the purpose of making specific commercial, industrial,
public or semi-public locations known and to assist in finding these locations.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION. A sign that identifies a residential, commercial, industrial, public
or semi-public use located upon the premises where the sign is located, or to which it is affixed.
SIGN, FLASHING. Any illuminated sign in which the artificial light is not maintained
stationary and/or constant in intensity and color at all times when the sign is in use. For the
purpose of this chapter, any revolving, illuminated sign shall be considered a FLASHING
SIGN.
SIGN, FREE-STANDING. A sign which is supported by upright braces or posts and is placed
upon or in the ground and not affixed to any part of any building.
SIGN, GROSS SURFACE AREA OF. The entire area within a single continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of the sign and in no case passing through or between any adjacent
elements of same; however, the perimeter shall not include any structural elements lying outside
the limits of the sign, and not forming an integral part of the display. In the case of a freestanding
sign with two back surfaces, each surface may equal the allowable gross area.
SIGN, ROOF. A sign erected upon the roof of any building.
SIGN, TEMPORARY. A sign which is erected or displayed for a limited period of time
including any sign, banner, pennant, valence or display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric,
cardboard or other light material, with or without frames.
STORY. That part of a building between the surfaces of a floor and the ceiling immediately above;
however, a basement is not considered to be a STORY.
STREET, ARTERIAL. Provides for through traffic movement between major highways and
collector streets, and for those major movements within or through an urban area not served by major
highways. To accomplish this, it should not force traffic through the areas it serves on an area wide
basis. For instance, an arterial area such as a residential, commercial or industrial district. Access
points should be well controlled and limited to cases of definite need.
STREETS, COLLECTOR. Distributes and collects the traffic within an internal district between
the major arterial and local streets. Continuity should be de-emphasized so that through traffic is
discouraged.
STREET LINE. The dividing line between the lot and the street.
53 Cokato - Land Usage
STRUCTURE. Anything erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the
ground, or attached to something having permanent location on the ground.
STRUCTURE, RESIDENTIAL. A building which is used predominantly for permanent dwelling
purposes. It may contain one or more dwelling units.
TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular portable structure built on a chassis designed to be used for
temporary occupancy for travel, recreational or vacation use; with the manufacturer’s permanent
identification TRAVEL TRAILER thereon; and when factory equipped for the road, being of any
length, provided its gross weight does not exceed 4,500 pounds, or being of any weight provided its
overall length does not exceed 28 feet.
TOURIST HOME. A building containing a single dwelling unit and in which meals or lodging or
both are provided or offered to transient guests for compensation.
USE. The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is designed, arranged or
intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
USE, INCOMPATIBLE. A use which is incapable of direct association with certain other uses
because it is contradictory, incongruent or discordant.
USE, NONCONFORMING. Any lawfully established use of a building or premises which on
the effective date of this chapter does not comply with the use regulations of the zoning district
in which the building or premises shall be located.
USE, PERMITTED. A use which may be lawfully established in a particular district or
districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations and performance standards, if
any, of the district.
USE, PRINCIPAL. The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or
accessory use.
USE, CONDITIONAL. A use, either public or private, which, because of its unique
characteristics, cannot be property classified as a permitted use in a particular district. After due
consideration in each case of the impact of the use upon neighboring land, and of the public
need for the particular use at the particular location, the CONDITIONAL USE may or may not
be granted.
YARD. An open space on a lot which is unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except as
hereinafter permitted. A YARD extends along a lot line and at right angles to a lot line to a depth or
width specified in the yard requirements for the district in which the lot is located.
YARD, FRONT. A yard extending along the full width of the front lot between side lot lines.
Zoning Regulations 54
YARD, REAR. The portion of the yard on the same lot with the building between the rear line
of the building and the rear line of the lot for the full width of the lot. In those locations where
an alley is platted in the rear of the lots, one-half of the width of the platted alley may be included
in the REAR YARD requirements. On corner lots, the Zoning Administrator shall determine
which yards are to be side and rear yards for the purpose of this chapter, and shall document
these findings.
YARD, SIDE. A yard extending along a side lot line between the front and rear yards.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The City Administrator or other individual as designated by the
City Council.
ZONING DISTRICT. An area or areas within the limits of the city for which the regulations and
requirements governing use, lot and bulk of buildings and premises are uniform.
ZONING MAP. The map setting forth the boundaries of the zoning districts of the city, which map
is entitled “Proposed Zoning Districts Map 2015”.
(Prior Code, § 903.02)
§ 153.007 DATE OF EFFECT
This chapter shall take effect and be in force ten days after its first legal notice, after its passage by
the Council.
(Prior Code, § 903.09)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 153.015 INTERPRETATION
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of public health, safety and general welfare.
(Prior Code, § 903.03)
§ 153.016 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
(A) Regulations. Except as hereinafter provided:
(1) No building or land in the City of Cokato shall hereafter be used or occupied and no
building or part thereof shall be erected, moved or altered unless in conformity with the
regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located;
55 Cokato - Land Usage
(2) No building shall hereafter be erected or altered to exceed the height, to house a greater
number of families, to occupy a greater percentage of lot area or to have narrower or smaller
front yards, side yards or rear yards than specified herein for the district in which the building
is located; and
(3) No part of a yard or other open space required about any building for the purpose of
complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be included as a part of a yard or other open
space similarly required for another building.
(B) Requiring house numbers on each residential unit; purpose. The Council finds, for the proper
health and safety within the city, that house numbers for each residential unit are displayed on the
house or dwelling with a four-inch height and easily read from the street.
(C) Numbering system. The required numbers assigned for each residential unit shall be the
responsibility of the City Administrator who shall supply the appropriate address to the owner or
occupant of each dwelling unit.
(D) Enforcement. It shall be the responsibility of the City Administrator to enforce the provisions
of this chapter. The Administrator shall have the authority to order in writing to the owner or
occupant to comply within 60 days and to extend time for compliance if it appears that extension is
appropriate.
(E) Building permit procedures and fee schedule.
(1) An applicant formally contacts the city offices far in advance of at least 30 days to discuss
the nature of his or her request for certain services. Then, the applicant completes in detail all
the plan requirements along with a non-refundable fee as defined and adopted by the City
Council.
(2) Submission of a detailed site plan and a certified land survey for each new building project
along with defined setback distances from property lines, i.e. front, side and rear yards, all
easements for drainage and utilities, location of new or existing dwellings/additions, accessory
structures, driveways, all building characteristics plus the identification of any other important
lot features.
(3) In order for the city to recover the cost of development services including staff time,
publishing of legal public notices required by city ordinance, the applicant shall pay in advance
a non-refundable fee for each item.
(4) Each request and/or cost of a preparation of a developer’s agreement will be at the
applicant’s expense and processed according to adopted procedures established by governing
ordinances and/or administrative policies of the city. All approved fees pursuant to the adopted
schedule shall be paid in advance prior consideration by the City Council and/or issuance of all
building permits.
(Prior Code, § 903.03)
Zoning Regulations 56
§ 153.017 ZONING DISTRICTS
In order to carry out the purpose of this chapter, the City of Cokato is hereby divided into the
following use districts:
(A) R-1 One-Family Residential District;
(B) R-2 One- and Two-Family Residential District;
(C) R-3 One-Family Residential District;
(D) C-1 Central Business District;
(E) C-2 Highway Business District;
(F) I Industrial District;
(G) FP Flood Plain Overlay District; and
(H) SM Shoreland Overlay District.
(Prior Code, § 903.04)
§ 153.018 ZONING MAPS
(A) The location and boundaries of the districts established by this chapter is set forth on the Zoning
Map which is hereby incorporated as part of this chapter. It shall be the responsibility of the Zoning
Administrator to maintain and update this map, and the amendments to the map shall be recorded
on the map within 30 days after official adoption of zoning amendments.
(B) This section shall be reissued for all amendments to the Zoning and Use District Map.
(Prior Code, § 903.04)
§ 153.019 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
(A) Nonconforming buildings.
(1) Alterations. A nonconforming building or structure shall not be reconstructed or altered to
an extent exceeding 25% of its current full and true value for assessment purposes unless the
building or structure is changed to conform to the regulations of this chapter.
(2) Enlargement. A non-conforming building or structure shall not be added to or enlarged in
any manner unless the addition or enlargements are made so as to bring the building or structure
into conformance with the regulations of this chapter.
57 Cokato - Land Usage
(3) Restoration. A non-conforming building or structure, which is damaged by fire or other
cause to the extent of more than 50% of its current full and true value for assessment purpose,
shall not be restored except in conformity with the regulations of this chapter.
(B) Nonconforming use of building or land.
(1) Extension. A non-conforming use of a building may be extended throughout the building,
provided no structural alterations are made therein except as required by other city codes or
ordinances.
A nonconforming use of land shall not be extended or enlarged.
(2) Relocation. A non-conforming use shall not be moved to any other part of the parcel of
land upon which the same was conducted at the time of passage of this chapter.
(3) Abandonment. A non-conforming use of a building or land which has been discontinued
for a period of 60 days shall not be re-established, and any future use shall be in conformity
with the regulations of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 903.06)
§ 153.020 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
(A) No accessory building or structure other than a fence or temporary construction office shall be
permitted on any lot in an R District prior to the time of construction of the principal building to
which it is an accessory.
(B) Whenever a garage is so designed that it is to be entered directly from a side street or alley, the
distance between the doors and the lot line shall be 20 feet or more.
(C) (1) No detached accessory building shall be located in the front yard; less than five feet from
the side lot line, or less than five feet from the rear lot line in the R District subject to this chapter.
(2) Should the accessory building be three feet or less from the principal building, it shall be
for the purpose of this chapter considered attached and a part of the principal building for
applying yard regulations.
(D) Should the lot grade between the street line and the required setback be ten feet or more, either
above or below the curb level, in the R District, a garage for the storage of two passenger automobiles
may be located in the front yard subject to minimum front yard setbacks or existing setbacks
established by existing buildings.
(E) Unless otherwise herein specified, no accessory building shall exceed the height of the principal
building except when on a farm and related to a farming operation.
Zoning Regulations 58
(F) The total square footage of all accessory buildings in R District shall not exceed the square
footage of the main floor of principal use, and in no case shall the square footage of all the buildings
on the lot exceed 30% of the land area.
(G) All accessory buildings shall be constructed of materials such that the outward appearance is
the same as the residence or at least the same as the outward appearance of other residences in the
immediate area.
(Prior Code, § 903.07)
DISTRICTS
§ 153.030 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-1)
(A) Purpose. The major purpose of this district is to allow the continuation of existing residential
development and in filling of existing lots in the residential areas of the city where central sewer and
water systems will be extended.
(B) Permitted uses.
(1) One-family detached dwellings;
(2) Public parks, playgrounds and recreational uses of a noncommercial nature;
(3) The renting of rooms by a resident family for lodging purposes only, and for not more than
two roomers in a one-family dwelling;
(4) Customary home occupations provided that the occupation is carried on in the principal
building:
(a) Not more than 25% of the gross floor area of the residence is used for this purpose;
(b) Only articles made or originating on the premises shall be sold on the premises unless
the articles are incidental to a permitted commercial service;
(c) No articles for sale shall be displayed so as to be visible from the street;
(d) No person is employed other than a member of the household residing on the premises;
and
59 Cokato - Land Usage
(e) No mechanical or electrical equipment is used if the operation of the equipment
interferes unreasonably with the desired quiet residential environment of the neighborhood.
(5) Customary accessory uses incidental to the foregoing principal uses when located on the
same lot with the building to which it is accessory but not including any business or industrial
use.
(C) Conditional Uses.
(1) Home occupations according to the following conditions:
(a) No evidence of the occupation other than gardening is visible from the street;
(b) No sale of products produced off the site; and
(c) No employed assistant.
(2) Public and semi-public buildings.
(3) Churches and or other worship facilities according to the following conditions:
(a) Located with direct access to a county road or trunk highway;
(b) Parking areas set back a minimum of 50 feet from all property lines;
(c) No more than 50 percent of the site to be covered with impervious surface and the
remainder to be landscaped or left in a natural state;
(d) Exterior lighting must be designed and installed so that the globe is recessed and
enclosed on all sides except the bottom and no direct light is cast on adjacent residential
property or rights-of-way;
(e) Roof top or outside mechanical equipment must be screened from view from adjacent
properties and rights-of-way;
(f) Any exterior storage must be screened from view with an opaque material architecturally
compatible with the building;
(g) No exterior bells or loudspeakers;
(h) Any living quarters associated with the facility shall meet the requirements of this
ordinance for the specific residential use(s) proposed; and
(i) The city council may require compliance with any other conditions, restrictions or
limitations it deems to be reasonably necessary to protect the residential character of the
neighborhood.
Zoning Regulations 60
(D) Building requirements.
(1) Minimum floor area: Residential: 1,000 square feet;
(2) Building height limit: Residential:
(a) Residential: two and one-half stories but less than 35 feet;
(b) Churches or other places of worship: 40 feet.
(3) Maximum floor area ratio:
(a) Residential: 0.3;
(b) All other: 0.4.
(E) Minimum lot requirements.
(1) Area:
(a) Residential: 13,500 square feet;
(b) Churches or other places of worship: 10 acres.
(2) Width: 90 feet measured at front setback line.
(3) Depth: 120 feet.
(F) Setbacks
(1) Front yard:
(a) Residential: 30 feet or average depth of front yard.
(b) Churches or other places of worship: 50 feet.
(2) Rear yard:
(a) Residential: 35 feet except where the yard abuts permanent open space in which case
20 feet may be allowed.
(b) Churches or other places of worship: 50 feet.
(3) Side yard:
61 Cokato - Land Usage
(a) Residential: ten feet each side except that corner side yards shall be 25 feet adjacent to
the street and except that interior side yards may be six feet on the side where there is an
attached garage.
(b) Public and semi-public buildings: 25 feet.
(c) Churches or other places of worship: 50 feet.
§ 153.031 ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-2)
(A) Purpose. The major purpose of this district is to allow for medium density and multi-family
residential development in areas served by central sewer.
(B) Permitted uses; one- and two-family detached dwellings.
(1) Municipal buildings, public parks, playgrounds, recreational uses of a noncommercial
nature;
(2) Churches and public and parochial schools;
(3) Hospitals, clinics, mortuaries, sanitariums, nursing homes, rest homes, old age homes and
rooming and boarding houses;
(4) The renting of rooms by a resident family for lodging purposes only, and for no more than
two roomers in a one-family dwelling;
(5) Customary home occupations provided that:
(a) The occupation is carried on in the principal building;
(b) Not more than 25% of the gross floor area of the residence is used for this purpose;
(c) Only articles made or originating on the premises shall be sold on the premises unless
the articles are incidental to a permitted commercial service;
(d) No articles for sale shall be displayed so as to be visible from any street;
(e) No person is employed other than a member of the household residing on the premises;
and
(f) No mechanical or electrical equipment is used if the operation of the equipment
interferes unreasonable with the desired quiet residential environment of the neighborhood.
(6) Customary accessory uses incidental to the foregoing principal uses when located on the
same lot with the building to which it is accessory but not including any business or industrial
use.
Zoning Regulations 62
(C) Conditional Uses.
(1) Multi-family dwellings;
(2) Zero lot line housing as regulated by § 153.083; and
(3) Earth sheltered dwellings.
(D) Building requirements.
(1) Minimum floor area:
(a) One-family dwelling; 900 square feet;
(b) Two-family dwelling unit: 750 square feet per unit; and
(c) Multiple-family dwelling units:
1. Efficiency: 350 square feet per dwelling unit;
2. One bedroom: 700 square feet per dwelling unit;
3. Two bedroom: 900 square feet per dwelling unit; and
4. Three bedroom: 1,100 square feet per dwelling unit.
(2) Height limit: residential two and one-half stories but less than 35 feet;
(3) Maximum floor area ratio:
(a) One- and two-family dwellings: 0.30;
(b) Three to eight family dwellings: 0.40; and
(c) All other uses: 0.4.
(E) Minimum lot requirements.
(1) Area:
(a) One-family dwelling: 10,800 square feet;
(b) Two-family dwelling: 14,000 square feet;
(c) Multiple-family dwelling units:
63 Cokato - Land Usage
1. One bedroom: 5,000 square feet per dwelling unit;
2. Two, three and four bedroom: 5,500 square feet per dwelling unit;
3. Width: One- and two-family dwelling: 80 feet;
4. Three- and four-family dwelling: 120 feet;
5. Five- to eight-family dwelling: 160 feet;
6. Depth: 135 feet;
7. Front yard: 30 feet or average depth of front yard;
8. Rear yard: 35 feet except where the yard abuts permanent open space in which
case 20 feet may be allowed; and
(2) Side yard:
(a) One- and two-family dwellings: ten feet each side except that corner side yards shall
be 25 feet adjacent to street;
(b) Multiple-family dwellings: 15 feet each side plus five feet for each additional story
over ground floor level;
(c) Corner side yards shall be 25 feet adjacent to street; and
(d) Public and semi-public buildings: 25 feet.
(Prior Code, § 903.04)
§ 153.032 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-3)
This district shall provide the older platted areas of Cokato with smaller lot sizes to redevelop at
acceptable standards for garage and home expansion construction.
(A) Permitted uses.
(1) One-family detached dwellings;
(2) Public parks, playgrounds and recreational uses of a noncommercial nature;
(3) The renting of rooms by a resident family for lodging purposes only, and for not more than
two roomers in a one-family dwelling;
Zoning Regulations 64
(4) Customary home occupations, provided that the occupation is carried on in the principal
building. Not more than 25% of the gross floor area of the residence is used for this purpose;
only articles made or originating on the premises shall be sold on the premises unless the articles
are incidental to a permitted commercial service. No articles for sale shall be displayed so as to
be visible from any street. No person is employed other than a member of the household residing
on the premises. No mechanical or electrical equipment is used if the operation of the equipment
interferes unreasonably with the desired quiet residential environment of the neighborhood;
(5) Customary accessory uses incidental to the foregoing principal uses when located on the
same lot with the building to which it is accessory but not including any business or industrial
use;
(6) Churches, public and parochial schools and public buildings; and
(7) Hospitals, clinics, mortuaries, sanitariums, nursing homes, rest homes, old age homes and
rooming and boarding houses.
(B) (1) Conditional Uses. Home occupations which may be limited to include the following
conditions:
(a) No evidence of the occupation other than gardening is visible from the street;
(b) No sale or products produced off the site; and
(c) No employed assistant.
(2) Duplexes, triplexes and four-plexes.
(a) Zero lot line housing as regulated by § 153.083; and
(b) Earth sheltered dwellings.
(D) Building requirements.
(1) Minimum floor area: Residential: 1,000 square feet;
(2) Height limit: Residential: Two and one-half stories but less than 35 feet; and
(3) Maximum floor area ratio:
(a) Residential: 0.3; and
(b) All other: 0.4.
65 Cokato - Land Usage
(E) Minimum lot requirements.
(1) Area: 6,000 square feet;
(2) Width: 50 feet measured at front setback line;
(3) Depth: 60 feet;
(4) Front yard: 30 feet or average depth of front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth
of not less than 25 feet, except that in a block where two or more residences have been erected
facing the same street, the setback for remaining lots in that block fronting on the same street
shall be determined by the average setback of existing buildings;
(5) Rear yard: 20 feet; and
(6) Side yard:
(a) Residential: there shall be a five foot side yard on each side of the principal
structure; and
(b) Public and semi-public buildings: 25 feet.
(Prior Code, § 903.04)
§ 153.033 CENTRAL BUSINESS (C-1)
(A) Purpose. The general business district is intended to provide a district that will allow general
retail and commercial uses to serve the existing population.
(B) Permitted uses.
(1) Retail stores which usually do not require on-site vehicular pick-up, including but not
limited to such uses as food, meat, drugs, clothing, art, jewelry, dry goods and notions, home
supplies, paint and wallpaper stores and shops;
(2) Professional and business offices, office buildings, offices for personal services and the
like;
(3) Restaurants, lunch counters and taverns;
(4) Hotels;
(5) Newspaper and job printing establishments;
Zoning Regulations 66
(6) Public buildings;
(7) Private clubs;
(8) Theaters, assembly halls and commercial recreation establishments;
(9) Public and private parking lots;
(10) Telephone exchange and public utility structures;
(11) Wholesale business and storage incident to a permitted use;
(12) Service establishments such as barber and beauty shops, laundry, dry-cleaning or dying,
tailoring, dressmaking, shoe making and repair shops when those shops are primarily service or
services and sales shops, and not manufacturing plants;
(13) Banks, financial and lending institutions; and
(14) Accessory uses incidental to the foregoing principal uses.
(C) Conditional Uses.
(1) Automobile service stations; and
(2) Multiple-family dwelling.
(D) Building requirements.
(1) Minimum floor area; none, other than multiple-family dwellings as follows:
(a) One bedroom unit: 700 square feet per dwelling unit;
(b) Two bedroom unit: 900 square feet per dwelling unit; and
(c) Three bedroom unit: 1,100 square feet per dwelling unit.
(2) Building height limit: all uses: three stories but less than 35 feet.
(3) Maximum floor area ratio:
(a) Residential: 0.5; and
(b) Other: none.
67 Cokato - Land Usage
(E) Minimum lot requirements.
(1) Area. 1,200 square feet 1,800 square feet 2,500 square feet
Additional details:
Multiple-family dwellings:
(a) Efficiency unit: 1,200 square feet;
(b) One bedroom unit: 1,800 square feet;
(c) Two, three and four bedroom unit: 2,500 square feet; and
(d) Other uses: 1,500 square feet.
(2) Width.
(a) Multiple-family dwellings: 50 feet; and
(b) Other uses: 15 feet.
(3) Depth.
(a) Multiple-family dwellings: 100 feet; and
(b) Other uses: 60 feet.
(4) Front yard.
(a) Multiple-family dwellings: 15 feet; and
(b) Other uses: none.
(5) Rear yard.
(a) Multiple-family dwellings: 25 feet; and
(b) Other uses: 15 feet in.
(6) Side yards. Multiple-family.
(Prior Code, § 903.04)
§ 153.034 HIGHWAY BUSINESS (C-2)
(A) Purpose. A C-2 District is established to accommodate those types of businesses that are
oriented to the traveling public and which benefit from access and visibility to the Highway.
Zoning Regulations 68
(B) Permitted uses.
(1) Commercial uses including but not limited to: general retail sales and services; repair and
maintenance services; professional services; eating and drinking establishments; automotive
repair and/or sales; clubs or lodges; churches and worship facilities; farm implement sales and
shops; uses that are non-industrial in nature.
(2)Accessory uses incidental to the foregoing principal uses;
(4) Storage Facilities.
(5) Alternative Learning Center (ALC) at 290 East Cokato Street.
(C) Conditional Uses
(1) Residential Uses. Residential uses shall be limited and may be permitted only where they
do not create conflicts present or future, between the non-residential and residential use and
activities, both on and off the subject property. Residential uses shall be governed by all
applicable standards of the R-3 Zoning District, Building and Fire Codes.
(2) Limited Production and Processing Business. Limited production and processing businesses
may be permitted provided they produce minimal off-site impacts.
(3) Commercial Kennels.
(4) Industrial Uses.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review each request for a Conditional Use Permit and
make a determination based on the type of use and desired location whether or not the proposed use
will unreasonably distract from or have a negative impact on the character of the proposed
neighborhood.
(D) Building requirements.
(1) Minimum floor area: none;
(2) Height limit: two stories but less than 30 feet; and
(3) Maximum floor area ratio: 1.0.
(E) Minimum lot requirements.
(1) Area: no requirement;
(2) Width: no requirement;
(3) Depth: no requirement;
69 Cokato - Land Usage
(4) Front yard: 30 feet;
(5) Rear yard: 15 feet; and
(6) Side yard: ten feet except that corner side yards shall be 15 feet adjacent to the street.
(Prior Code, § 903.04) (Am. Ord. 02-2009, passed 10-13-2009)
§ 153.035 INDUSTRY (I)
(A) Purpose. An Industrial District is intended to provide for industrial uses that may suitably be
located in areas of relatively close proximity to non-industrial development.
(B) Permitted uses. None.
(C) Conditional Uses.
(1) Industrial fabricating, processing or storage to be undertaken within completely enclosed
buildings;
(2) Wholesaling all commodities except live animals;
(3) Accessory uses incidental to and on the same zoning lot as the principal use;
(4) Farm implement sales and storage yards, auto sales and mobile home sales;
(5) Sewage treatment plants;
(6) Junk yards;
(7) Commercial Kennels;
(8) Telecommunication towers and facilities as regulated by Section 153.086 of the City Code;
and
(9) Other industry not listed above, provided the industry can conform to suitability standards.
(D) Prohibited uses.
(1) Distillation of bone, coal, tar, petroleum, grain or wood;
(2) Manufacturing or bulk storage of explosives;
(3) Fertilizer manufacturing, compost or storage processing of garbage, offal, dead animals,
refuse or rancid fats;
(4) Livestock feeding yards, slaughterhouses or processing plants;
(5) Manufacturing, refining or processing of chemicals;
Zoning Regulations 70
(6) Any industry that creates an excessive odor, noise or air environmental pollution problem;
and
(7) Any industry that creates a fire prevention service or hazard beyond the capabilities of city
and/or county government.
(E) Building requirements.
(1) Minimum floor area.
(a) Permitted use: none; and
(b) Conditional use permit: none.
(2) Height limit. Permitted use: two stories but less than 30 feet.
(3) Conditional use permit. None, except those that may be imposed by regulations of other
government units.
(4) Maximum floor area ratio.
(a) Permitted use: 1.0; and
(b) Conditional use permit: 0.5.
(F) Minimum lot requirements.
(1) Area: permitted use: no requirement. Conditional use permit: no requirement.
(2) Width: permitted use: no requirement. Conditional use permit: no requirement.
(3) Depth: permitted use: no requirement. Conditional use permit: no requirement.
(4) Front yard: permitted use: 30 feet. Conditional use permit: 30 feet.
(5) Rear yard: permitted use: 15 feet. Conditional use permit: 20 feet.
(6) Side yard: permitted use: ten feet except that corner side yards shall be 15 feet
adjacent to street. Conditional use permit: 20 feet each side: 30 feet where adjacent to a side
street.
(Prior Code, § 903.04)
§ 153.036 FLOOD PLAIN OVERLAY (F)
(A) Purpose. The Flood Plain Overlay District is created for the purpose of controlling the
71 Cokato - Land Usage
development of the flood plain areas of the City of Cokato to minimize potential losses of life and
property due to periodic flooding, and to prevent health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce
and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief and
impairment of the tax base. The regulations contained in this section are required and authorized by
M.S. Chapters 103F and 462, as it may be amended from time to time, and Minnesota Regulations
NR 85-92, whereby the legislature of the State of Minnesota has delegated the responsibility to local
government units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
(B) General provisions; adoption of flood insurance study. The Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
for the City of Cokato, dated August 19, 1985, developed by the Federal Insurance Administration,
is hereby adopted by reference and made part of this chapter. A copy of the most current version of
this map shall be kept on file with the City Administrator.
(C) Lands to which chapter applies. This subchapter shall apply to all lands designated as Flood
Hazard Areas (Zone A) within the jurisdiction of the City of Cokato as shown on the FIRM.
(D) Regulatory flood protection elevation. The regulatory flood protection elevation shall be an
elevation no lower than one foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood
elevation caused by encroachments on the flood plain that result from designation of a floodway.
(E) Interpretation. The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be determined by scaling distances
on the Zoning Map and Flood Hazard Boundary Maps. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact
location of the boundaries of a district, the Zoning Administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation based on elevations on the regional (100-year) flood profile and other available
technical data.
(F) Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be located,
extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this section and
other applicable regulations that apply to uses within the jurisdictions of this subchapter.
(G) Establishment of Flood Plain Overlay District (F); overlay concept. The Flood Plain Overlay
District (F) shall be applied to and superimposed upon any underlying district as indicated on the
Cokato Zoning Map. Where the provisions of the underlying district impose more restrictive, greater
or additional standards that those of the F District, the underlying district shall be controlling. Where
the provisions of the F District impose more restrictive, greater or additional standards than those
contained in the underlying district, the F District shall be controlling.
(H) Floodway and flood fringe areas. The City of Cokato shall determine whether any proposed
use of lands within the F District is considered floodway or flood fringe area. This determination
shall be made in accordance with the procedures established in division (L) below. If it is determined
that a proposed area lies in the floodway area, the provisions of division (I) below shall apply. If it
is determined that the proposed use lies in the flood fringe area, the provisions of division (J) below
shall apply.
(I) Floodway area; permitted uses. The following uses have a low flood damage potential and do
not obstruct flood flows. These uses shall be permitted within the floodway area as long as they are
not prohibited by any other ordinance and provided they do not require structures, fill or storage of
materials or equipment.
Zoning Regulations 72
(1) Agriculture uses such as general farming pasture, forestry, sod farming and wild crop
harvesting.
(2) Industrial: Commercial uses such as parking areas and airport landing strips.
(3) Private and public recreational uses;
(4) Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas; and
(5) All other uses are prohibited.
(J) Flood fringe area.
(1) Permitted uses. Any use permitted within a floodway area.
(2) Conditional uses.
(a) Residences (including mobile homes and manufactured homes), accessory buildings
and other structures constructed on fill so that the basement floor or first floor, if there is
no basement, is at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. The finished fill
elevation shall be no lower than one foot below the regulatory flood protection elevation
and shall extend at the elevation at least 15 feet beyond the limits of any structure or
building erected thereon. Fill shall be compacted and the slopes shall be protected by riprap
or vegetative covering. Residences constructed on fill shall be provided with vehicular
access no lower than two feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation.
(b) Placement of fill for any purpose not listed.
(c) Parking lots and storage yards for equipment, machinery or materials, except that
storage of materials that are subject to flotation, flammable, explosive or potentially
injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited in the F District except on areas filled
to the regulatory flood protection elevation in accordance with the filling requirement listed
in division (J)(2)(a) above.
(K) Other similar uses; conditional use procedure. Conditional uses shall be considered, evaluated
and approved only in accordance with the administrative procedural requirements for conditional
use permits as specified in division (L) and (M) below and the requirements of this section.
(L) Procedures for evaluating proposed conditional uses within the flood plain overlay district.
(1) Upon receipt of an application for a conditional use permit for a use within the flood plain
overlay district, the applicant shall be required to furnish such of the following information as
is deemed necessary by the Planning and Zoning Commission for the determination of the
regulatory flood protection elevation and whether the proposed use is within the floodway of
flood fringe areas.
73 Cokato - Land Usage
(a) A typical valley cross-section showing the channel of the stream, elevation of land area
adjoining each side of the channel, cross sectional areas to be occupied by the proposed
development and high water information.
(b) Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the ground; pertinent structure,
fill or storage elevation; size, location and spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing
structures on the site; location and elevations of streets; photographs showing existing land
uses and vegetation upstream and downstream and soil type.
(c) Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow line of the stream for at
least 500 feet in either direction from the proposed development.
(2) One copy of the above information shall be transmitted to a designated engineer or other
expert person or agency for technical assistance in determining whether the proposed use is in
the floodway or flood fringe and to determine the regulatory flood protection elevation.
Procedures consistent with Minnesota Regulations NR 86-87 shall be followed in this expert
evaluation. The designated engineer or expert shall:
(a) Estimate the peak discharge of the regional flood;
(b) Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based upon a hydraulic
analysis of the stream channel and over bank areas; and
(c) Compute the floodway necessary to convey the regional flood without increasing flood
stages more than one-half feet. An equal degree of encroachment on both sides of the stream
within the reach shall be assumed in computing floodway boundaries.
(3) Based upon the technical evaluation of the designated engineer or expert, the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall determine whether the proposed use is in the floodway or flood fringe
and the regulatory flood protection elevation at the site. Factors upon which the decision of the
Cokato City Council shall be based:
(a) The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by
encroachments;
(b) The danger that materials may be swept into other lands or downstream to the injury
of others;
(c) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to
prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions;
(d) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the
effect of the damage on the individual owner;
(e) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
Zoning Regulations 74
(f) The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location;
(g) The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use;
(h) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development
anticipated in the foreseeable future;
(i) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and flood plain
management program for the area;
(j) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency
vehicles;
(k) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood
waters expected at the site; and
(l) The other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this chapter.
(M) Conditions attached to conditional use permits. Upon consideration of the factors listed above
the purposes of this chapter, the city may attach those conditions to the granting of conditional use
permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter. The conditions may include, but
are not limited to, the following:
(1) Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities;
(2) Limitation on period use, occupancy and operation;
(3) Imposition of operational controls, sureties and deed restrictions;
(4) Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes, levees and other protective
measures;
(5) Flood-proofing measures, in accordance with the State Building Code. The applicant shall
submit a plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
flood-proofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and
associated flood factors for the particular area; and
(6) Erosion prevention measures, including sodding, sloping and rip-rapping requirements.
(N) Subdivisions. No land shall be subdivided which is held unsuitable by the city for reason of
flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment facilities. All lots within the flood
plain districts shall contain a building site at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. All
subdivisions shall have water and sewage disposal facilities that comply with the provisions of this
chapter and have road access both to the subdivision and to the individual building sites no lower
than two feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation.
75 Cokato - Land Usage
(O) Utilities, railroads, roads and bridges.
(1) Public utilities. All public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer and water
supply systems to be located in the flood plain shall be flood-proofed in accordance with the
State Building Code or elevated at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation.
(2) Public transportation facilities. Roads, railroad tracks and bridges within the flood plain
shall be designed to minimize increases in flood elevations.
(a) Bridges, culverts and approach fills shall comply with provisions of Minnesota
Regulations 6 MCAR § 1.5025.
(b) Roads, railroad tracks and bridges shall be elevated above the regulator protection
elevation if failure or interpretation of transportation services would endanger the public
health or safety.
(3) Individual sewage treatment systems. Individual sewage treatment and water supply
systems shall be designed and located so that they will not be damaged or contaminate surface
water if flooded.
(P) Conditional use permit.
(1) Conditional use permit required. A conditional use permit issued by the Zoning
Administrator shall be secured prior to the construction, addition or alteration of any building,
structure; prior to the use or change of use of a building structure or land; prior to the change or
extension of a nonconforming use and prior to the placement of fill or excavation of materials
within the flood plain.
(2) Application for conditional use permit. Application for a conditional use permit shall be
made to the Zoning Administrator and shall include plans drawn to scale showing where
applicable the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the lot; existing or proposed
structures, fill or storage of materials and the location of the foregoing in relation to the stream
channel.
(Q) State and federal permits. Prior to granting a conditional use permit or processing an application
for a variance, the Zoning Administrator shall determine that the applicant has obtained all necessary
state and federal permits.
(R) Certification of first floor elevations. The applicant shall submit certification by a registered
professional engineer, registered architect or registered land surveyor that the finished fill and
building elevations were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter. The
Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of these elevations for all new structures in the flood
plain districts.
(S)Variances. The Board of Adjustment and Appeals may authorize upon appeals, variances from the
provision of this chapter as long as they will not be contrary to the public interest, and if the spirit of this
chapter will be observed. Variances may only be granted where, due to special conditions, literal
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship. No variance
Zoning Regulations 76
shall have the effect of allowing in any district uses prohibited in that district, permit a lower degree
of flood protection that the regulatory flood protection elevation for the particular area or permit
standards lower than those required by state law.
(T) Amendments. All amendments to this chapter shall be submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of Natural Resources prior to adoption. Changes in the boundaries of the floodway
or flood fringe districts also require prior approval by the Federal Insurance Administration.
(U) Notification. The Zoning Administrator shall submit to the Commissioner of Natural Resources
or his or her authorized agent a copy of all application materials and hearing notices relating to this
chapter amendments, re-zonings, conditional use permits, variances and subdivisions located within
the FP district at least ten days prior to the hearing to consider these matters. In addition, copies of
all final decisions relating to these matters shall be forwarded to the Commissioner of Natural
Resources or his or her authorized agent within ten days of a decision.
(Prior Code, § 903.04)
§ 153.037 SHORELAND OVERLAY (S)
(A) Purpose. The uncontrolled use of shoreland areas affects the public health, safety and general
welfare by contributing to the pollution of public waters, causing overcrowding of surface waters
and impairing the local tax base. The legislature of the State of Minnesota has delegated
responsibility to the municipalities of the State of Minnesota M.S. Chapters 103F and 462, as it may
be amended from time to time, to regulate the subdivision, use and development of shorelands in
accordance with regulations (NR 82-84) developed by the Commissioner of Natural Resources. The
City of Cokato recognizes this responsibility and adopts the following requirements to satisfy this
mandate.
(B) Additional definitions. In addition to the definitions contained in § 153.006, the following
definitions shall also apply within the Shoreland Overlay District (S). In case of conflict between
these definitions, the most restrictive shall apply.
BOATHOUSE. A structure used solely for the storage of boats or boating equipment.
BUILDING LINE. That line measured across the width of the lot at the point where the
principal structure is placed in accordance with setback provisions.
CLEAR-CUTTING. The removal of an entire stand of trees.
DECK. An appurtenance to a structure attached directly to a structure that does not have walls
or a roof and is generally used for outdoor recreation activities.
LOT. A parcel of land designated by metes and bounds description, registered land survey,
auditor’s plat or other accepted means and separated from other parcels or portions by the
description
77 Cokato - Land Usage
for the purpose of sale, lease or separation thereof. For the purposes of these regulations, a LOT
shall be considered to be an individual building site, which shall be occupied by no more than
one principal structure equipped with sanitary facilities.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK. A mark delineating the highest water level that has been
maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape. The
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK is commonly that point where the natural vegetation
changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A type of development which may incorporate a variety
of land uses planned and developed as a unit. The PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT is
distinguished from the traditional subdivision process of development in that zoning standards
such as density, height limits and minimum lot sizes may be altered by negotiation and
agreement between the developer, the municipality and the Commissioner of Natural
Resources. CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT is considered to be a type of Planned Unit
Development and is subject to the same review criteria.
SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between a structure or sanitary facility and a
road, well, highway or property lines.
SHORELAND. Land located within the following distances from protected waters:
(a) One thousand feet from the ordinary high water mark of a lake, pond or flowage; and
(b) Three hundred feet from a river or stream, or the landward extent of a flood plain on
the rivers or streams, whichever is greater.
SUBDIVISION. Improved or unimproved land or lands which are divided for the purpose of
ready sale or lease, or divided successively within a five-year period for the purpose of sale or
lease, into three or more lots or parcels of less than five acres each, contiguous in area and which
are under common ownership or control.
SUBSTANDARD USE. Any use of shorelands existing prior to the date of enactment of this
subchapter which is permitted within the applicable zoning district but does not meet the
minimum lot area and length or water frontage, structure setbacks or other dimensional
standards of this chapter.
(C) Designation of types of land use.
(1) Shoreland management classification. The protected waters of the city have been classified
by the Commissioner of Natural Resources as follows:
(a) Brooks Lake (DNR I.D. #86-264p) recreational development;
(b) Sucker Creek Urban.
Zoning Regulations 78
(2) Purpose. The shorelands of the City of Cokato are hereby designated as a Shoreland
Overlay District (S). The purpose of the Shoreland Overlay District is to provide for the wise
utilization of shoreland areas in order to preserve the quality and natural character of these
protected waters of the city. The S district is shown on the zoning map.
(3) Permitted uses. All permitted uses allowed and regulated by the applicable zoning district
underlying this Shoreland Overlay District (S) as indicated on the official zoning map of the
city.
(4) Conditional uses.
(a) All conditional uses and applicable attached conditions allowed and regulated by the
applicable zoning district underlying this Shoreland Overlay District (S) as indicated on the
official zoning map of the city as required by § 153.018.
(b) Boathouses.
(c) Decks not meeting the setback requirements of this chapter.
(d) On-site sewage treatment systems.
(5) Nonconforming uses. Any uses of shorelands in existence prior to the date of enactment of
this subchapter which are permitted within the applicable zoning district, but do not meet the
minimum lot area, setbacks or other dimensional requirements of this chapter are
nonconforming uses. Nonconforming uses, including substandard sanitary facilities, shall be
allowed to continue. However, any structural alteration or addition to a nonconforming use
which will increase the substandard dimensions shall not be allowed.
(6) Prohibited uses. Any uses which are not permitted or conditional uses, as regulated by the
applicable zoning district underlying this Shoreland Overlay District as indicated on the official
zoning map of the city, are prohibited.
(D) Zoning provisions.
(1) Dimensional requirements. The following standards shall apply to all shorelands of the
protected waters listed in this section within the city. Where the requirements of the underlying
zoning district as shown on the official Zoning Map are more restrictive than those set forth
herein, then the more restrictive standards shall apply:
Natural Environment Water Lot Area (Square Feet)
Waterfront lots 40,000
Other lots 20,000
Water frontage and lot width at building line 125
79 Cokato - Land Usage
Natural Environment Water Lot Area (Square Feet)
Structure setback from ordinary high water mark 150
Structure setback from roads and highways:
Federal, state or county 50
Municipal or private 20
Structure height limitation 35
Percentage (%)
Maximum lot area covered by impervious
surfaces
30
(2) Substandard lots. Lots of record in the office of the County Recorder prior to the date of
enactment of this chapter which do not meet the requirements of division (D)(1) above may be
allowed as building sites provided:
(a) The use is permitted in the zoning district;
(b) The lot is in separate ownership from abutting lands; and
(c) All other dimensional requirements of this section are complied with insofar as
practical.
(3) Roads and parking areas. Roads and parking areas shall be located to retard the runoff of
surface waters and nutrients in accordance with the following criteria:
(a) Where feasible and practical, all roads and parking areas shall meet the setback
requirements established for structures in division (D)(1) above;
(b) In no instance shall these impervious surfaces be placed less than 50 feet from the
ordinary high water mark; and
(c) Natural vegetation or other natural materials shall be used to screen parking areas when
viewed from the water.
(E) Elevation of lowest floor. The elevation to which the lowest floor, including basements, shall
be placed at a level at least three feet above the highest known water level. In those instances where
sufficient data on unknown high water levels are not available, the ordinary high water mark shall
be used.
(F) Exception to structure setback requirements. Setback requirements from the ordinary high
water mark shall not apply to boathouses, piers and docks.
Zoning Regulations 80
(1) Location of piers and docks shall be controlled by state and local regulations. Boathouses
may be allowed as a conditional use provided they are not used for habitation and do not contain
sanitary facilities.
(2) On undeveloped shoreland lots that have two adjacent lots with existing principal structures
on both the adjacent lots, any new residential structure may be set back the average setback of
the adjacent structures from the ordinary high water mark provided all other provisions of the
Shoreland Overlay District are complied with.
(3) On residential structures that existed prior to the effective date of this chapter, decks may
be constructed as a conditional use that do not meet the setback requirements of this section,
provided that:
(a) Lakeward encroachment is the only practicable direction to orient the deck;
(b) No deck shall contain a roof, wall or be used for habitation; and
(c) That no deck shall encroach more than 15% of the existing structure setback distance
towards the ordinary high water mark. For example, for a house that is now 100 feet from
a lake, a deck could not extend more than 15 feet more towards the lake.
(4) Conditions placed upon such a conditional use may include coloration of the deck (earth
tone colors preferred), height of rails and provisions to screen the deck with vegetation and
shrubs.
(Prior Code, § 903.04; Res. 92-5, passed 6-8-1992)
§ 153.038 SHORELAND ALTERATIONS
(A) The following standards shall apply to all shorelands of the protected waters listed in this section
within the City of Cokato. Where the requirements of the underlying zoning district as shown on the
official Zoning Map are more restrictive than those set forth herein, then the more restrictive
standards shall apply:
(1) The removal of natural vegetation shall be restricted to prevent erosion into protected
waters, to consume nutrients in the soil and to preserve shoreland aesthetics; and
(2) Removal of natural vegetation in the Shoreland Overlay District shall be subject to the
following provisions:
(a) Selective removal of natural vegetation is allowed, provided that sufficient vegetative
cover remains to screen cars, dwellings and other structures when viewed from the water;
(b) Clear-cutting of natural vegetation is prohibited;
(c) Natural vegetation shall be restored insofar as feasible after any construction project is
completed to retard surface runoff and soil erosion;
81 Cokato - Land Usage
(B) The provisions of this section shall not apply to permitted uses which normally require the
removal of natural vegetation; and
(C) Grading and filling in shoreland areas or any alteration of the natural topography where the
slope of the land is toward a protected water or a watercourse leading to a protected water must be
authorized by a grading and filling permit. The grading and filling permit may be granted by the
Zoning Administrator subject to the conditions that:
(1) The smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for as short a time as feasible;
(2) Temporary ground cover, such as mulch, is used and permanent ground cover, such as sod,
is established;
(3) Methods to prevent erosion and trap sediment are employed; and
(4) Fill is stabilized to accepted engineering standards.
(Prior Code, § 903.04)
ZONING REGULATIONS
§ 153.050 SEWAGE TREATMENT
Any premises intended for human occupancy shall be provided with an adequate method of sewage
treatment to be maintained in accordance with acceptable practices. Public or municipal collection
and treatment facilities shall be used where available and where feasible. Use of a private on-site
sewage treatment system shall require a conditional use permit, which shall require that all standards
listed in the standards of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA), AIndividual Sewage
Treatment Systems Standards and Appendices (6 MCAR § 4.8040), be met. These standards are
hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. All existing sewage treatment systems
inconsistent with the standards referenced above shall be brought into conformance or discontinued
within five years from the date of enactment of this chapter. Any nonconforming sanitary facility
found to be a public nuisance shall be brought into conformity or discontinued within 30 days after
receiving written notice from the Zoning Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 903.04)
§ 153.051 WATER SUPPLY
(A) Public or private supplies of water for domestic purposes shall conform to Minnesota
Department of Health standards for water quality.
(B) Public or municipal water supplies shall be used where available and where feasible.
Zoning Regulations 82
(C) Private wells shall be located in a manner to be free from flooding and the top shall be so
constructed and located as to be above all possible sources of pollution.
(D) Wells already existing in areas subject to flooding shall be flood-proofed.
(Prior Code, § 903.04)
§ 153.052 PLANNING REGULATIONS
(A) Planning regulations. No land shall be subdivided which is held unsuitable by the city for the
proposed use because of flooding, inadequate drainage, soil and rock formations with severe erosion
potential, unfavorable topography, inadequate water supply or sewage treatment capabilities, or any
other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety or welfare of future residents of the proposed
subdivision or of the community.
(B) Planned Unit Development (PUD). Altered zoning standards may be allowed as exceptions to
this chapter for PUDs, provided preliminary plans are approved by the Commissioner of Natural
Resources prior to their approval by the city, and further provided:
(1) Central sewage facilities shall be installed which meet applicable standards of the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency or the PUD is connected to a municipal sanitary sewer;
and
(2) Open space is preserved through the use of restrictive deed covenants, the following factors
are carefully evaluated to ensure the increased density of development is consistent with the
resource limitations of the protected water:
(a) Suitability of the site for the proposed use;
(b) Physical and aesthetic impact of increased density;
(c) Level of current development;
(d Amount and ownership of undeveloped shoreland;
(e) Levels and types of water surface use and public accesses; and
(f) Possible effects on over-all public use.
(C) Regulations. Any commercial, recreational, community or religious facility allowed as part of
the planned unit development shall conform to all applicable federal and state regulations including,
but not limited to the following:
(a) Licensing provisions or procedures;
(b) Waste disposal regulations;
83 Cokato - Land Usage
(c) Water supply regulations;
(d) Building codes;
(e) Safety regulations;
(f) Regulations concerning the appropriation and use of protected waters as defined in
M.S. Chapter 103G, as it may be amended from time to time; and
(g) Applicable regulations of the Minnesota Environmental Quality Board.
(D) Final plan. The final plan for a planned unit development shall not be modified, amended,
repealed or otherwise altered unless approved in writing by the developer, the municipality and the
Commissioner. There are centralized shoreline recreation facilities such as beaches, docks and boat
launching facilities.
(Prior Code, § 903.04)
§ 153.053 NOTIFICATION PROCEDURES
A copy of the notice of a public hearing to consider a variance, inconsistent plan, ordinance or
amendment, conditional use, re-zoning in the Shoreland Overlay District shall be sent to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources such that the notice is received by the Commissioner at least
ten days prior to the hearings. A copy of all amendments to this subchapter, all plats and final
decisions granting variances or conditional uses within the Shoreland Overlay District shall be sent
to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten days of the amendment or final action.
(Prior Code, § 903.04)
SPECIAL REGULATIONS
§ 153.065 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
(A) Minimum number of parking spaces required. None required in C-1 except as in below:
(1) One-, two- and multiple-family dwellings: two per dwelling unit;
(2) Churches, auditoriums, mortuaries and other similar places of assembly: one per every four
seats;
(3) Schools: elementary and junior high: one per classroom plus one additional for every 50
students or fraction thereof;
Zoning Regulations 84
(4) Schools: senior high: one per classroom plus one additional for every ten students;
(5) Hospitals: one per every three beds; and
(6) Sanitariums, convalescent homes, rest homes and nursing homes: one per every six beds.
(B) Retail commerce other than C-1.
(1) Restaurant: one per every three seats; and
(2) Other retail: one per every 400 square feet of retail floor space, but in no case less than 2.5
(gross parking area) to 1.0 gross building floor area).
(C) Service commerce other than C-1.
(1) Motels: one per unit;
(2) Bowling alley: five per lane;
(3) Theaters and other places of entertainment: one per every six seats;
(4) Personal and professional offices: one per every 1,500 square feet of gross floor area;
(5) Other service business: one per every 400 square feet of gross floor area;
(6) Industrial including wholesale: one per every two persons of maximum employment during
any work period;
(7) Minimum size of parking spaces: 400 square feet of standing and maneuvering space; and
(8) Fractional spaces over one-half count as one space.
(D) Location of parking spaces.
(1) Spaces for one- and two-family dwellings: on the same lot as the dwelling served;
(2) Spaces for multiple-family dwellings: on the same lot as the dwelling served or within 200
feet of the main entrance to the dwelling;
(3) Spaces for commercial uses not in the C-1 Districts or for public and semi-public uses:
within 300 feet of the main entrance of the building served;
(4) Spaces for industrial uses: within 400 feet of the main entrance of the building served; and
(5) No off-street parking space to be located within 15 feet of any street right-of-way.
85 Cokato - Land Usage
(E) Surfacing and drainage. Off-street parking areas and access ways shall be surfaced with a
durable material to control dust and shall be graded so as to dispose of all surface water per review
by the City Engineer.
(F) Screening. All open off-street parking areas having more than six parking spaces shall be
effectively screened by a wall, fence of acceptable design, or a compact hedge along all sides which
adjoin or are directly across a street or alley from a property in a residential, public or semi-public
(school, church, hospital, park and the like) use.
(Prior Code, § 903.05)
§ 153.066 OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING REQUIREMENTS
(A) Minimum number of off-street loading spaces required. An adequate number of off-street
loading spaces shall be provided for all structures that require the receipt or distribution of materials
or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles, so as to assure unrestricted movement of pedestrians
and motor vehicles throughout the active areas of Cokato.
(B) Minimum size of off-street loading berths.
(1) Width: ten feet;
(2) Length: 40 feet; and
(3) Vertical clearance: 14 feet.
(C) Location of off-street loading berth. No closer than 40 feet from the intersection of two street
rights-of-way.
(D) Access to off-street loading berths. Each berth shall be designed with appropriate means of
access to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movement.
(E) Surfacing and drainage. All loading berths and access ways shall be surfaced with a durable
material to control dust and shall be graded so as to dispose of all surface water.
(Prior Code, § 903.05)
§ 153.067 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL SCREENING
(A) Where any commercial or industrial use is adjacent to property zoned for residential use, that
commerce or industry shall provide screening along the boundary of the residential property where
outdoor storage or off-street parking or loading areas are located across the street from the residential
property.
Zoning Regulations 86
(B) The screening required in this section shall consist of a solid fence or wall not less than six feet
high, but shall not extend within 30 feet of any street or alley right-of-way. The screening shall be
placed along property lines, or in the case of screening along a street 30 feet from the street
right-of-way with landscaping between the screening and the pavement a louvered fence shall be
considered “solid” if it blocks direct vision.
(Prior Code, § 903.05)
§ 153.068 SIGNS
(A) No proposed sign which has a gross surface area of more than 32 square feet or which exceeds
a height of 12 feet above ground level shall be erected until the sign has been reviewed by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the City Council.
(B) On Highway 12 only, sign dimensions of up to 128 square feet with (two to four panels) and a
height of up to 22 feet will be authorized as a permitted use with a designated permit as approved
by the City Council.
(C) Signs in residential districts shall be regulated as follows:
(1) Permitted signs.
(a) One identification sign for each one-or two-family dwellings units, provided the sign
does not exceed two square feet in area;
(b) One identification sign for each multiple-family dwelling, provided the sign does not
exceed five square feet in area;
(c) One home occupation sign for each dwelling, provided the sign is free-standing and
does not exceed an area of two and one-half square feet and a height of five feet; and
(d) Two directional signs for each church, school and other public facility, provided the
signs are free standing, do not exceed an area of five square feet and a height of seven feet.
(2) Nonresidential signs. Signs in all non-residential zoning districts shall be permitted subject
to the provisions of division (A) above and as follows. The following signs shall be prohibited:
(a) Signs, that by reason of position, shape or color, would interfere with the proper
functioning of a traffic sign or signal;
(b) Signs that resemble any official marker erected by a governmental agency, or that
display the words Stop or Danger;
87 Cokato - Land Usage
(c) Flashing signs;
(d) Sign structures that obstruct any window, door, fire escape, stairway or opening
intended to provide light, air, ingress or egress for any building or structure;
(e) Banners and stringers except for temporary use not to exceed four weeks at grand
openings, holidays and similar occasions. Grand openings shall include an initial promotion
following a change in management;
(f) Temporary signs or posters of a miscellaneous character that are tacked, posted or
otherwise affixed to the walls of buildings (theaters excepted) or on trees, fences, poles or
other structures not considered to be bona fide sign structures;
(g) Signs painted on the walls of buildings or other structures considered to be bona fide
sign structures. Signs painted on windows or doors are excepted;
(h) Signs placed upon the roofs of buildings; and
(I) Billboards.
(Prior Code, § 903.05)
§ 153.069 MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOME COURTS
The location of manufactured homes and the design and maintenance of manufactured home courts
in Cokato shall be regulated as follows:
(A) Except for manufactured homes in an approved manufactured home parks as regulated by this
section, all dwelling units in the City of Cokato manufactured or site built shall:
(1) Be placed on a permanent masonry or treated wood foundation which complies with the
Uniform Building Code and which is solid for the complete circumferences of the house;
(2) Be at least 22 feet at its narrowest point;
(3) Have conventional exterior dwelling type material lapping the siding by a minimum of one
inch; and
(4) Have a pitched roof with shingles or tile and eaves of not less than 12 inches unless an
approved earth sheltered home.
(B) Comply with all zoning regulations for the zone in which they are located;
(C) All manufactured houses not meeting these requirements shall be permitted only in
manufactured home parks;
Zoning Regulations 88
(D) Manufactured homes that vary from these requirements may be permitted in residential zones
when authorized by a conditional use permit. Before granting the conditional use permit, the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council must find as a fact that the value of the
adjacent property will not be diminished by the placement of the manufactured house. The
conditional use permit shall state any conditions that may be set by the Council in granting of the
permit;
(E) This section shall not be applicable to manufactured homes placed in a manufactured home
park. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the regulation of uses of property by means of restrictive
covenants that are valid except for this subchapter;
(F) In cases where a manufactured home which does not meet the requirements of this section and
is not located in a duly permitted manufactured home park and was so located before April 9, 1979,
the manufactured home shall be allowed to remain in its nonconforming location only until the
expiration date of the temporary permit by the city or until the manufactured home has been removed
from the location where it is situated;
(G) The manufactured home park shall be located on a well-drained area, and the premises shall be
properly graded so as to prevent the accumulation of storm or other waters. There shall be a green
belt 25 feet in width of plantings around the periphery of the manufactured home park that adjoins
any residential zones, to effectively screen the interior of the manufactured home park. Where the
manufactured home park boundary is adjacent to city, state or county road, setback of homes shall
conform to that of residential houses;
(H) All manufactured home parks shall have rights-of-way not less than 44 feet in width. The
right-of-way shall be hard-surfaced for a width of at least 32 feet (there shall be no parking on the
hard surface), adequately drained and in good repairs throughout. All roads and right-of-ways within
a manufactured home park shall be privately owned, maintained, traffic and speed regulated, lighted,
laid out and drained in accordance with safety and accepted engineering practices. Each unit shall
abut on and have access to a street which shall be at least 32 feet wide between gutters. All streets
shall have a concrete curb and gutter. All water mains, hydrants, sanitary sewers and storm sewers
within a manufactured home park shall be privately owned and maintained as prescribed by the City
Utility Department;
(I) The minimum area of a manufactured home lot shall be 5,000 square feet. The parking of more
than one manufactured home on any single home lot shall not be permitted. All manufactured home
lots shall be a minimum of 50 feet in width and 100 feet in length. All manufactured home lots shall
have at least 40 feet of frontage on a street. The maximum width manufactured home to be allowed
on a 50-foot width lot shall be 18 feet; for manufactured homes in excess of eight feet in width, the
minimum width of the lot shall be three times the width of the manufactured home. The City Council,
in its discretion, may waive width, length and frontage requirements providing a satisfactory
alternative plan is presented which meets the requirement of 5,000 square feet per lot:
(1) Each manufactured home lot shall have a manufactured stand of at least four inches of
compacted gravel or aggregate of adequate size on which the home shall be parked;
89 Cokato - Land Usage
(2) Each lot shall have a concrete slab or bituminous surface off-street parking space for two
automobiles. No off-street parking shall be closer than 15 feet to the nearest adjacent home. A
compacted gravel surface may be used if a three-foot concrete apron is provided at the curb and
gutter;
(3) Each lot shall have a concrete patio adjacent to the main manufactured home door of not
less than 150 square feet in area and shall have a minimum thickness of four inches;
(4) Each lot shall have a concrete sidewalk not less than 24 inches in width and not less than
three inches in thickness connecting street to patio;
(5) Each lot shall have at least one shade tree of maple, ash or birch with a minimum diameter
of one and one-half inches at time of planting;
(6) Each two lots shall be provided with a metal building for storage purposes, such buildings
to contain no less than 40 square feet for each home;
(7) Each home shall be skirted with a uniform type of material approved by the Building
Inspector. The skirting shall be installed within ten days from the date of installation of the
home;
(8) No item shall be stored underneath a home;
(9) No more than two motor vehicles may be stored on a lot for a period of more than 48 hours;
(10) No vehicle without a current license shall be allowed within the park;
(11) No vehicle shall be dismantled nor shall mechanical work except of a very minor repair
nature be done on any vehicle on a manufactured home lot; nor shall any automotive vehicle that
is not in an operable condition be parked, stored or kept on the manufactured home lot or in a
manufactured home park, except a vehicle that became inoperable when it was in the
manufactured home park, and then it shall not be parked in that condition for a period of more
than seven days;
(12) No trucks over 10,000 pounds gross weight shall be parked on any manufactured home lot;
and
(13) All manufactured or mobile home units shall include anchors and tie-down devices. The
devices shall include a cast in place concrete foundation or runway, screw augers, arrowhead
anchors or other approved devices providing for stability of the housing units. Existing housing
units without the devices shall comply no later than March 31, 2001. Anchors and tie-downs shall
be placed at least at each corner of the manufactured or mobile home stand to be in compliance
with M.S. § 327.33, as it may be amended from time to time. Each anchor shall sustain a minimum
tensile strength of 3,150 pounds with a 50% overload (4,725) or as approved under the current
Minnesota Uniform Manufactured Home Code, whichever is more restrictive.
Zoning Regulations 90
(J) Travel trailers are not permitted within a manufactured home park;
(K) A manufactured home park shall contain not less than 40 manufactured home lots. The
minimum size of a park shall be not less than eight acres and a maximum number of lots shall not
exceed five per gross acre. No manufactured home park shall exceed 100 units. All manufactured
home parks shall have at least 10% of the total home lot area developed for recreational use, to be
developed and maintained at the owner’s expense. All manufactured home lots shall be sodded with
grass before the lot is occupied. Unoccupied areas of the manufactured home park shall be kept
mowed;
(L) All utilities, including water, sewer, gas, electricity, telephone and television cables shall be
underground. There shall be no overhead wires or supporting poles except those for street or other
lighting purposes;
(M) Each manufactured home park shall have an adequate supply of safe, sanitary quality water to
serve the entire park. All sewage shall be discharged into a sewage disposal system. Installation of
the water and sewage system shall meet approval of the Minnesota State Board of Health and City
Council;
(N) No boats, boat trailers or other vehicles other than personal automobiles of the occupant shall
be parked on manufactured home lots and there shall be provided a separate area upon which these
boats or other vehicles shall be stored. This area shall be located away from the public road and shall
be densely screened by landscaping;
(O) It shall be the responsibility of the manufactured home park owner to see that good
housekeeping and living conditions are maintained in the manufactured home park at all times. No
unused building materials, debris or rubbish shall be allowed to accumulate. No outside storage shall
be permitted or oil drums or trailer equipment unless it be effectively screened or concealed;
(P) No building permit shall be issued for a park until four copies of the plan drawn to scale are
submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the Council. The plans shall
include the following:
(1) Location and size showing boundaries of park and location of abutting streets and property;
(2) Location and size of all home lots, recreation areas, dead storage space, roadways and all
setbacks;
(3) Road construction plans and specifications;
(4) Sewage disposal, water supply, electrical service, gas service, TV cable and telephone;
(5) Storm water drainage plans;
(6) Detailed landscaping plans and specifications;
(7) Location and size of service buildings and all structures;
91 Cokato - Land Usage
(8) Method of disposing of garbage and refuse;
(9) Plan of lighting services for the entire park; and
(10) Name and address of developer, except that if the developer is a corporation, association or
similar organization, then a list of all stockholders, their addresses and each stockholder’s
percentage of ownership shall be included.
(Q) All requirements and procedures set forth in this chapter shall be fully completed and approved
by the City of Cokato Council and the Minnesota State Board of Health prior to the placement of
any manufactured home in the park. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to help assure a high
standard of development and quality to conserve the value of properties and to encourage the most
appropriate use of land;
(R) When no longer in use as a manufactured home park, the property shall be automatically
classified as R-1, and the zoning map shall be amended to show this change; and
(S) A permit is required for moving of any manufactured or mobile home units into a court within
city limits. The responsibility for obtaining a permit shall be with the owner of the land or court
upon which the manufactured or mobile home unit will reside. The City Council shall establish the
permit fee for inspection by resolution.
(Prior Code, § 903.05)
§ 153.070 LANDSCAPING
In all zoning use districts except the C-1 and I Districts (except as required in special provisions for
specific uses) all developed uses shall provide a landscaped yard along all streets. The yard shall be
kept clear of all structures, storage and off-street parking within one year of the effective date of this
chapter. The yard shall be at least ten feet in depth along all streets, measured from the street
right-of-way except for driveways. The yard shall extend the entire frontage of the lot, and along
both streets in the case of a corner lot.
(Prior Code, § 903.05)
§ 153.071 RESIDENTIAL YARD STORAGE
In all residence districts, all materials and equipment shall be stored within a building or fully
screened (so as not to be visible) from adjoining properties, except for the following: laundry drying
and recreational equipment, equipment temporarily being used on the premises, agricultural
equipment and materials if these are used or intended for use on the premises and off-street parking
of passenger automobiles and pick-up trucks.
(Prior Code, § 903.05)
Storage of cut firewood or wood products are permitted in residential areas provided use is for the
premises where it is being stored in a safe and orderly fashion and not for resale to others.
Zoning Regulations 92
(A) Outdoor Conditions for Wood Storage
(1) Neat & secure stacks elevated at least 4 inches off the ground
(2) Height shall be not more than five (5) feet high, length ten (10) feet & five (5) feet in width
(3) Shall be stored on the side & rear yard only with a minimum setback of eight feet from
adjoining property line and minimum setback from street right of way;
(4) Fallen elm trees must be debarked and stored in separate piles from other types of firewood
(5) Shall not be allowed to become pest infested with rats, rodents or vermin;
All fallen & uncut trees shall be removed or cut up in to firewood as soon as practical but cannot
exceed forty five (45) days. City Council may extend the time period upon written request by the
property owners up to ninety (90) days if environment conditions do not present a safety or
neighborhood nuisance.
§ 153.072 REFUSE
In all zoning use districts, all waste material, debris, refuse or garbage shall be kept in an enclosed
building or properly contained in a closed container designed for the purpose. The owner of vacant
land shall be responsible for keeping the land free of refuse.
(Prior Code, § 903.05)
§ 153.073 TRAFFIC VISIBILITY
No obstruction exceeding 30 inches in height above the centerline grade of the street shall be
permitted within any setback area, so as to allow for visibility at a street intersection.
(Prior Code, § 903.05)
§ 153.074 FARM OPERATIONS
Farm operation in existence at the time of passage of this chapter shall be permitted to continue but
no new buildings in which farm animals are kept shall be permitted within 300 feet of a non-farm
dwelling except in the Agricultural Zoning District.
(Prior Code, § 903.05)
§ 153.075 BUILDING DESIGN
(A) A public occupancy building shall be designed by a registered architect as provided by state
law.
93 Cokato - Land Usage
(B) Non-public principal buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings shall be designed by
a registered architect if deemed pertinent and desirable by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 903.05)
§ 153.076 JUNK YARDS
(A) Junk yards, salvage yards or automobile reduction yards shall be permitted only within the I
District and in no case shall they be located so as to be plainly visible.
(B) The junk yards shall be allowed only by special use permit, the issuance of which shall be based
upon an absolute city need for the facility as decided by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(C) Permitted junk yards shall be effectively screened on all sides so that the storage and operation
is not visible from adjacent properties or streets.
(Prior Code, § 903.05)
§ 153.077 GLARE
(A) In all districts, any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area or sign shall be arranged
so as to deflect light away from any adjoining residential district or from the public streets.
(B) Direct or sky reflected glare, whether from floodlights or from high-temperature processes such
as combustion or welding, shall not be directed into any adjoining property.
(Prior Code, § 903.05)
§ 153.078 RESIDUAL FEATURES
No activity or operation shall be established or maintained which by reason of its nature or manner
of operation will cause the emission of noise, odor, toxic or noxious fumes, smoke, dust and
particulate matter, and vibration in such concentration as to be detrimental to or endanger the public
health, welfare, comfort and safety to cause injury to property or business.
(Prior Code, § 903.05)
§ 153.079 DRAINAGE
(A) No land shall be developed and no use shall be permitted that results in water run-off, flooding
or erosion on adjacent properties. The run-off shall be properly channeled into a storm drain, water
course, ponding area or other public facility. All new development shall include provision for storm
sewers, curbs and gutters along public streets.
(B) No land shall be developed and no use shall be permitted that results in water run-off causing
flooding, erosion or deposit of minerals on adjacent properties. The run-off shall be properly
channeled into a storm drain, water course, ponding area or other public facilities. Any change in
grade affecting water run-off onto adjacent property must be as approved by the City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 903.05)
Zoning Regulations 94
§ 153.080 BUILDING RELOCATION
A building, including an accessory building, which is proposed to be moved from one land parcel to
another parcel or from outside the city limits shall require a conditional use permit, sewer and water
access charge and a building permit. Any relocated building not exceeding ten feet in width or 12
feet in length and being not over ten feet in height shall require a building permit and approval by
the Planning and Zoning Commission/City Council. No building shall be moved from one location
to another without a building permit from the relocation, so as to comply with all of the provisions
of this chapter as to construction.
(Prior Code, § 903.05)
§ 153.081 DWELLING BELOW GROUND LEVEL
Unless as allowed by a conditional use permit for an earth sheltered dwelling in a residential district
granted under § 153.097, no interior space below ground level shall be occupied for dwelling
purposes unless the space is part of a structure having at least one full story above ground level and
having its exterior portion in a structurally completed state as evidenced by issuance of a certificate
of occupancy.
(Prior Code, § 903.05)
§ 153.082 COMPLETION OF DWELLINGS
All exterior and landscaping of residential dwellings shall be completed one year from date of
construction of beginning the digging basement or foundation.
(Prior Code, § 903.05)
§ 153.083 ZERO LOT LINE HOUSING
(A) Zero lot line housing regulations are designed to accommodate changing housing needs while
ensuring sound planning and design practices.
(B) Each specific proposed zero lot line development must apply for a conditional use permit under
§ 153.097.
(C) Conditions of the conditional use permit shall be binding on all construction.
(D) Any proposed change in the development plan as proposed in the permit application and
approved by the City Council shall be resubmitted for consideration as a permit amendment.
(1) Side yard requirements. The side yard setback may be zero feet on one side of the lot,
provided that all of the following are true:
(a) The lot adjacent to that zero side yard is held under the same ownership at the time of
initial construction and the minimum side yard setback for the adjacent lot is not less than
15 feet;
95 Cokato - Land Usage
(b) The 15 foot side yard is perpetually maintained free and clear from any obstructions
other than swimming pools, normal landscaping, fences and the like;
(c) No portion of the dwelling or architectural features project over any property line;
(d) The zero side yard is not adjacent to a public or private right-of-way;
(e) A conditional use permit application, accompanied by precise development plans, is
submitted to and approved by Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council prior to
issuing building permits for the dwelling; and
(f) The Planning and Zoning Commission, after receiving the application, may
recommend approval, approval with conditions or denial to the Council. The Council shall
act on the Commission recommendation by approving, conditionally approving or denying
the application. All reviews shall be according to procedures established in other parts of
this section.
(2) Application procedure. An applicant for a zero lot line housing conditional use permit shall
undertake the following application steps.
(a) Pre-application meeting. Prior to preparation of the application the applicant or his or
her representative may meet with the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Zoning
Administrator and other appropriate officials in order to become fully aware of all
applicable ordinances and regulations. At this time or at subsequent informal meetings, the
applicant may submit a general sketch plan of his or her proposal for comments by the city.
(b) Conditional use permit application. The application for zero lot line housing as a
conditional use will be governed by § 153.097 of the Cokato City Code, as amended. In
addition to the information required on the standard conditional use permit application
form, the applicant shall submit four complete sets of precise development plans. The
precise development plans shall have two parts:
1. The site plan drawings, which shall show the following information:
a. The location, size of site and the proposed uses of land to be developed;
b. The location and size of all common space and the form of organization to
own and maintain the space;
c. The use, height, dimensions and bulk, and approximate locations of buildings
and other structures;
d. Floor plans and elevations of or renderings of structures or buildings
proposed;
e. Places for collection and removal of sanitary wastes, distribution of water and
storm water;
f. Plans for vehicle parking, location and width of proposed streets;
Zoning Regulations 96
g. Profiles, streets grades and grading plans which shall include the proposed lot
grades and foundation elevation of proposed buildings; and
h. A topographic map prepared by a registered engineer or land surveyor
covering the entire tract proposed for development. The maps shall be at a
minimum scale of one inch equals 100 feet and shall indicate topography at a twofoot
contour interval. It shall show in accurate detail the existing topography,
existing buildings, land features and trees.
2. The plan narrative which shall show the following information:
a. An explanation of the general character of the planned development;
b. A statement describing the ultimate ownership and maintenance of all parts
of the development including streets, structures and open space;
c. The total anticipated population to occupy the zero lot line development, with
breakdowns as to number of school aged children, adults and families;
d. Any information on the proposed developments physical characteristics
which may include topography, erosion and siltation, susceptibility to flooding,
drainage and the like; and
e. Details concerning the architectural style, structure, construction materials
and finishing materials, which are pertinent to the applications review criteria
outlined later in this section.
(c) Review criteria and required findings. In the review of all applications for a
conditional use permit for zero lot line housing the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
approve only those applications which meet the requirements of § 153.097 of the City Code
and for which the following findings, which indicate the plan is in the public interest, are
made:
1. The proposed plan is not in conflict with adopted applicable general and specific
plans of the city or the Cokato Comprehensive Plan;
2. The site is physically suitable for the proposed density of development;
3. The design of the proposal will not cause serious environmental damage, public
health problems or create an excessive burden on existing public facilities including,
but not limited to parks, schools, streets and utilities;
4. The plan is designed to form a well-conceived, desirable and unified development
within its own boundaries. It is sensitive to sound planning and design criteria and is
aesthetically pleasing in architectural style, placement of structure, building materials,
finishing materials and landscaping;
97 Cokato - Land Usage
5. The proposed plan will not be a detriment to existing and future land uses in the
surrounding area;
6. The proposed plan will not have an undue adverse impact on the value or
reasonable enjoyment of neighboring property; and
7. Any exception to the standard requirements of this chapter are justified by the
design of the development.
(Prior Code, § 903.05)
§ 153.084 FENCING
(A) The purpose of this ordinance is to establish standards for the installation of fencing to protect
the general health, safety and welfare of the city.
(B) Except as otherwise regulated, fences shall be permitted in all yards subject to the following
regulations.
(1) Permit Required: No person may erect any fence up to six feet in height without first
securing a building permit. Fences exceeding six feet in height shall require a conditional use
permit.
(2) Locations:
(a) A fence that requires periodic maintenance shall be located not closer than one foot
from any side or rear yard lot line on the property of the person constructing the fence. An
exception to this may be allowed if an agreement addressing construction, maintenance and
repair responsibilities, including rights of access, is established between the adjoining
property owners, which agreement must be determined acceptable by the city attorney and
filed with the Wright County recorder against the titles of the respective properties. The
fence agreement shall provide for amendment or cancellation only upon written approval
of the City.
(b) A fence that is maintenance free, such as chain link of steel, plastic or vinyl, may be
constructed up to the side or rear yard property line.
(c ) The City may require the owner of the property upon which a fence now exists or an
applicant for a fence permit to establish or verify the boundary lines of the property by a
land survey or other appropriate means.
(d) No fence shall be placed on or extend into any public right of way or other public
property.
(C) Construction and Maintenance
(1) Fences shall be constructed in a workmanlike manner and of substantial material reasonably
suited for the purpose for which the fence is proposed to be used. Fences shall be
maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and shall not be allowed to become a danger,
or constitute a nuisance, public or private. Any fence which is or becomes dangerous to
the public safety, health or welfare, is a public nuisance, and the City may commence proper
proceedings for an abatement thereof.
Zoning Regulations 98
(2) The side of any fence considered to be its “face” (i.e. the finished side having no structural
supports) shall face the abutting property or street right of way.
(3) Electric fences shall be permitted only when related to agricultural uses, but not as boundary
fences, and shall only be permitted in areas zoned for agricultural uses.
(4) Barbed wire fences shall only be permitted for agricultural, business or industrial purposes,
and only in areas zoned for those uses. Barbed wire fences for business or industrial
purposes are subject to regulations set forth in part G of this section.
(D) Solid Walls. Solid walls up to six feet in height that are not part of buildings may be constructed
and maintained only in the buildable area of a lot.
(E) Traffic Sight Visibility Triangle. On corner lots, no fence or screening material shall be
permitted within the traffic sight visibility triangle.
(F) Residential Fencing and Screening.
(1) Except as provided herein, fences shall be at least five percent open for passage of air, light
and drainage.
(2) Except as provided herein, fences may not exceed six feet in height.
(3) Fences extending across front yards shall not exceed 48 inches in height and shall be at
least 75 percent open space for passage of air and light. Fences extended across front yards
or side yards abutting a public right-of-way shall not be permitted within the traffic
visibility triangle. For purposes of this section, fences and screening shall include
manufactured and/or vegetation.
(G) Business and Industrial Fencing.
(1) No fence shall be allowed in the front yard of a business use except by conditional use
permit.
(2) Except in a required front yard, business and industrial fences may be erected as provided
herein.
(3) Business and industrial fences with barbed wire security arms shall be erected with a
minimum height of six feet (measured without the security arm). The security arm shall be
angled in such a manner that it extends only over the property of the permit holder and does
not endanger the public. Security fencing shall be prohibited within a required front yard
or when located along a property line abutting a residential use.
99 Cokato - Land Usage
§ 153.085 TEMPORARY FAMILY HEALTH CARE DWELLINGS
(A) Pursuant to authority granted by Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.3593, subdivision 9, the
City of Cokato opts-out of the requirements of Minn. Stat. § 462.3593, which defines and
regulates Temporary Family Health Care Dwellings.
§ 153.086 REGULATION OF TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS AND FACILITIES
(A)Limited Federal Preemption. The city recognizes that the Federal Communications Act of
1934 as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1995 (“the Act”) grants the Federal
Communications Commission exclusive jurisdiction over the regulation of the environmental
effects of radio frequency emissions from telecommunications facilities and the regulation of
radio signal interference among users of the radio frequency spectrum. Consistent with the
Act, the regulation of telecommunication towers and telecommunications facilities in the city
is not intended to have the effect of prohibiting any person from providing wireless
telecommunications services.
(B) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the placement, construction, maintenance
and modification of telecommunication towers and telecommunication facilities in order to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, while not unreasonably interfering with the
development of the competitive wireless telecommunications marketplace in the city. In
adopting this ordinance, the city intends to advance the following specific purposes:
(1) Minimize adverse visual and economic impacts of telecommunication towers and
facilities through design, siting, landscaping, and camouflaging techniques;
(2) Promote and encourage shared use and colocation of telecommunication towers and
antenna support structures;
(3) Avoid injury to persons and damage to adjacent properties caused by falling or
dislocated telecommunication towers and facilities by ensuring that those structures
are appropriately located and soundly designed, constructed, and maintained and
removed promptly when no longer used or when determined to be structurally
unsound;
(4) Ensure that telecommunication towers and facilities are compatible with surrounding
land uses, especially residential uses; and
(5) Facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunications services to the residents and
businesses of the city in an orderly fashion.
(C) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings given
them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
(1) Antenna support structure. A building, water tower, or other structure, except a
tower, which can be used for location of telecommunications facilities.
Zoning Regulations 100
(2) Applicant. A person who applies for a permit to develop, construct, build, modify or
erect a tower or telecommunications facility.
(3) Application. The written request by the applicant for the city to consider granting
permission to develop, construct, build, modify, or erect a tower or telecommunications
facility and the process by which the city reviews said request.
(4) Dual lighting. A lighting pattern which varies by number, location or intensity between
day and night for a single facility.
(5) Engineer. A structural engineer licensed by the state of Minnesota.
(6) Person. Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or
other legal entity, private or public, whether for profit or not for profit.
(7) Telecommunications facilities. Cables, wires, lines, wave guides, antennas and any
other facilities or equipment associated with the transmission or reception of communications
located or installed on or near a tower or antenna support structure. The term does not include
a satellite earth station antenna two meters in diameter or less if located in the M-1, C-1, C-2
or I Zoning districts or a satellite earth station antenna one meter in diameter or less if located
in any zoning district other than the above.
(8) Telecommunications tower or tower. A self-supporting lattice, guyed, or monopole
structure constructed from grade which supports telecommunications facilities. The term does
not include amateur radio operations equipment licensed by the Federal Communications
Commission.
(9) Tower height. The vertical distance from the average grade adjacent to the base pad of
the tower to the highest point of the tower or any component of the telecommunication
facilities.
(D) Application. Any person desiring to construct a tower must submit an application for a
Conditional Use Permit. The applicant must submit the following in connection with an
application for a tower:
(1) The engineering plans for the proposed tower and a written statement from an engineer
that the proposed structure meets the structural requirements of the city code of
ordinances;
(2) A written statement from an engineer that the proposed site of the tower or
telecommunications facilities does not pose a risk of explosion, fire or other danger due
to its proximity to volatile, flammable, explosive, or hazardous materials such as liquid
propane gas, propane, gasoline, natural gas, or corrosive or other dangerous chemicals;
(3) A map of the city showing the location of all towers and telecommunications facilities in
the applicant's entire existing or proposed wireless telecommunications network;
101 Cokato - Land Usage
(4) Written evidence that the applicant will be required to remove the tower and
telecommunications facilities upon cessation of operations if the site of the tower is
leased; and
(5) An application fee in the amount established by the city council.
(E) Performance Standards.
(1) Colocation capability. Unless the applicant presents evidence to the City that colocation
is not feasible, no tower may be built, constructed or erected unless the tower is capable
of supporting at least one additional telecommunications facility comparable in weight,
size, and surface area to the facility proposed by the applicant.
(2) Setback requirements. In addition to any other setback requirement which may be
applicable under this ordinance, a tower up to 180 feet in height authorized under this
section must comply with the following setback and locational requirements:
(a) The tower must be set back a distance from the nearest property line equal to the
height of the tower, unless an engineer certifies in writing that the tower will
collapse within a lesser distance under all reasonably foreseeable circumstances. In
no event, however, shall a tower be located closer to any property line than a
distance equal to 50 percent of the height of the tower;
(b) Setbacks for a tower shall be measured from the base of the tower to the nearest
property line of the parcel on which it is located;
(c) No tower may be located between a principal structure and the street, except that on
corner lots, a tower may be located between the principal structure and the street
having the lesser volume of traffic; and
(d) A tower must be set back from land within the M-1, R-1, R-2, or R-3 zoning
districts a minimum of 200 feet or 150 percent of the height of the tower, whichever
is greater.
A tower which exceeds 180 feet in height shall be set back from the nearest property
line a distance equal to the height of the tower plus an additional 1.5feet for every foot by
which its height exceeds 180 feet, unless an engineer certifies in writing that the tower
will collapse within a lesser distance under all reasonably foreseeable conditions. If
an applicant produces the engineering certification required in this subdivision, the
setback may be reduced to a distance no less than 75 percent of the height of the tower,
except that setbacks from land within the M-1, R-1, R-2 or R-3 zoning districts shall be a
minimum of 300 feet or 150 percent of the height of the tower, whichever is greater.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, any tower which is supported by guy
wires shall comply with the full setback as provided herein and shall not qualify for
Zoning Regulations 102
any reduction in setback allowed by certification from an engineer regarding the collapse
pattern of the tower.
(3) Engineer Certification. Towers must be designed and certified by an engineer to be in
conformance with the Uniform Building Code and all other applicable standards set forth
in the city code of ordinances and to be structurally sound for conditions reasonably
likely to occur in Minnesota.
(4) Lighting. Towers may not be lighted except as required by the Federal Aviation
Administration. Whenever a tower is proposed to be located within 1000 feet of land
within the M-1, R-1, R-2 or R-3 zoning districts, the applicant must seek approval for
dual mode lighting from the Federal Aviation Administration.
(5) Exterior Finish. Towers not requiring specific painting or marking by the Federal
Aviation Administration must have an exterior finish approved by the city.
(6) Fencing. Fences constructed around or upon parcels containing towers, antenna support
structures, or telecommunications facilities must be constructed in accordance with any
fencing requirements applicable within the zoning district in which the tower, antenna
support structure or telecommunications facility is located, unless more stringent fencing
requirements are required by the Federal Communications Commission regulations.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, any guy wire used to support a tower
shall be fenced so that it is protected against climbing and vandalism.
(7)Camouflage; Landscaping. Reasonable but creative measures must be employed to
camouflage towers from view. Landscaping on parcels containing buildings used as
antenna support structures or telecommunications facilities must meet the landscaping
requirements approved in the special use permit. Utility buildings and structures
accessory to the tower must be designed to blend in architecturally with the surrounding
environment and to meet all setback requirements applicable to the tower. Ground
mounted equipment must be screened from view by suitable vegetation, except where a
design using non-vegetative screening better reflects and complements the character of
the surrounding neighborhood. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the city
may impose more stringent screening requirements when a tower, antenna support
structure or telecommunications facility will be in close proximity to residential uses or
environmentally sensitive areas or land forms.
(8) Accessory Buildings. One accessory building not more than 2000 sq. ft. in area is
permitted per tower.
(9) Security; Signs. Towers and telecommunication facilities must be reasonably posted and
secured to offer protection against trespass. All signs must comply with applicable sign
regulations. Towers and telecommunication facilities must be constructed with such
devices and techniques as reasonably necessary to prevent climbing or trespass by
unauthorized persons.
(10) On-site parking. Property upon which any tower is located must contain vehicular
access and at least one paved vehicular parking space immediately adjacent to the
tower.
103 Cokato - Land Usage
(11) Removal of Towers. If the use of a tower is discontinued, the tower owner must
provide written notice to the city of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the
use will be discontinued Abandoned or unused towers or telecommunications facilities
must be removed from the site within six months of the cessation of operations of the
telecommunications facility at that site unless an extension of time is approved by the
city council. Any tower or telecommunications facility which is not removed within six
months of the cessation of operations at a site is hereby declared to be a public nuisance
and may be removed by the city and the costs of removal assessed against the property.
(F) Additional Requirements.
(1)Maintenance. Towers must be maintained in accordance with the following
provisions:
(a) Tower owners must employ ordinary and reasonable care in the construction, use
and operation of a tower and must employ commonly accepted methods and
devices for preventing failures and accidents likely to cause injury, damage, or
nuisance to persons or property.
(b) Tower owners must install and maintain towers, antenna support structures and
telecommunications facilities, in compliance with the requirements of the National
Electric Safety Code and all Federal Communications Commission, state, and local
regulations.
(c) Towers, telecommunications facilities, and antenna support structures must be kept
and maintained in good condition, order, and repair.
(d) Maintenance or repair of a tower, telecommunications facilities or antenna support
structure must be performed by qualified maintenance or repair personnel.
(e) Towers must be used in compliance with radio frequency emissions standards of
the Federal Communications Commission.
(2) Certification of Structural Conditions. Every five years after its construction, a tower
must be recertified by an engineer to be structurally sound and in conformance with
the requirements of the Uniform Building Code and all other construction standards
set forth by the city code of ordinances or federal or state law. A written certification
to this effect must be provided to the city. The city may require more frequent
certifications if it reasonably believes that the structural or electrical integrity of the
tower does not comply with federal, state, or local law or regulations. The city may
require repair or removal of the tower if the engineering certification discloses
deficiencies in the structural integrity of the tower or that it fails to meet the
requirements of the Uniform Building Code. They city may revoke the special use
permit if the tower owner fails to make repairs or fails to comply with the
recertification requirements of this section.
Zoning Regulations 104
(3) Inspections. Upon reasonable notice to the owner of the tower and the property upon
which it is located, the city may inspect any tower for the purpose of determining if it
complies with the Uniform Building Code and other construction standards provided by
the city code or federal or state law. The expense related to such inspections will be borne
by the tower owner. Based upon the results of such inspection, the city building official
may require repair or removal of a tower.
§ 153.087 SWIMMING POOLS
(A) Building Permit Required. A building permit shall be required for any swimming pool having a
depth of 24 inches or more at any point and a surface area of 150 square feet or more,
including:
(1) Prefabricated swimming pools in which the pool walls are entirely above the adjacent grade
and the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons.
(2) All in ground pools regardless of capacity and all aboveground swimming pools that exceed
5,000 gallons.
(B) Permit Application. An application for a building permit to construct a swimming pool shall be
accompanied by plans and specifications of sufficient detail to show:
(1) The proposed location of the pool and its relationship to the property lines and all buildings
on the lot;
(2) The size of the pool;
(3) Fencing and other fixtures existing and proposed on the lot, including utility locations and
trees;
(4) The location, size, and types of equipment to be used in connection with the pool, including,
but not limited to, filter unit, pump fencing and the pool itself; and
(5) That all requirements of this section will be satisfied with the submission and approval of a
site plan.
(C) Safeguards Required. All swimming pools for which a permit is required under this ordinance
shall be provided with safety features to prevent uncontrolled access thereto. This requirement
may be accomplished with fencing or other means of enclosure to reasonably prevent
uncontrolled access. If fences are chosen, they shall be at least four feet in height. The bottom
of the fence shall not be more than four inches from the ground nor shall there be any open
space in the fence large enough for a sphere 4 inches in diameter to pass through the fence
unimpeded. Fences shall be constructed of a non-corrosive material and shall not be easily
climbable. All fence openings or points of entry into the pool area shall be equipped with gates
or doors. Gates or doors to pool area shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching
105 Cokato - Land Usage
devices placed at a sufficient height so as to be inaccessible to small children. The fencing
requirements of this section need only be provided around the means of access to aboveground
pools which have vertical or outward inclined side walls of at least 4 feet in height. Prior to
filling the pool, the approved fence or ether enclosure must be installed, inspected and approved
by the City bui1ding official.
(D) Location and Setback. In all residential districts, swimming pools shal1 be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from all adjoining lots and, except for fences and pump enclosures, shall be
located at least 10 feet away from any other building or structure on the same lot. Pools shall
not be located within a drainage or utility easement. Pools shall not be permitted in a front yard
or in the area between the street right of way and the minimum required building side yard
setback line.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 153.095 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
The Zoning Administrator shall enforce this subchapter and shall recommend and perform the
following duties as assigned by the City Council. The Building Inspector shall:
(A) Issue occupancy and building permits, and make and maintain records thereof;
(B) Recommend inspections of buildings and use of land to determine compliance with the terms
of this chapter;
(C) Maintain permanent and current records of this subchapter, including but not limited to all maps,
amendments and conditional uses, variances, appeals and applications therefore;
(D) Receive, file and forward all applications for appeals, variances, conditional uses or other matter
to the designated official bodies;
(E) Institute in the name of the city, any appropriate actions or proceedings against a violator as
provided for; and
(F) Serve as an ex-officio non-voting member of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 903.08)
§ 153.096 APPEALS AND THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS
(A) The City Council shall act as a Board of Appeals and in its capacity shall hear and review all
appeals. The decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall not be final, and any person
having an interest affected by this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the court.
(B) The meetings of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall be held at the call of the
Zoning Regulations 106
Chairperson and at other times as the Board in its rules of procedure may specify. The Board of
Adjustment and Appeals shall act upon all questions as they may arise in the administration of this
chapter, including the interpretation of zoning maps, variances and it shall hear and decide appeals
from and review any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative
official charged with enforcing this chapter. The appeal may be taken by any person aggrieved or
by any officer, department, board or bureau of a town, municipality, county or state.
(C) Hearings by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall be held within the time and upon
notice to interested parties as provided in its adopted rules for the transaction of its business. The
Board shall, within a reasonable time, make its order deciding the matter and shall serve a copy of
the order upon the appellant or petitioner by mail. Any party may appear at the hearing in person
or by agent or attorney.
(D) The Board of Adjustment and Appeals may reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify
the order, requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises
and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal was taken and may
issue or direct the issuance of a permit. The reasons for the Board’s decision shall be stated. The
decision of the Board shall not be final and any person having an interest affected by the decision
shall have the right to appeal to District Court in the county in which the land is located on questions
of law and fact.
§ 153.097 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
(A) Criteria for granting conditional use permits.
(1) In granting a conditional use permit, the Cokato City Council shall consider the advice and
recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the effect of the proposed use
upon the health, safety, morals and general welfare of occupants of surrounding lands, existing
and anticipated traffic conditions including parking facilities on adjacent streets and land, the
effect of values of property and scenic views in the surrounding area and the effect of the
proposed use on the Policies Plan. In permitting a new conditional use or the alteration of an
existing conditional use, the Planning and Zoning Commission may impose, in addition to these
standards and requirements expressly specified by this chapter, additional conditions which the
Planning and Zoning Commission considers necessary to protect the best interest of the
surrounding area or the community as a whole. These conditions may include, but are not
limited to the following:
(a) Increasing the required lot size or yard dimension;
(b) Limiting the height, size or location of buildings;
(c) Controlling the location and number of vehicle access points;
(d) Increasing the street width;
(e) Increasing the number of required off-street parking spaces;
(f) Limiting the number, size, location or lighting of signs;
107 Cokato - Land Usage
(g) Requiring diking, fencing, screening, landscaping or other facilities to protect adjacent
or nearby property; and
(h) Designating sites for open space.
(2) Any change involving structural alterations, enlargement, intensification of use or similar
change not specifically permitted by the conditional use permit issued shall require an amended
conditional use permit, and all procedures shall apply as if a new permit were being issued. The
City Administrator shall maintain a record of all conditional use permits issued including
information on the use, location and conditions imposed by the governing body, time limits,
review dates and other information as may be appropriate.
(B) Procedure. The person applying for a conditional use permit shall fill out and submit to the
Zoning Administrator, a zoning application together with a fee per this chapter as adopted by the
City Council.
(1) The Zoning Administrator shall refer the application to the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
(2) Property owners with 350 feet of the property in question shall be notified, although failure
of any property owner to receive the notification shall so invalidate the proceedings.
(3) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposal.
(4) The petitioner or his or her representative shall appear before the Planning and Zoning
Commission in order to answer questions concerning the proposed conditional use.
(5) The report of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be placed on the agenda of the
Cokato City Council at its next regular meeting following referral from the Planning and Zoning
Commission, but not later than 60 days after the applicant has submitted the application. The
Cokato City Council must take action on the application within 60 days after receiving the report
of the Planning and Zoning Commission. If it grants the conditional use permit, the Cokato City
Council may impose conditions (including time limits) it considers necessary to protect the
public health, safety and welfare, and the conditions may include a time limit for the use to exist
or operate.
(6) An amended conditional use permit application shall be administered in a manner similar
to that requested for a new conditional use permit except that the fee shall be as set forth in the
city’s fee schedule ordinance. Amended conditional use permits shall include requests for
changes in conditions, and as otherwise described in this chapter.
(7) No application for a conditional use permit shall be resubmitted for a period of six months
from the date of the order or denial.
(8) If a time limit or periodic review is included as a condition by which a conditional use
permit is granted, the conditional use permit may be reviewed at a public hearing with notice of
Zoning Regulations 108
the hearing published at least ten days prior to the review. It shall be the responsibility of the
Zoning Administrator to schedule the public hearings and the owner of land having a conditional
use permit shall not be required to pay a fee for the review. A public hearing for annual review
of the conditional use permit may be granted at the discretion of the Cokato City Council.
(Prior Code, § 903.08)
§ 153.098 VARIANCES
(A) Criteria for granting variances. A variance may be granted only in the event that all of the
following are met:
(1) Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances apply to the property which do not apply
generally to other properties in the same zone or vicinity, and result from lot size or shape,
topography or other circumstances over which the owners of property since enactment of this
chapter have had no control;
(2) Literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of rights
commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this chapter;
(3) The special conditions or circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant;
(4) Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that
is denied by this chapter to owners of other lands, structures or buildings in the same district;
(5) Variance requested is the minimum variance which would alleviate the hardship; and
(6) Variance would not be materially detrimental to the purposes of this chapter, or to property
in the same zone.
(B) Procedure.
(1) The person applying for a variance shall fill out and submit to the Zoning Administrator a
zoning application together with a fee as designated by ordinance as approved by the City
Council.
(2) The Zoning Administrator shall refer the application to the Zoning Board of Adjustment
and Appeals. Property owners within 350 feet of the property in question shall be notified in
writing, although failure of any property owner to receive the notification shall not invalidate
the proceedings.
(3) The Zoning Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the proposal.
(4) The petitioner or his or her representative shall appear before the Zoning Board of Appeals
in order to answer questions concerning the proposed variance.
109 Cokato - Land Usage
(5) The Zoning Board of Appeals must take action on the application within 60 days after
holding the public hearing. If it grants the variance, the Zoning Board may impose conditions
(including time limits) it considers necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare,
and the conditions may include a time limit for the use to exist or operate.
(Prior Code, § 903.08)
§ 153.099 ZONING AMENDMENTS
(A) An amendment to the text of the ordinance or the Zoning Map may be initiated by the governing
body, the Planning and Zoning Commission or by application of a property owner. Individuals
wishing to initiate an amendment to this chapter shall fill out an application and submit it to the
Zoning Administrator. Property owners or occupants within 350 feet of the property in question shall
be notified of the proposed zoning amendment in writing.
(B) A public hearing on the re-zoning application shall be held by the Planning and Zoning
Commission within 30 days after the request for the zoning amendment has been received. Notice
of the hearing shall be published in the official newspaper designated by the governing body. The
Planning and Zoning Commission shall make its report to the governing body at the next regular
meeting of the Cokato City Council following the hearing recommending approval, disapproval or
modified approval of the proposed amendment.
(C) The Cokato City Council must take action on the application within 60 days following referral
by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The person making the application shall be notified of the
action taken. The Cokato City Council shall maintain records of amendments to the text and Zoning
Map of this chapter.
(D) No application of a property owner for an amendment to the text of this chapter or the Zoning
Map shall be considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission within the one-year period
following a denial of the request, except the Planning and Zoning Commission may permit a new
application, if in the opinion of the Planning and Zoning Commission, new evidence or a change of
circumstances warrant it.
(Prior Code, § 903.08)
§ 153.100 ENFORCEMENT
(A) Enforcing officer. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator as assigned shall to cause
the provisions of this chapter to be properly enforced.
(B) Building permit.
(1) No building permit shall be issued unless the proposed building, structure or proposed use
of land complies with the regulations of this chapter.
(2) All applications of building projects shall be accompanied by the following exhibits:
Zoning Regulations 110
(a) Boundary survey, or if pertinent, a certified survey by a registered land surveyor of an
area including the property in question and 100 feet beyond the outer boundaries of the
property in question, showing existing utilities, lot boundaries and dimensions, buildings,
easements, foliage and topography and waterways, if pertinent. Soil tests to be included, if
pertinent; and
(b) Preliminary building and site plans-complete preliminary drawings as follows, if
pertinent:
1. Site development plan showing building’s location, dimensional parking and
loading arrangements, vehicular and pedestrian access and egress, surface drainage
plan, landscaping, utility plan, screening, size and location of all signs and other
improvements;
2. Building floor plans of all floors;
3. Elevation of all sides of buildings; and
4. Sections, details and outline materials specification as appropriate.
(3) Upon approval by the Building Inspector of the preliminary plans called for in division
(2)(b) above, the following shall be provided:
(a) Final building and site plans;
(b) Final construction drawings and specifications including site plan and specifications
designed and certified by a registered architect or engineer; and
(c) Final floor plans, elevations, site plans, structural plans, mechanical plans, electrical
plans and plumbing plans, and all specifications related thereto shall be designed and
certified by architect(s) and/or engineer(s) registered in the State of Minnesota.
(4) As deemed by the Building Inspector, the applicant shall file the completed application for
together with the required exhibits with the City Administrator and shall pay a fee as designed
by fee schedule.
§ 153.999 PENALTY
Any person, firm, corporation or voluntary association which violates or refuses to comply with any
of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall
be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment as established by state law and which changes from time to
time. Each day a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.




CITY OF COKATO
ORDINANCE NO: 2019-04
Amendment to Title VII: Traffic Code
The City Council of the City of Cokato, Minnesota ordains as follows:
Following the required review and posting period, the City Council hereby ordains that the city’s Traffic
Code codified in Title VII: Traffic Code, Chapters 70.01 - 70.15 and Chapter 70.99 is hereby amended
as outlined in the attached document.
This ordinance shall be effective immediately upon its passage and summary publication, which is
hereby authorized by the City Council.
Adopted by the Cokato City Council, Wright County, Minnesota this _____ day of August, 2019.
ATTEST: APPROVED BY:
____________________________________ _____________________________________
Andrew Carlson, City Clerk Gordy Erickson, Mayor
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC, PARKING AND MOTOR VEHICLES
Section
Motor VehiclesAutomobiles
70.01 Definitions
70.02 Turning
70.03 Through streets; one-way streets
70.04 Trunk restrictions
70.05 Seasonal and other weight restrictions
70.06 General parking regulations
70.07 Recreational vehicle parking regulations
70.08 Additional residential parking regulations
70.09 Municipal parking lots
70.10 Truck zones, loading zones and the like
70.11 Winter parking
70.12 Establishment of safety zones, lanes of traffic and the like
70.13 Removing keys
70.14 Exhibition driving prohibited
70.15 Police duties
Snowmobiles
70.30 Definitions
70.31 Operation on streets and highways
70.32 Operation generally
70.33 Equipment
70.34 Application of other laws
70.35 Persons under 18
70.36 Leaving snowmobile unattended
70.37 Chasing animals forbidden
Bicycles
70.50 Definition
70.51 Traffic laws apply
70.52 Manner and number of riding
70.53 Hitching rides
70.54 Where to ride
70.55 Right of way; sidewalks
70.56 Carrying articles
70.57 Visibility and brake equipment
3
4 Cokato - Traffic Code
Roller Skates, Inline Skates, Roller Skis, and Skateboards
70.60 Definitions
70.61 Unlawful acts
70.62 Right of way
70.63 Hours of use
70.64 Violations
70.99 Penalty
MOTOR VEHICLESAUTOMOBILES
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS
Any term used in this chapter and defined in M.S. § 169.011, as it may be amended from time to
time, has the meaning given it by that section, with the exception of Recreational Vehicles, which
are defined in Section 70.07. In this chapter, any reference to POLICE includes any party with
whom the city has contracted with for police protection.
(Prior Code, § 701.01) (Am. Ord. 07-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
§ 70.02 TURNING
(A) Restriction on turns. The Council by resolution may, whenever necessary to preserve the free
flow of traffic or to prevent accidents, designate any intersection as one where the turning of vehicles
to the left or to the right, or both, is to be restricted at all times or during specified hours. The Public
Works Director shall mark, by appropriate signs, any intersections so designated. No intersection
on a trunk highway shall be so designated until the consent of the Commissioner of Transportation
to the designation is first obtained. No person shall turn a vehicle at any such intersection contrary
to the direction on such signs.
(B) U turns. No person shall turn a vehicle so as to reverse its direction on any street in the business
district or at any intersection where traffic is regulated by a traffic control signal.
(Prior Code, § 701.02) (Am. Ord. 07-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
§ 70.03 THROUGH STREETS; ONE-WAY STREETS
The Council, by resolution, may designate any street or portion of a street as a through highway or
a one-way roadway where necessary to preserve the free flow of traffic or to prevent accidents. The
Public Works Director shall post appropriate signs at the entrance to such streets. No trunk highway
shall be so designated unless the consent of the Commissioner of Transportation to the designation
is first secured.
(Prior Code, § 701.03) (Am. Ord. 07-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
Traffic, Parking and Motor Vehicles 5
§ 70.04 TRUCK RESTRICTIONS
(A) The City Council, by resolution, may designate streets on which travel by commercial vehicles
in excess of 10,000 pounds gross weight is prohibited.
(B) The Public Works Director shall erect appropriate signs on the streets.
(C) No person shall operate a commercial vehicle on the posted streets in violation of the restrictions
stated.
(Prior Code, § 701.04) (Am. Ord. 07-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
§ 70.05 SEASONAL AND OTHER WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
(A) The Public Works Director is authorized to prohibit the operation of vehicles upon any city
street or impose weight restrictions on vehicles to be operated on the street whenever the street, by
reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other climactic conditions, may be seriously damaged or
destroyed unless the use of vehicles on the street is prohibited or the permissible weights thereof
reduced.
(B) The Public Works Director shall erect and maintain signs plainly indicating the prohibition or
restriction at each end of the portion of the street affected.
(C) No person shall operate a vehicle on a posted street in violation of the prohibition or restriction.
(Prior Code, § 701.05) (Am. Ord. 07-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
§ 70.06 GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS
(A) Adoption of State of Minnesota highway traffic regulations. The State of Minnesota highway
traffic regulations as set forth in M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be amended from time to time, are
hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this chapter as if fully set
forth herein. Additional prohibitions and limitations may be added in other sections of this chapter.
(B) Angle and parallel parking. Angle parking shall be required on the east side of Millard Avenue
from Third Street to Fourth Street and on the west side of Millard Avenue from Second Street to
Third Street. On that street, every vehicle parked shall be parked with the front of the vehicle facing
the curb or the edge of the traveled portion of the street at an angle of approximately 30 degrees.
On all other streets, cars shall be parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway in accordance
with the law.
6 Cokato - Traffic Code
(C) No parking, stopping or standing zones. The City Council may, by resolution, designate
certain streets or portions of streets as "no parking" or "no stopping or standing zones" and may limit
the hours in which the restrictions apply. The Public Works Director shall mark, by appropriate
signs, each zone so designated. Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or a traffic control device, no person shall stop or
park a vehicle in an established no stopping or standing zone when stopping or standing is prohibited.
No vehicle shall be parked in a no parking zone during hours when parking is prohibited except that
a vehicle may be parked temporarily in such a zone for the purpose of forming a funeral procession,
and a truck may be parked temporarily between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. of any business
day for the purpose of unloading or loading where access to the premises is not otherwise available.
(D) Time limit parking zones. The City Council may, by resolution, designate certain areas where
the right to park is limited during hours or for length of time specified. The Public Works Director
shall mark, by appropriate signs, each zone so indicated. No person shall park a vehicle in any
limited parking zone during the hours specified or for a longer period than is so specified.
(E) Special time limit.
(1) No vehicle shall be parked for more than two hours during the period from 7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m. on Mondays through Saturdays inclusive on the following streets:
(a) Broadway from railroad right-of-way to Fourth Street;
(b) Millard from Second Street to Fourth Street;
(c) Third Street from Millard Avenue to Mooers Avenue; and
(d) Water Street.
(2) No vehicle shall be parked more than eight consecutive hours during the period 7:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m. on Mondays through Saturdays inclusive on the following streets:
(a) Second Street from Broadway Avenue to Jackson vacated Jenks Avenue; and
(b) Third Street from Millard Avenue to JacksonJenks Avenue.
(3) No vehicle shall be parked at any time on the Industrial Park Road.
(4) No vehicle shall be parked at any time on Clarke Lane.
(54)Additionally, no commercial vehicle of more than a one-ton capacity shall be parked on the
streets specified in this division (E).
Traffic, Parking and Motor Vehicles 7
(F) Double parking. No motor vehicle shall be double parked on any street in the city except for
loading or unloading purposes, or for the purpose of receiving or discharging passengers and then
only for the time as is reasonably necessary for such purpose but in no event shall the double parking
be permitted where it interferes or obstructs other vehicles.
(G) Parking on public property. No vehicle shall be parked on any property owned or leased by
the city including, but not limited to, parks, playgrounds, boulevards, building grounds, parking lots
and maintenance facilities between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Vehicles in violation of
this division may be impounded as provided for in division (I) below. This does not apply to the
parking lane of public streets or to other areas where specific regulations are set forth in this chapter.
What about the mall parking lot? Snap Fitness is open during overnight hours . . . .
(H) 7248-hour parking limit. No vehicle may be parked or permitted to remain in one location on
any street or highway for more than 72 consecutive hours at any time unless specifically permitted
by this chapter. A vehicle must be moved at least 100 feet from its initial location in order to be
considered not to have remained in one location for 72 hours, and may not return to its original
location within a 24 hour period. Removal of chalk lines or other marks placed by local
enforcement officers is a violation of this section of City Code..
(I) Impoundment.
(1) Any police officer may impoundremove a vehicle from a street to a garage or other place
of safety when the vehicle is left unattended and constitutes an obstruction to traffic or hinders
snow removal, street improvement or maintenance operations.
(2) Any police officer may impoundremove any vehicle from a street to a garage or other place
of safety if the vehicle has remained on the street in violation of any parking restriction in this
chapter after compliance with the requirements of M.S. §§ 168B.04 and 168B.0359.041, as they
may be amended from time to time.
(3) The vehicle shall not be released until the fees for towing and storage are paid in addition
to any fine imposed for violation of this chapter. Vehicles may be disposed of in accordance
with M.S. Chapter 168BChapter 92 of the Code of Ordinances.
(J) Prima facie violation. The presence of any motor vehicle on any street when standing or
parked in violation of this chapter is prima facie evidence that the registered owner of the vehicle
committed or authorized the commission of the violation.
(Prior Code, § 701.06) (Am. Ord. 07-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
§ 70.07 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKING REGULATIONS
(A) In addition to the general parking regulations established in § 70.06, the following parking
regulations regarding recreational vehicles shall apply in all areas of the city zoned for residential
zoning districtsuse.
8 Cokato - Traffic Code
(B) Parking of recreational vehicles.
(1) Purpose. The standards established for recreational vehicles and equipment in this section
are designed to regulate their storage and use and to protect the health, safety and general
welfare of the community. The standards are established to promote the safe use, storage and
parking of recreational vehicles and equipment and to eliminate those conditions or misuses
which are unsafe or cause deterioration of property and property values.
(2) Findings. The outside parking or outside storage of recreational vehicles on or abutting
residential district properties, if unregulated, is found to have a detrimental influence upon the
public health, safety, prosperity, good order and general welfare in residential districts. The
detrimental impacts include, but are not limited to, obstruction of view on streets and private
properties; preventing full use of residential streets for residential parking; creating a cluttered
and unsightly area; creating overcrowding if the recreational vehicles are used as a residence;
creating environmental hazards if the recreational vehicles are not properly maintained or are
stored for excessive periods of time; detrimentally impacting the essential residential character
of the neighborhood if the vehicle is stored and not used by the occupants of the principal
dwelling for the vehicle's intended purpose as a recreational vehicle; and otherwise adversely
affecting residential property values and the character of the neighborhood.
(3) Nuisance. The outside parking or outside storage on or abutting residential district
properties of recreational vehicles or equipment in violation of the standards set forth in this
division is found to create a nuisance and is prohibited. Recreational vehicles as defined in this
section are prohibited from parking on the streets in all residential zoning districts.
(4)(C) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the meanings
assigned to them below.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT
(a) Travel trailers, including those which telescope or fold down, chassis mounted
campers, motor homes, tent trailers, slip-on campers, converted buses and converted vans
that provide temporary human living quarters. A RECREATIONAL VEHICLE is a
vehicle that:
1. Is not used as the residence of the owner or occupant;
2. Is used while engaged in recreational or vacation activities; and
3. Is either self-propelled or towed on the highways incidental to the recreational or
vacation activities.
(b) The term includes snowmobiles and snowmobile trailers, boats and boat trailers, and
all-terrain vehicles and all-terrain vehicle trailers and utility trailers. The term does not
include manufactured homes or park trailers as those terms are defined by M.S. § 168.002,
as it may be amended from time to time.
Traffic, Parking and Motor Vehicles 9
SLIP-ON CAMPER. Any camper which is mounted into a pick-up truck in the pick-up box,
either by bolting through the floor of the pick-up box or by firmly clamping to the side of the
pick-up box.
UTILITY TRAILER. Any motorless vehicle used for carrying property on its own structure
while being drawn by a motor vehicle.
(5D) Parking regulations.
(a1) Recreational vehicles and equipment may not be parked on city streets, but may be parked
or stored in a residential zoning district on private property as follows:
(a) In a fully enclosed structure;
(b) On any rear or side yard of a lot except the side yard of a corner lot adjacent to the
street, provided that:
1. No more than one recreational vehicle per property may be parked or stored
outside of an established driveway; and
2. The vehicle meets the requirements of this division; or
(c) In the front yard of a lot, provided that:
1. The recreational vehicle is parked in an established driveway at a location on the
driveway that is farthest from the side lot line of the property;
2. The vehicle is not closer than 12 feet to the curb line of the street abutting the
driveway;
3. The vehicle does not obstruct a public sidewalk; and
4. The vehicle meets the requirements of this division.
(b2)Loading. A recreational vehicle may be stored on a lot without regard to the location on
the lot for the sole and express purpose of loading and unloading for a period not in excess of
48 hours.
(c3) Slide-in pickup campers. Unmounted slide-in pickup campers must be stored no higher
than 20 inches above the ground and must be securely supported on at least at four corners by
solid support blocks.
10 Cokato - Traffic Code
(d4) Storage. Except as provided herein, all recreational vehicles or equipment parked or
stored outside must be on wheels or must be securely attached to a wheeled trailer or other
wheeled vehicle, with wheels fully inflated. This requirement does not apply to canoes, kayaks
or slide-in pickup campers that are stored in compliance with division (D)(3) above.
(e5) Covers. Except as provided herein, all snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles and boats that are
parked or stored outside must be covered with a tightly fitted cover designed to keep out rodents
and rain and kept free of standing water. Canoes or kayaks do not require a cover if they are
stored in a manner that prevents rain accumulation.
(f6) Licenses. All recreational vehicles or equipment parked or stored outside must display
current licenses as required by applicable law for use in the State of Minnesota.
(g7)Location. All recreational vehicles or equipment parked or stored outside must be located
at least three feet from any building or other structure, including but not limited to fences.
Canoes and kayaks are excepted from this requirement.
(h8)Owned by occupant. All recreational vehicles or equipment parked or stored outside must
be owned by an occupant of the premises on which the vehicle or equipment is parked or stored.
The owner of the recreational vehicle or equipment must be able to present proof of ownership
of the vehicle or equipment upon request of an authorized code enforcement official. In
addition, owner must be able to show proof of occupancy of the property where the vehicle or
equipment is located.
(i9) Size limit. No more than one recreational vehicle or equipment parked or stored outside
on a property may exceed seven and one-half feet in width or seven and one-half feet in height.
(6E)Prohibited uses. A recreational vehicle or equipment shall not be used as a permanent
residence.
(7F)Waivers. The City Council may grant a waiver to the literal provisions of this section in the
case of unusual circumstances or hardship so long as the public health, safety, or welfare is not
endangered by such waiver and subject to such terms and conditions as the City Council may
establish.
(Ord. 07-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
§ 70.08 ADDITIONAL RESIDENTIAL PARKING REGULATIONS
The following additional regulations apply to all vehicle parking in areas of the residential zoning
districtscity zoned for residential use and on streets adjacent to residential zoning districtsareas
zoned for residential use.
Traffic, Parking and Motor Vehicles 11
(A) Driveways and parking areas shall be at least five feet from a side property line except in the
case of a driveway shared by abutting properties. Vehicles may be parked up to the property line
in the case of shared driveways so long as reasonable access for the abutting property is maintained.
Parking areas shall not be in the street right-of-way or on other public property.
(B) No owner or operator shall park a vehicle in a location which blocks a sidewalk or access to a
driveway. Add anything here about blocking mailboxes?
(C) No Commercial Motor Vehicle as defined in M.S. Section 169.011 subd. 16semi-tractor trailer
shall be parked or allowed to stand on any street in a residential zoning district except as follows:
(1) for purposes of making a delivery to a residential property as requested by the
owner/occupant
(2) . for construction purposes with an approved building or other permit issued by the City.
(3) Under no circumstances shall a vehicle under these exceptions remain on the street longer
than 24 hours. No overnight parking is allowed.or on any residential property for more than two
hours at any time.
(D) Whether or not it meets the definition in section (C ) above, noNo semi-truck or semitruck/
trailertrailer shall be parked or allowed to stand unattached from the tractor unit on any street
or on any residential property for any length of time within a residential zoning district except in an
emergency in order to change tractors.
(Prior Code, § 701.06) (Ord. 07-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
§ 70.09 MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS
(A) Parking lots designated. The following areas are hereby designated as municipal parking lots:
(1) Municipal Lot # One: Outlot C, Richards Addition, City of Cokato;
(2) Municipal Lot # Two: The west 20 feet of Water Street adjacent to Lot seven and the south
20 feet of Lot eight, Block 12, Lees Addition, City of Cokato; and
(3) Municipal Lot # Three: The west 60 feet of the south 27 feet of Lot six and Lots seven
through ten inclusive, Block 14, Original Townsite, City of Cokato.
(B) Time limits. No vehicle shall be parked in any municipal parking lot contrary to the following
regulations:
(1) Municipal Lot # One: No vehicle shall be parked more than two consecutive hours
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Mondays through Saturdays inclusive. No
vehicle shall be parked between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day;
(2) Municipal Lot # Two: No vehicle shall be parked more than eight consecutive hours
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Mondays through Saturdays inclusive. No
vehicle shall be parked between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day; and
(3) Municipal Lot # Three: No vehicle shall be parked more than 48 consecutive hours during
any period.
(Prior Code, § 701.065) (Am. Ord. 07-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
§ 70.10 TRUCK ZONES, LOADING ZONES AND THE LIKE
(A) Establishment. The City Council may, by resolution, establish spaces and streets and loading
zones or truck zones. The hours of 6:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays, New Year’s
Day, Memorial Day, July 4, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day, or such other time
as the City Council may specify in the resolution establishing the zones shall be the loading zone or
truck zone hours. The Public Works Director shall mark each zone by appropriate signs.
(B) Truck zone prohibitions. During truck zone hours, no person shall stop, stand or park any
vehicle except a truck in a truck zone. No person shall stop, stand or park a truck in a truck zone
during truck zone hours except to receive or discharge passengers or freight and then only for a
period no longer than is necessary for the purpose.
(C) Loading zone prohibitions. During loading zone hours, no person shall stop, stand or park any
vehicle in a loading zone except to receive or discharge passengers or freight and then only for a
period no longer than is necessary for the purpose. No person shall occupy a loading zone with a
vehicle other than a truck for more than five minutes during such hours.
(D) Property owner initiative. Any person desiring the establishment of a loading zone or truck
zone abutting from premises occupied by him or her shall make written application therefor to the
City Council. If the Council grants the request, the proper city officer shall bill the applicant for
the estimated cost of placing signs and of painting the curb. When the amount is paid to the City
Clerk-Treasurer, the Public Works Director shall install the necessary signs and paint the curb.
(E) Semi-truck parking. No person shall allow a semi-truck/trailer combination to stand or be
parked upon any street for more than two hours at any time. No person shall allow a semi-trailer to
stand or be parked unattached from a tractor unit for any length of time on any street, except in an
emergency in order to change tractors. The Council may, by resolution, establish "No Truck
Parking Zones" in the business district, and the Public Works Director shall mark, by appropriate
signs, any zone so established. The zones shall be established in the business district where heavy
traffic by trucks and other traffic congestion makes parking by trucks a hazard to the safety of
vehicles or pedestrians. No person shall park a truck of more than a one-ton capacity between 6:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any weekday upon any street and any such zone, but parking of the vehicle
for a period of not more than 30 minutes shall be permitted in the zone for the purpose of having
access to abutting property when the access cannot conveniently be secured otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 701.07) (Am. Ord. 07-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
Traffic, Parking and Motor Vehicles 13
§ 70.11 WINTER PARKING
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle or permit it to stand on any street in the city between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. on any day from November 15 through May 1April 1, both
inclusive. One parking space shall be required for every dwelling unit for a one-family dwelling or
efficiency units.
(Prior Code, § 701.08) (Am. Ord. 07-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
§ 70.12 ESTABLISHMENT OF SAFETY ZONES, LANES OF TRAFFIC AND THE LIKE
To assist in the direction and control of traffic, to improve safe driving conditions at any intersection
or dangerous location and to warn pedestrians or drivers of motor vehicles of dangerous conditions
or hazards, the Public Works Director may establish safety zones, lanes of traffic and stop
intersections, and he or she may order installation by the city of stop signs, yield signs, warning
signs, signals, pavement markings or other devices. No regulation may be established on a trunk
highway unless the consent of the Commissioner of Transportation is first secured.
(Prior Code, § 701.09) (Am. Ord. 07-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
§ 70.13 REMOVING KEYS
No person shall leave a motor vehicle, except a truck which is engaged in loading or unloading,
unattended on any street, used car lot or unattended parking lot without first stopping the engine,
locking the ignition and removing all ignition keys from the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 701.10) (Am. Ord. 07-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
§ 70.14 EXHIBITION DRIVING PROHIBITED
No person shall turn, accelerate, decelerate or otherwise operate a motor vehicle within the city in a
manner that causes unnecessary engine noise or backfire, squealing tires, skidding, sliding, swaying,
throwing of sand or gravel or in a manner simulating a race. Squealing or screeching sounds
emitted by tires, or the throwing of sand or gravel by the tires, is prima facie evidence of a violation
of this section. This section includes any activities in violation of M.S. §§ 169.69 and 169.693, as
amended from time to time, which are hereby incorporated by reference.
(Prior Code, § 701.11) (Am. Ord. 07-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
§ 70.15 POLICE DUTIES
(A) The police shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and the state traffic laws.
(B) Police officers are authorized to direct all traffic within the city, either in person or by means of
visible or audible signal, in conformity with this chapter and the state traffic laws.
14 Cokato - Traffic Code
(C) During a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, the police may
direct traffic as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter and the state traffic
laws.
(D) Officers of the Fire Department may direct or assist the police in directing traffic at the scene
of a fire or in the immediate vicinity.
(Prior Code, § 701.12) (Am. Ord. 07-2010, passed 12-13-2010)
§ 70.99 PENALTY
(A) Motor VehiclesAutomobiles. Any person convicted of violating any provision of §§ 70.01
through 70.15 is guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 701.13)
(A) Snowmobiles. Every person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of §§ 70.30
through 70.37 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 702.09)
(B) Bicycles. Any person violating the provisions of §§ 70.50 through 70.57 shall be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 703.10)
(C) Roller skates, inline skates, roller skis, and skateboards. Any person violating the provisions
of §§ 70.60 through 70.64 shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor.


promises in this contract. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this
Franchise and the Cable Ordinance, the provisions of this Franchise shall govern.
c. This Franchise shall be nonexclusive and City may grant additional Franchises
at any time. The City will not grant an additional Franchise on terms and conditions more
favorable or less burdensome than those in this Franchise and Grantee shall have all rights
provided by Section 14.4 of the Regulatory Ordinance in the event an additional
Franchise(s) is granted. The City may impose additional terms and conditions in any
additional Franchise.
d. The City shall comply with Section 14.4 of the Cable Ordinance in the event an
additional provider is legally authorized to provide Cable Service.
e. Grantee acknowledges the City’s right to issue this Franchise. Upon acceptance
of this Franchise by Grantee as required by Section 8 herein, this Franchise shall supersede
and replace any previous ordinance or other authorization granting a Franchise to Grantee,
and all rights, obligations and claims under any previous Franchise are extinguished, except
that the Grantee’s obligation to indemnify the City against claims that arose during the term
of the previous Franchise shall continue in full force and effect subject to applicable law.
Section 2.2 Franchise Term.
This Franchise will be in effect for a period of fifteen (15) years from the date of acceptance
by the Grantee, unless sooner renewed or revoked.
Section 2.3 Service Area.
a. This Franchise is granted for the corporate boundaries of the City, as it
exists from time to time, subject to the density requirement of Section 2.3.b below. The
City will notify the Grantee in writing in the event the City annexes any areas that the
Grantee will be required to serve subject to Section 2.3b below.
b. The Grantee will extend its System and offer Cable Service, within a
reasonable time, after a request for Service, to areas with a density of at least nine (9)
residential units per one-quarter (1/4) cable mile of System, as measured from the nearest
accessible Cable System tie-in point actively delivering Cable Service as of the date of
such request for Service. Where the density is less than that specified above, the Grantee
may require that Persons requesting Service pay a portion of the cost of the capital cost of
the line extension in advance. The Grantee shall provide a free written estimate of the total
cost for extension and the required payment amount within fifteen (15) days of the request
for Service. The charge for Installation or extension for each Person requesting Service
shall not exceed a pro rata share of the actual cost of extending the Service. Subscribers
shall also be responsible for any standard/non standard installation charges to extend the
Cable System from the tap to the residence.
SECTION 3. SYSTEM
Section 3.1 System Capacity.
Grantee will continue to operate a System providing a minimum of at least 75 video
programmed Channels throughout the term of this Franchise. The System must have return
capability and permit “narrowcasting” as provided in Section 4.2(c).
Section 3.2 Construction Deadline.
Except for Grantee’s System extension obligations pursuant to Section 2.3, System
construction is substantially complete. Subject to Section 2.3b above, Grantee will use
commercially reasonable efforts to complete any System extension and construction of
new facilities for new developments contemporaneous with installation of other utilities.
The City shall provide reasonable and timely advance written notice of the location of all
new developments to Grantee.
SECTION 4. COMMUNITY SERVICES
Section 4.1 Commercial Video Programming.
The Grantee will provide broad categories of video programming, including news, sports
and entertainment.
Section 4.2 PEG Access Facilities.
a. Access Channels. The Grantee shall continue to dedicate two (2) Channels
for public, education, and government access (“PEG Access”) programming. The two (2)
PEG Access Channels must be cablecast on the Basic Cable Service tier. All Subscribers
who receive Cable Services offered on the System must receive the PEG Access Channels
at no additional charge. Only to the extent required by Minn. Stat. §238.084, Subd. 1. (z)
and permitted by applicable law, the VHF spectrum must be used for the provision of at
least one (1) of the PEG Access Channels. Nothing herein shall diminish the City’s rights
to secure additional channels pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 238.084, Subd. 1(z), and applicable
FCC regulations.
b. Responsibility for PEG Access. The City will operate, administer, and
manage PEG Access programming pursuant to this Section 4.2. The City may delegate its
PEG Access authority and responsibilities to the Commission. The Grantee acknowledges
that the Commission may coordinate the expenditure of Franchise Fees and PEG Capital
Fees by and among the Commission’s member municipalities. Nothing herein shall
obligate the City to make equipment or channels available for public access programming
or to any particular programmer.
c. Narrowcast. The System currently allows one (1) PEG Access Channel to
be “narrowcast;” i.e. permits a program to be cablecast on such Channel for viewing solely
by Subscribers in one City while Subscribers in adjoining cities served by the Grantee and
who are members of the Commission simultaneously view other programming on that
Channel. Grantee shall continue to ensure that such narrowcasting is provided on the
System.
d. Live Origination. The Grantee shall continue to provide two-way capability
permitting transmission of live programming from the public institutional sites listed in
Exhibit A-1 attached. The Grantee shall not be required to provide end-user equipment.
The City may designate relocated or additional live programming sites provided that the
City shall pay the actual construction cost of connecting such relocated or additional live
programming sites prior to the Grantee’s construction of same. The Grantee must ensure
that the System meets the technical standards attached as Exhibit B at all live origination
sites. The Grantee must further ensure that the City can “narrowcast” programming
originated from City Hall consistent with Section 4.2c.
e. High Definition.
(i) Within one hundred and twenty (120) days after the Effective Date, unless
delayed by events out of Grantee’s reasonable control, the Grantee shall
convert the Commission’s area-wide PEG Access Channel (i.e. the
Channel that is not “narrowcast” to each member city pursuant to Section
4.2(c)) to high definition (“HD”) provided that the programming signals
are provided to the Grantee in HD and meet Grantee’s technical
specifications for HD channels. Thereafter, at such time as Grantee makes
at least 90% of all non-PEG Channels available in HD, the Grantee shall
also convert the “narrowcast” PEG Access Channel to HD provided that
the programming signals are provided to the Grantee in HD and meet
Grantee’s technical specifications for HD channels. The City understands
that, although the Grantee must ensure that the PEG Access Channels are
cablecast on the Basic Cable Service tier and available to all Subscribers at
no additional charge, the HD PEG Access Channel will not be located on
the Basic Cable tier, the signal from the HD PEG Access Channels may
not be available in HD on the Basic Cable tier of service, and Grantee
shall have no obligation to carry PEG Access Channels in more than one
format; i.e. dual carriage. Grantee’s costs to purchase equipment to
convert and distribute programming on the PEG Access Channels in HD
will be reimbursed by the City or Commission in an aggregate amount not
to exceed Seven Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($7500.00) within sixty
(60) days of receipt of invoices evidencing Grantee’s expenditures.
(ii) The City acknowledges that in order to receive Access Channels in HD
format Subscribers may be required to buy or lease special equipment, or
pay additional HD charges applicable to all HD services,
f. PEG Access Capital Support. In addition to the requirements of Section
4.2(a)-(d) above, the Grantee shall collect and remit a PEG capital fee of up to eighty-five
cents ($.85) per Subscriber, per month (“PEG Capital Fee”). The Grantee shall remit such
payments on the same schedule as the Franchise Fee. All amounts paid shall be subject to
audit and recomputation and acceptance thereof does not constitute an accord that amounts
paid are correct. The PEG Capital Fee as of the Effective Date is eighty-five cents ($.85)
per Subscriber, per month. Grantee may itemize any PEG Capital Fee on Subscriber’s
bills. Payment by Grantee must be separate from and in addition to any Franchise Fee.
g. Use of PEG Capital Fee. The City and Grantee agree that the City will
expend the PEG Capital Fees solely for capital costs (consistent with GAAP) associated
with PEG Access. In consideration for Grantee’s obligation to remit the PEG Capital Fee,
the City agrees to provide financial support for PEG Access that is equivalent to the amount
of PEG Capital Fees collected and provided to the City. Within sixty (60) days of written
request, the City shall provide Grantee with an annual report of any expenditures of the
PEG Access Capital Fee to insure such fees are used for capital costs related to PEG
Access. The report shall also demonstrate how the City fulfilled its requirement to provide
matching support for PEG Access. Based on the report, the Grantee may send a written
notice to the City alleging that the City failed to demonstrate that the PEG Capital Fee was
used for capital or that matching PEG Access support was provided. The City shall have
thirty (30) days after receipt of the written notice to provide additional information
demonstrating compliance with the requirements of this Section. If the Grantee continues
to allege that the City has not complied with its obligations herein, the Grantee may provide
written notice of its intent to reduce and/or discontinue collecting and remitting the PEG
Capital Fee. If the City disputes the Grantee’s actions, it may initiate any enforcement
action under the Cable Ordinance it deems appropriate.
h. Access Rules. The City may implement rules governing PEG Access
Channels and programming.
i. Parity of Obligations. The City will impose equivalent PEG Access
obligations on any other franchised provider of Cable Service in the City.
Section 4.3 Drops and Service to Public Buildings.
a. Subject to applicable law, the Grantee must provide, without charge,
monthly Basic Cable Service and Cable Programming Service (excluding pay-per-channel
or pay-per-program), one (1) Drop, one (1) outlet, and one (1) Converter of the type and
functionality made available to Subscribers (“Complimentary Service”) to the public
institutional sites listed in Exhibit A-2 attached which are served as of the Effective Date.
The programming provided by Grantee is not for public display. The City shall hold the
Grantee harmless for any copyright, or other penalties, incurred due to improper use of free
service. If additional Converters or other customer premises equipment (“CPE”) are
required to receive Complimentary Service, Grantee reserves the right to charge the
institution the published rate for such CPE consistent with applicable law.
b. Subject to applicable law, the Grantee shall connect such additional public
administration buildings as the City may subsequently designate, provided however, that
the Grantee shall only be required to pay the cost of the first one hundred and fifty (150)
feet of any necessary System or Drop construction as measured from an accessible System
tie-in point actively delivering Cable Service, and further provided that the City or
institution shall pay any additional mutually agreed upon construction cost. The Grantee
will have a reasonable time from the designation of additional sites to complete extension.
Institutions may add outlets at their own expense. The Grantee shall only be required to
provide Complimentary Service to the extent a newly designated building replaces a site
previously receiving such service.
Section 4.4 Receipt of Subscriber Payments
The Grantee must maintain a convenient means for Subscribers to make payments such as
the ability to make payments electronically via a company website.
SECTION 5. ADMINISTRATION PROVISIONS
Section 5.1 Franchise Fee.
a. The Grantee shall pay a Franchise Fee to the City in an amount equal to five
percent (5%) of its Gross Revenues. The Grantee shall remit Franchise Fee payments to
the City on a quarterly basis within 60 days of the close of the preceding calendar quarter.
Payments shall be based on Gross Revenues generated during the preceding calendar
quarter. In the event Grantee offers a bundle or package of Cable Services and non-Cable
Services at a discounted rate, the Grantee must allocate revenues between Cable Services
subject to the Franchise Fee and non-Cable Services that are not subject to the Fee on a
proportionate pro rata basis in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
(“GAAP”). In no event shall the Grantee allocate the revenues to evade its Franchise Fee
obligations under this Franchise or to disproportionately reduce Gross Revenues.
b. Each Franchise Fee payment must be accompanied by a report in form
reasonably acceptable to City detailing the computation of the payment. All amounts paid
are subject to audit and recomputation by the City, and acceptance of any payment must
not be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount. In
accordance with Minn. Stat. § 541.05, any action to recover Franchise Fees must be
commenced within three (3) years of receipt of the Franchise Fee payment or due date for
such payment.
c. In the event that any Franchise payment or recomputed payment is not made
on or before the dates specified herein, Grantee shall pay an interest charge, computed from
such due date, at the annual rate of one percent over the prime interest rate.
Section 5.2 Rules of Grantee.
The Grantee may promulgate such rules, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its
business provided that such rules, terms and conditions must not be in conflict with the
provisions of this Franchise, the Cable Ordinance, or applicable laws or regulations.
SECTION 6. INDEMNIFICATION, INSURANCE, BONDS
Section 6.1 Indemnification.
By acceptance of this Franchise, the Grantee agrees to indemnify, defend, and hold the City
harmless in accordance with the Cable Ordinance.
Section 6.2 Insurance.
At the time of acceptance of this Franchise, the Grantee will file with the City a Certificate
of Insurance in accordance with the Cable Ordinance. The Grantee must maintain such
insurance for the entire term of this Franchise.
Section 6.3 Performance Bond.
a. The Grantee must furnish to the Commission, for the benefit of all member
cities of the Commission, a single performance bond in the amount of Fifty Thousand
Dollars ($50,000.00) in a form and substance reasonably acceptable to the Commission.
The single bond provided to the Commission shall comply with the parallel bonding
requirements imposed by the other members of the Commission. The Grantee must
maintain the bond until this Franchise expires or is terminated.
b. The bond shall be conditioned upon Grantee’s faithful performance in
accordance with the terms of this Franchise, the Cable Ordinance, and applicable laws and
regulations. The bond must provide that in the event the Grantee fails to comply with any
law, ordinance or regulation, any damages or loss suffered by the City as a result, including
the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of removal or abandonment
of any property of the Grantee, plus a reasonable allowance for attorneys’ fees and costs,
up to the full amount of the security, will be recoverable jointly and severally from the
principal and surety of the bond, and further guaranteeing payment by the Grantee of
claims, liens and taxes due the City which arise. In the event this Franchise is revoked or
the rights hereunder relinquished or abandoned by Grantee, the City is entitled to collect
any resultant damages, costs or liabilities incurred by the City.
c. The City and Grantee acknowledge that it may be difficult or impossible to
accurately quantify actual damages or losses suffered by the City due to a violation or
unsatisfied obligation under this Franchise, the Cable Ordinance, or applicable laws or
regulations. Accordingly, the City may, in its reasonable discretion, collect liquidated
damages in an amount of up to Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($250.00) per violation of
any provision of this Franchise, the Cable Ordinance, or applicable laws or regulations in
an amount not to exceed Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) in any calendar year. Each
violation may be considered a separate violation for which separate liquidated damages
can be imposed.
d. In the event the City will make any claim against the bond or otherwise
seeks to assess liquidated damages, the City must comply with Section 14 of the Cable
Ordinance governing enforcement of this Franchise.
e. The City’s rights herein are in addition to all other rights the City may have
and the City’s exercise of such rights does not constitute an exclusive remedy nor limit any
other right.
SECTION 7. MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS
Section 7.1 Amendment of Franchise Ordinance.
The Grantee and the City may mutually agree, from time to time, to amend this Franchise.
Any changes, modifications or amendments to this Franchise must be made in writing,
signed by the City and the Grantee. Nothing herein is intended to expand or diminish the
rights given to City under state law. The City reserves its lawful rights, including its police
powers, ordinance-making authority, and under power of eminent domain law.
Section 7.2 Force Majeure.
In the event Grantee’s performance of this Franchise is prevented due to a cause beyond
its reasonable control, such failure to perform must be excused for the period of such
inability to perform.
Section 7.3 Severability.
If any term, condition or provision of this Franchise or the application thereof to any Person
or circumstance is held, to any extent, invalid, preempted or unenforceable, the remainder
and all the terms, provisions and conditions herein must, in all other respects, continue to
be effective provided the loss of the invalid, preempted or unenforceable provisions do not
substantially alter the agreement between the Parties. In the event a law, rule or regulation
is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed so that the Franchise
provision which had been held invalid, preempted or modified is no longer in conflict
therewith, such Franchise provision will return to full force and effect and thereafter be
binding upon thirty (30) days written notice to the Grantee.
Section 7.4 Nonenforcement by City.
The Grantee is not relieved of its obligations to comply with this Franchise or the Cable
Ordinance due to any failure or delay of the City to enforce prompt compliance. The City
and Grantee may only waive its rights by expressly so stating in writing.
Section 7.5 Rights Cumulative.
All of the City’s and Grantee’s rights and remedies pursuant to this Franchise are in
addition to and not exclusive of any and all other rights and remedies available to the City
or Grantee.
Section 7.6 Work Performed by Others.
All obligations of this Franchise apply to work performed by any agent, subcontractor or
other Person performing any work or services on behalf of the Grantee pursuant to this
Franchise to the extent applicable, however, in no event will any such Person obtain any
rights to maintain and operate a System or provide Cable Service.
Section 7.7 Entire Agreement.
This Franchise sets forth the entire agreement between the parties respecting the subject
matter hereof. All agreements, covenants, representations, and warranties, express and
implied, oral and written, of the parties with regard to the subject matter hereof are
contained herein. No other agreements, covenants, representations or warranties, express
or implied, oral or written, have been made by any party to another with respect to the
matter of this Franchise. All prior and contemporaneous conversations, negotiations,
possible and alleged agreements, representations, covenants and warranties with respect to
the subject matter hereof are waived, merged herein and therein and are superseded hereby
and thereby.
SECTION 8. ACCEPTANCE OF FRANCHISE
Section 8.1 Publication and Effective Date.
This Franchise will be effective on the date of acceptance by Grantee. This Franchise shall
be enacted and published in accordance with applicable local and Minnesota law.
Section 8.2 Time for Acceptance.
a. The Grantee must accept this Franchise within sixty (60) days of enactment
by the City, unless the time for acceptance is extended by the City. Acceptance by the
Grantee will be deemed the grant of this Franchise for all purposes.
b. Upon acceptance of this Franchise, the Grantee and City will be bound by
all the terms, conditions and obligations contained herein.
Section 8.3 Manner for Acceptance.
The Grantee must accept this Franchise in the following manner:
a. The Franchise must be fully executed and acknowledged by Grantee and
delivered to the City.
b. The Grantee must also deliver any construction bond and insurance
certificates required herein that have not previously been delivered, with its acceptance.
Section 8.4 Failure to Accept.
In the event the Grantee does not timely accept this Franchise in accordance with the
requirements herein, this Franchise and all rights granted herein are null and void.
Passed and adopted this _____ of _______________, 2019.
CITY OF COKATO
By: _______________________________
Its: ______________________________
By: _______________________________
Its: ______________________________
ACCEPTED: This Franchise is accepted and we agree to be bound by its terms and
conditions.
SPECTRUM MID-AMERICA, LLC L/K/A CHARTER COMMUNICATIONS
By: Charter Communications, Inc.
Its: Manager
By: ________________________________
Name: ______________________________
Its: _________________________________
Date: __________________________, 2019
Paul Abbott
VP, Local Government Affairs & Franchising
September 27
EXHIBIT A-1
(Live Origination Sites)
City of Big Lake, City Hall 160 Lake St N, Big Lake, MN 55309
City of Buffalo, City Hall* 212 Central Ave, Buffalo, MN 55313
City of Cokato, City Hall 255 Broadway Ave S, Cokato, MN 55321
City of Cokato, Fire Hall 745 7th Street SW, Cokato, MN 55321
City of Dassel, City Hall 460 3rd St, Dassel, MN 55325
City of Delano, City Hall 234 2nd St N, Delano, MN 55328
City of Elk River, City Hall 13065 Orono Pkwy NW, Elk River, MN 55330
City of Maple Lake, City Hall 10 Maple Ave S, Maple Lake, MN 55358
City of Rockford, City Hall 6031 Main St, Rockford, MN 55373
City of Watertown, City Hall 309 Lewis Ave S Ste 1, Watertown, MN 55388
City of Monticello, City Hall 505 Walnut St Ste 1, Monticello, MN 55362
? In Buffalo City Hall, Grantee shall continue to provide two (2) Converters free of
charge for program monitoring purposes and two-way connectivity for two (2)
programming streams originating from this site.
EXHIBIT A-2
(Complimentary Service Sites)
City Hall Locations
City of Big Lake, City Hall 160 Lake Street North, Big Lake MN 55309
City of Buffalo, City Hall 212 Central Avenue Buffalo, MN 55313
City of Cokato, City Hall 255 Broadway Avenue South, Cokato, MN 55321
City of Dassel, City Hall 460 3rd Street Dassel, MN 55325
City of Delano, City Hall 234 2nd Street North Delano, MN 55328
City of Elk River, City Hall 13065 Orono Parkway NW, Elk River, MN 55330
City of Maple Lake, City Hall 10 Maple Avenue South, Maple Lake, MN 55358
City of Rockford, City Hall 6031 Main Street Rockford, MN 55373
City of Monticello , City Hall 505 Walnut Street Monticello, MN 55362
City of Watertown, City Hall 309 Lewis Avenue South, Watertown, MN 55313
SWTV - Area Wide Channel (Located in Buffalo City Hall) 212 Central Avenue
Buffalo, MN 55313
Public Safety Locations
Big Lake Police Department 790 Minnesota Avenue, Big Lake, MN 55309
Big Lake Fire Department 20243 County Road 43, Big Lake, MN 55309
Big Lake Public Works 18041 198th Avenue, Big Lake, MN 55309
Buffalo Police Department 215 1st Avenue NE, Buffalo, MN 55313
Buffalo Fire Department - Station 1 - 212 Central Avenue, Buffalo, MN 55313*
Buffalo Fire Department - Station 2 - 209 Atlas Avenue NE, Buffalo, MN 55313
Buffalo Streets and Parks 1303 County Road 134, Buffalo, MN 55313
Buffalo Utilities Campus 503 Lake Blvd. NW, Buffalo, MN 55313
Cokato Fire Department 745 7th Street SE, Cokato, MN 55321
Cokato Public Works 695 Cokato Street East, Cokato, MN 55321*
Delano Fire Station 245 2nd Street North, Delano, MN 55328
Delano Public Works 402 County Road 30 SE, Delano, MN 55328*
Dassel Fire Department 426 2nd Street North, Dassel, MN 55325
Elk River Police Department 13077 Orono Parkway, Elk River, MN 55330
Elk River Fire Department - Station 1 - 415 Jackson Street, Elk River MN 55330
Elk River Fire Department - Station 2 - 13073 Orono Parkway, Elk River, MN 55330
Elk River Emergency Operations Center 13077 Orono Parkway, Elk River, MN 55330
Elk River Public Works 19000 Proctor Road NW, Elk River, MN 55330
Maple Lake Fire Department 106 Division Street West, Maple Lake, MN 55358
Maple Lake Pubic Works 441 Oak Avenue South, Maple Lake, MN 55358
Monticello Fire Department (Current Address) 6th Street West, Monticello, MN 55362
Monticello Fire Department (November 2019) 101 Chelsea Road, Monticello, MN
55362*
Monticello Public Works 909 Golf Course Road, Monticello, MN 55362
Rockford Fire Department 6700 Main Street, Rockford, MN 55373
Rockford Public Works 6551 Utility Drive, Rockford, MN 55373
Watertown Fire Department 401 Carter Street NE, Watertown, MN 55388
Watertown Public Works 700 Lewis Avenue North, Watertown, MN 55388
*The Grantee’s rights to recover its actual, demonstrated costs of completing these
connections shall be governed by Section 4.3.b. of the Franchise.
EXHIBIT B
(Technical Standards- Live Origination Sites)
With respect to all sites listed in Exhibit A, the System shall meet or exceed the following
requirements:
1. The System shall operate in conformance with the technical standards
promulgated by the FCC pursuant to Title 47, Section 76.601 to 76.617, as may be
amended or modified from time to time.
2. The System shall be capable of continuous 24-hour operation without
signal degradation.
3. The System shall be capable of operation without failure, material
performance changes or signal degradation over an outdoor temperature range of -40
degrees F to +130 degrees F and over a variation in supply voltages from 105 to 130 volts
AC.
4. The System will provide access channel connections up to the demarcation
point, both upstream and downstream, without material signal degradation or
deterioration and with signal quality equal to or better than any other channels. Material
signal degradation or deterioration where any signal problem including ghosting or other
audio or visual distortion or interference is apparent without special testing. The Grantee
shall not be responsible for technical problems deriving from facilities or equipment
located beyond the demarcation point, within the institutional site.