CITY OF CHISHOLM, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING CORPORATION
432 Walnut Street Cincinnati, Ohio 45202-3909 (800) 445-5588
1
CHISHOLM, MINNESOTA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
10. General Code Construction; General Penalty
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
30. General Provisions
31. City Organizations
32. Purchasing Policy
33. Administrative Offenses
34. Emergency Management
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
50. General Provisions
51. Refuse Collection; Recyclables
52. Water Service
53. Public and Private Sewers
54. Stormwater Utility
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
70. Traffic Regulations
71. Parking Regulations
72. Municipal Airport
73. Recreational Vehicles
74. Parking Schedules
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
90. Animals
91. Abandoned Motor Vehicles, Unclaimed Property and Excess Property
92. Deposit of Litter
93. Trees
94. Nuisances; Health; Public Protection
95. Streets and Sidewalks
96. Noise Control
Chisholm - Table of Contents
2
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
110. General Regulations and Licensing
111. Businesses Regulated
112. Pawnbrokers
113. Tobacco and Tobacco Products
114. Liquor Regulations
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
130. Obscenities; Obscene Material
131. Offenses to Public Peace and Safety
132. Curfew; Minors
133. Weapons and Firearms
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
150. Buildings and Construction
151. Trailer Coach Parks
152. Subdivision Regulations (Platting)
153. Zoning Code/Land Use Regulations
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Table
I. Franchises
II. Land Usage
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Minnesota Statutes
References to 1994 Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
INDEX
1
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter
10. GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL
PENALTY
Chisholm - General Provisions
2
3
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
10.01 Title of code
10.02 Rules of interpretation
10.03 Application to future ordinances
10.04 Captions
10.05 Definitions
10.06 Severability
10.07 Reference to other sections
10.08 Reference to offices
10.09 Errors and omissions
10.10 Official time
10.11 Reasonable time
10.12 Ordinances repealed
10.13 Ordinances unaffected
10.14 Effective date of ordinances
10.15 Repeal or modification of ordinance
10.16 Ordinances which amend or supplement code
10.17 Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
10.18 Copies of code
10.19 Adoption of statutes and rules and supplements by reference
10.20 Enforcement
10.98 Supplemental administrative penalties
10.99 General penalty and enforcement
Appendix A: Notice of code violation
' 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
(A) All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as revised, codified, rearranged,
renumbered and consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and
designated as the Acity code@, for which designation Acode of ordinances@, Acodified ordinances@ or
Acode@ may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any part of the law
as contained in the code.
Chisholm - General Provisions
4
(B) All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to the components of the code unless
otherwise specified. Any component code may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the ATraffic
Code@. Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation A'@ followed by the number, such as
A' 10.01@. Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and section numbers are
employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
' 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
(A) Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules
of construction, definition and application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing
the interpretation of state law.
(B) Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the
following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the
context of the same ordinance:
(1) AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written Aand/or@ whenever the
context requires.
(2) Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions or ordinance requires an act to be done
which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the
performance of the act by an authorized agent or deputy.
(3) Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be
deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural, and
words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the
future, if applicable.
(4) General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited
to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
' 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to ordinances hereafter
adopted which amend or supplement this code unless otherwise specifically provided.
' 10.04 CAPTIONS.
Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and section numbers are
employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
General Code Construction; General Penalty
5
' 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
(A) General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or ordinary and usual sense.
However, technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be
understood according to their technical import.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CITY. The area within the corporate boundaries of the city as presently established or as
amended by ordinance, annexation or other legal actions at a future time. The term CITY when used in
this code may also be used to refer to the City Council and its authorized representatives.
CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This city code as modified by
amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.
COUNTY. Saint Louis, Minnesota.
MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
MONTH. A calendar month.
OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an
oath, and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and
AFFIRMED. All terms shall mean a pledge taken by the person and administered by an individual
authorized by state law.
OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of this city unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a
penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the
partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
STATE. The State of Minnesota.
Chisholm - General Provisions
6
SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in the chapter
analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by
the subject matter of the heading. Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
' 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to any person or circumstance
is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.
' 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that reference shall extend and
apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the
subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
' 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of
this city exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
' 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words; the omission of any
word or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to
which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or words supplied,
omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the
same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.
' 10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws, shall be the official time within
this city for the transaction of all city business.
General Code Construction; General Penalty
7
' 10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
(A) In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or requires
reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is
necessary for a prompt performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
(B) The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall be computed by excluding
the first day and including the last. If the last day is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.
' 10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature
pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the
subjects treated by this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
' 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not
embraced in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by
necessary implication.
' 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall take effect from and after
the due publication thereof, unless otherwise expressly provided.
' 10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
(A) Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified by a subsequent
ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until
the publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect to it,
unless otherwise expressly provided.
(B) No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted, created, given, secured or
accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released or discharged,
but may be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force unless it
is otherwise expressly provided.
Chisholm - General Provisions
8
(C) When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed,
the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.
' 10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
(A) If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or section of this code, the chapter
or section shall be specifically repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.
(B) Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new chapter or section shall
indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In
addition to this indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall be
shown in concise form above the ordinance.
' 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of this code shall be prosecuted
and remain punishable as provided by those laws. This code does not affect any rights or liabilities
accrued, penalties incurred or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures shall be enforced and
imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize
highway rights-of-way, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this
code had not been enacted.
' 10.18 COPIES OF CODE.
The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection. The
Clerk shall provide a copy for sale for a reasonable charge.
' 10.19 ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES AND SUPPLEMENTS BY REFERENCE.
(A) It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code, all future amendments to
any state or federal rules and statutes adopted by reference in this code or referenced in this code are
hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this code was
adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to the contrary.
(B) It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code, all future supplements are
hereby adopted as if they had been in existence at the time this code was enacted, unless there is clear
intention expressed in the code to the contrary.
General Code Construction; General Penalty
9
' 10.20 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) Any licensed peace officer of the city=s Police Department, or the County Sheriff, or any
Deputy Sheriff shall have the authority to enforce any provision of this code.
(B) As permitted by M.S. ' 626.862, as it may be amended from time to time, the City Clerk shall
have the authority to administer and enforce this code. In addition, under that statutory authority, certain
individuals designated within the code or by the Clerk or City Council shall have the authority to
administer and enforce the provisions specified. All and any person or persons designated may issue a
citation in lieu of arrest or continued detention to enforce any provision of the code.
(C) The City Clerk and any city official or employee designated by this code who has the
responsibility to perform a duty under this code may with the permission of a licensee of a business or
owner of any property or resident of a dwelling, or other person in control of any premises, inspect or
otherwise enter any property to enforce compliance with this code.
(D) If the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of a premises objects to the inspection
of or entrance to the property, the City Clerk, peace officer or any employee or official charged with the
duty of enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that probable cause exists for the
issuance of a valid search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search
warrant before conducting the inspection or otherwise entering the property. This warrant shall be only to
determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
people are being complied with and to enforce these provisions only, and no criminal charges shall be
made as a result of the warrant. No warrant shall be issued unless there be probable cause to issue the
warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is reasonable. Probable cause does not depend on specific
knowledge of the condition of a particular property.
(E) Every licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of property within the city shall
permit at reasonable times inspections of or entrance to the property by the City Clerk or any other
authorized city officer or employee only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce these
provisions. Unreasonable refusal to permit the inspection of or entrance to the property shall be grounds
for termination of any and all permits, licenses or city service to the property. Mailed notice shall be
given to the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of the property, stating the grounds for
the termination, and the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of the property shall be given
an opportunity to appear before the City Clerk to object to the termination before it occurs, subject to
appeal of the Clerk=s decision to the City Council at a regularly scheduled or special meeting.
(F) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the city to enter private
property in urgent emergency situations where there is an imminent danger in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare.
Chisholm - General Provisions
10
' 10.98 SUPPLEMENTAL ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.
(A) In addition to those administrative penalties established in this code and the enforcement
powers granted in ' 10.20, the City Council is authorized to create by resolution, adopted by a majority
of the members of the Council, supplemental administrative penalties. The resolution may not proscribe
administrative penalties for traffic offenses designated by M.S. ' 169.999, as it may be amended from
time to time.
(B) These administrative penalty procedures in this section are intended to provide the public and
the city with an informal, cost effective and expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for
violations of certain provisions of this code. The procedures are intended to be voluntary on the part of
those who have been charged with those offenses.
(C) Administrative penalties for violations of various provisions of the code, other than those
penalties established in the code or in statutes that are adopted by reference, may be established from
time to time by resolution of a majority of the members of the City Council. In order to be effective, an
administrative penalty for a particular violation must be established before the violation occurred.
(D) In the discretion of the peace officer, City Clerk or other person giving notice of an alleged
violation of a provision of this code, in a written notice of an alleged violation, sent by first class mail to
the person who is alleged to have violated the code, the person giving notice may request the payment of
a voluntary administrative penalty for the violation directly to the City Treasurer within 14 days of the
notice of the violation. A sample notice is contained in Appendix A to this chapter. In the sole discretion
of the person giving the notice of the alleged violation, the time for payment may be extended an
additional 14 days, whether or not requested by the person to whom the notice has been given. In addition
to the administrative penalty, the person giving notice may request in the notice to the alleged violator to
adopt a compliance plan to correct the situation resulting in the alleged violation and may provide that if
the alleged violator corrects the situation resulting in the alleged violation within the time specified in the
notice, that the payment of the administrative penalty will be waived.
(E) At any time before the payment of the administrative penalty is due, the person who has been
given notice of an alleged violation may request to appear before the City Council to contest the request
for payment of the penalty. After a hearing before the Council, the Council may determine to withdraw
the request for payment or to renew the request for payment. Because the payment of the administrative
penalty is voluntary, there shall be no appeal from the decision of the Council.
(F) At any time after the date the payment of the administrative penalty is due, if the administrative
penalty remains unpaid or the situation creating the alleged violation remains uncorrected, the city,
through its Attorney, may bring criminal charges in accordance with state law and this code. Likewise,
the city, in its discretion, may bring criminal charges in the first instance, rather than requesting the
payment of an administrative penalty, even if a penalty for the particular violation has been established
by Council resolution. If the administrative penalty is paid, or if any requested correction of the situation
resulting in the violation is completed, no criminal charges shall be initiated by the city for the alleged
violation.
General Code Construction; General Penalty
11
' 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT.
(A) Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this code for which another
penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty
which may be imposed for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days or a fine of not
more than $1,000, or both.
(B) Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this code, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon
conviction be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense
which is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.
(C) Pursuant to M.S. ' 631.48, as it may be amended from time to time, in either the case of a
misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
(D) The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any official duty imposed by this
code shall not subject the officer or employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.
(E) In addition to any penalties provided for in this section or in ' 10.98, if any person, firm or
corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code, the Council or any city official designated by
it, may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the violation.
Chisholm - General Provisions
12
APPENDIX A
NOTICE OF CODE VIOLATION
To: (Name and address of person who is alleged to have violated the code)
From: (Name and title of city official giving the notice)
Re: Alleged violation of Section of the City Code, relating to (give title of section)
Date: (Date of notice)
I hereby allege that on (date of violation) you violated ' of the City Code relating
to
.
The City Council has by resolution established an administrative penalty in the amount of $
for this violation.
Payment of this administrative penalty is voluntary, but if you do not pay it the city may initiate
criminal proceedings for this alleged violation.
Payment is due within 14 days of the date of this notice. Before the due date, you may request an
additional 14-day extension of the time to pay the administrative penalty.
As an alternative to the payment of this administrative penalty, if the situation that gave rise to this
alleged violation is corrected by (establish date), then the payment of the
administrative penalty will be waived.
Even if the administrative penalty is paid, the city reserves the right to institute appropriate
proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the violation.
Before the due date, you may request to appear before the City Council to contest the request for
payment of the penalty. After a hearing before the Council, the Council may determine to withdraw the
request for payment or to renew the request for payment. Because the payment of the administrative
penalty is voluntary, there shall be no appeal from the decision of the Council.
If you pay the administrative penalty, the city will not initiate criminal proceedings for this alleged
violation. However, the Council, or any city official designated by it, may institute appropriate
proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the violation.
General Code Construction; General Penalty
13
Payment of the administrative penalty may be made by check, cash or money order to the City
Treasurer.
Signed:
(Name and Title of Person Giving Notice)
Chisholm - General Provisions
14
1
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
30. GENERAL PROVISIONS
31. CITY ORGANIZATIONS
32. PURCHASING POLICY
33. ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES
34. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Chisholm - Administration
2
3
CHAPTER 30: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
30.01 Authority and purpose
30.02 General rules
30.03 Votes of Council members
30.04 Right to administrative appeal
30.05 Facsimile signatures
30.06 Interim emergency succession
30.07 Salaries of Mayor and Council members
30.08 Accounts, claims or demands
30.09 Worker=s compensation
30.10 Franchises
30.11 Regulation for development of lots
30.12 Partial prepayment of special assessments
30.13 Investment of idle funds
30.14 Budget calendar
30.15 Reimbursements and advances for expenses
30.16 Criminal history background; employees, licenses
' 30.01 AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE.
Pursuant to the authority granted by the Charter, this chapter of the city code is enacted so as to set
down for enforcement the government and good order of the city by and through the Council.
(1994 Code, ' 2.01)
' 30.02 GENERAL RULES.
Except as otherwise herein provided, Robert=s Rules of Order (Revised) shall govern all meetings
and proceedings before the Council.
(1994 Code, ' 2.02)
' 30.03 VOTES OF COUNCIL MEMBERS.
(A) Generally. Votes of Council shall be by aye and nay, except as to matters requiring a recorded
4
roll call vote.
(B) Recorded roll calls. A recorded roll call vote shall be held as to all questions when requested by
a member of the Council or the presiding officer.
(C) Abstentions. The vote of any member of the Council who abstains, or otherwise fails or refuses
to vote upon any question, shall be deemed to be a vote with the majority otherwise voting thereon;
provided, however, that if there is no majority otherwise voting thereon, the vote shall be deemed to be a
nay vote.
(1994 Code, ' 2.03)
' 30.04 RIGHT TO ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL.
If any person shall be aggrieved by any administrative decision of the City Clerk, the aggrieved
person is entitled to a full hearing before the Council upon serving a written request therefor upon the
Mayor and City Clerk at least five days prior to any regular Council meeting. The request shall contain a
general statement setting forth the administrative decision to be challenged by the appellant. At the
hearing the appellant may present any evidence he or she deems pertinent to the appeal, but the city shall
not be required to keep a verbatim record of the proceedings. The Mayor, or other officer presiding at the
hearing, may, in the interest of justice or to comply with time requirements and on his or her own motion
or the motion of the appellant, the City Clerk or a member of the Council, adjourn the hearing to a more
convenient time or place, but the time or place shall be fixed and determined before adjournment so as to
avoid the necessity for formal notice of reconvening.
(1994 Code, ' 2.10)
' 30.05 FACSIMILE SIGNATURES.
The Mayor and City Treasurer are hereby authorized to request a depository of city funds to honor
an order for payment when the instrument bears a facsimile of his or her signature, and to charge the
same to the account designated thereon or upon which it is drawn, as effectively as though it were his or
her manually written signature. The authority is granted only for the purpose of permitting the officers an
economy of time and effort.
(1994 Code, ' 2.11)
' 30.06 INTERIM EMERGENCY SUCCESSION.
(A) Purpose. Due to the existing possibility of a nuclear attack or a natural disaster requiring a
declaration of a state of emergency, it is found urgent and necessary to ensure the continuity of duly
elected and lawful leadership of the city to provide for the continuity of the government and the
emergency interim succession of key governmental officials by providing a method for temporary
emergency appointments to their offices.
(B) Succession to local offices. In the event of a nuclear attack upon the United States or a natural
disaster affecting the vicinity of the city, the Mayor, Council and City Clerk shall be forthwith notified by
General Provisions
5
any one of the persons and by any means available to gather at the City Hall. In the event that safety or
convenience dictate, an alternative place of meeting may be designated. Those gathered shall proceed as
follows.
(1) By majority vote of those persons present, regardless of number, they shall elect a
Chairperson and Secretary to preside and keep minutes, respectively.
(2) They shall review and record the specific facts relating to the nuclear attack or natural
disaster and injuries to persons or damage to property already done, or the imminence thereof.
(3) They may, based on the facts, declare a state of emergency.
(4) By majority vote of those persons present, regardless of number, they shall fill all positions
on the Council, (including the office of Mayor) of those persons upon whom notice could not be served
or who are unable to be present.
(5) The interim successors shall serve until a time as the duly elected official is again available
and returns to his or her position, or the state of emergency has passed and a successor is designated and
qualifies as required by law, whichever shall occur first.
(C) Duties of the Interim Emergency Council. The Interim Emergency Council shall exercise the
powers and duties of their offices, and appoint other key government officials to serve during the
emergency.
(1994 Code, ' 2.12)
' 30.07 SALARIES OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.
The salaries of the Mayor and Council members, effective January 1, 2013, are hereby fixed as
follows, which amounts are deemed reasonable.
(A) The salary of the Mayor shall be $700 per month.
(B) The salary of each Council member shall be $500 per month.
(1994 Code, ' 2.13) (Ord. 155, passed 5-22-2012)
' 30.08 ACCOUNTS, CLAIMS OR DEMANDS.
Chisholm - Administration
6
(A) Generally. Except as to an annual salary, fees of jurors or witnesses fixed by law, or wages or
salaries of employees which have been fixed on an hourly, daily, weekly or monthly basis by the Council
and which by law are authorized to be paid on a payroll basis, any account, claim or demand against the
city which can be itemized in the ordinary course of business, the Council shall not audit or allow the
claim until the person claiming payment, or his or her agent, reduces it to writing, in items, and signs a
declaration to the effect that the account, claim or demand is just and correct and that no part of it has
been paid.
(B) Discretionary exception. The Council may, in its discretion, allow a claim prepared by the City
Clerk prior to the declaration by the claimant if the declaration is made on the check by which the claim
is paid.
(C) Form of declaration. The declaration provided for in division (A) above is sufficient in the
following form; AI declare under the penalties of law that this account, claim or demand is just and
correct and that no part of it has been paid. Signature of Claimant@.
(D) Form and effect of declaration on check. The declaration provided for in division (B) above
shall be printed on the reverse side of the check, above the space for endorsement thereof by the payee, as
follows: AThe undersigned payee, in endorsing this check declares that the same is received in payment
of a just and correct claim against the city, and that no part of it has heretofore been paid@. When
endorsed by the payee named in the check, the statement shall operate and shall be deemed sufficient as
the required declaration of claim.
(E) Signing checks. All checks shall be signed by the City Treasurer and the Mayor.
(1994 Code, ' 2.14)
' 30.09 WORKER=S COMPENSATION.
All officers of the city elected or appointed for a regular term of office or to complete the unexpired
portion of any regular term shall be included in the definition of Aemployee@ as defined in state statutes
relating to coverage for purposes of worker=s compensation entitlement.
(1994 Code, ' 2.15)
' 30.10 FRANCHISES.
(A) Definition. The term FRANCHISE as used in this section shall be construed to mean any
special privileges granted to any person in, over, upon or under any of the streets or public places of the
city, whether the privilege has heretofore been granted by it or by the state, or shall hereafter be granted
by the city or by the state.
(B) Franchise ordinances. The Council may grant franchises by ordinance. Franchise rights shall
always be subject to the superior right of the public to the use of streets and public places. All persons
General Provisions
7
desiring to make any burdensome use of the streets or public places, inconsistent with the public=s right
in those places, or desiring the privilege of placing in, over, upon or under any street or public place any
permanent or semi-permanent fixtures for the purpose of constructing or operating railways,
telegraphing or transmitting electricity, or transporting by pneumatic tubes, or for furnishing to the city
or its inhabitants or any portion thereof, transportation facilities, water, light, heat, power, gas or any
other like utility, or for any other purpose, shall be required to obtain a franchise before proceeding to
make like use of the streets or public places or before proceeding to place the fixtures in those places.
(C) Power of regulation reserved. The city shall have the right and power to regulate and control the
exercise by any person, of any franchise however acquired, and whether the franchise has been
heretofore granted by it or by the state.
(D) Conditions in every franchise. All conditions specified in this section shall be a part of every
franchise even though they may not be expressly contained in the franchise.
(1) The grantee shall be subject to and will perform on its part all the terms of this section and
will comply with all pertinent provisions of any City Charter and city code, as the same may from time to
time be amended.
(2) The grantee shall in no case claim or pretend to exercise any power to fix fares, rates and
charges: but that the fares, rates and charges shall at all times be just, fair and reasonable for the services
rendered and shall in all cases be fixed and from time to time changed, unless regulated by an agency of
the state, in the manner following:
(a) A reasonable rate shall be construed to be one which will, with efficient management,
normally yield above all operating expenses and depreciation a fair return upon all money invested;
(b) If possible maximum rates and charges shall be arrived at by direct negotiation with
the Council; and
(c) If direct negotiations fail to produce agreement, the Council shall, not less than 30 days
before the expiration of any existing rate schedule or agreement, appoint an expert as its representative,
the franchisee shall likewise appoint an expert as its representative and the two of them shall appoint a
third person, preferably an expert, and the three of them shall constitute a board of arbitration. The board
shall report its findings as soon as possible and the rates and charges it shall agree upon by majority vote
shall be legal and binding, subject only to review by a court of competent jurisdiction upon application of
one of the parties.
(3) The Council shall have the right to require reasonable extensions of any public service
system from time to time, and to make rules and regulations as may be required to secure adequate and
proper service and to provide sufficient accommodations for the public.
(4) The grantee shall not issue any capital stock on account of the franchise or the value thereof
and that the grantee shall, have no right to receive upon condemnation proceedings brought by the city to
acquire the public utility exercising the franchise, any return on account of the franchise or its value.
Chisholm - Administration
8
(5) No sale or lease of the franchise shall be effective until the assignee or leasee shall have
filed with the city an instrument, duly executed, reciting the facts of the sale or lease, accepting the terms
of the franchise, and agreeing to perform all the conditions required of the grantee thereunder.
(6) Every grant in the franchise contained of permission for the erection of poles, masts or
other fixtures in the streets and for the attachment of wires thereto, or for the laying of tracks in, or of
pipes or conduits under the streets or public places, or for the placing in the streets or other public places
of any permanent or semi-permanent fixtures whatsoever, shall be subject to the conditions that the
Council shall have the power to require the alterations therein, or relocation or rerouting thereof, as the
Council may at any time deem necessary for the safety, health or convenience of the public, and
particularly that it shall have the power to require the removal of poles, masts and other fixtures bearing
wires and the placing underground of all facilities for whatsoever purpose used.
(7) Every franchise shall contain a provision granting the city the right to acquire the same in
accordance with statute.
(8) The franchisee may be obligated by the city to pay the city fees to raise revenue or defray
increased costs accruing as a result of utility operations, or both, including, but not limited to, a sum of
money based upon gross operating revenues or gross earnings from its operations in the city.
(E) Further provisions of franchises. The enumeration and specification of particular matters which
must be included in every franchise or renewal or extension thereof, shall not be construed as impairing
the right of the city to insert in any like franchise or renewal or extension thereof other and further
conditions and restrictions as the Council may deem proper to protect the city=s interests, nor shall
anything contained in this section limit any right or power possessed by the city over existing franchises.
(1994 Code, ' 2.60)
' 30.11 REGULATION FOR DEVELOPMENT OF LOTS.
(A) This section shall apply to all undeveloped lots contained within plats approved and accepted by
the Council prior to January 1, 1962. For purposes of this section, an UNDEVELOPED LOT is
determined to be a lot which requires the extension of utility mains and/or streets to a position adjacent to
or abutting the lot, for purposes of development of the lot.
(B) Prior to the issuance of a building permit for construction upon an undeveloped lot, the
applicant and the city shall enter into an agreement which agreement shall provide, among other things,
the following:
(1) A determination by the Council as to what portion of the cost of all improvements required
to service the lot shall be borne by the applicants which portion shall be not less than 40%; and
(2) The payment of the applicant=s share of the cost, which shall be either by cash payment
upon completion of the installation of the improvements or by special assessment against the lot, which
assessment shall be paid in no more than five annual installments, each bearing interest at the rate of 6%
General Provisions
9
per annum.
(1994 Code, ' 2.70)
' 30.12 PARTIAL PREPAYMENT OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
(A) Partial prepayment of assessments permitted. After the adoption of an assessment roll pursuant
to M.S. Chapter 429, as it may be amended from time to time, and before certification of the assessment
roll to the County Auditor, the City Clerk or other authorized official, is authorized and directed to accept
partial prepayment of the assessments but not less than 50% of the amount of any assessment, and reduce
the amount certified to the County Auditor accordingly. As provided by law, the partial prepayment may
be accepted only during the 30-day period following approval of the assessment roll.
(B) Scope. This section shall apply to all assessment rolls which, on the effective date hereof, have
been adopted by the Council but not yet certified to the County Auditor, and to all assessment rolls
subsequently adopted by the Council.
(1994 Code, ' 2.80)
' 30.13 INVESTMENT OF IDLE FUNDS.
(A) Authorization. Pursuant to state statutes and this section, the city is authorized to invest any
funds not presently needed for its obligations. In accordance the city may invest its idle funds in certain
specified obligations and it may make interest-bearing deposits of the funds in state or national banks,
and savings and loan associations.
(B) Permissible investments and interest-earning deposits set forth. Permissible investments and
interest-earning deposits are set forth in this section.
(1) Direct U.S. government obligations:
(a) Treasury bills;
(b) Certificates of indebtedness;
(c) Treasury notes; and
(d) Treasury bonds.
(2) Federal agency issues (not directly guaranteed by the U.S. government):
(a) Federal Home Loan Banks;
(b) Federal National Mortgage Association;
Chisholm - Administration
10
(c) Federal Land Banks;
(d) Federal Intermediate Credit Banks; and
(e) Banks for Cooperatives.
(3) Obligations of the state or state municipalities.
(4) Interest-bearing deposits.
(a) Time deposits shall be withdrawable and certificates of deposits and investments shall
mature and bear interest payable at times and in amounts which, in the judgement of the city will provide
cash at the times and in the amounts required for the purposes of paying the city obligations. There is one
exception, however: the city may authorize the purchase of longer term investments subject to an
agreement to repurchase the investments at times and prices sufficient to yield the amounts estimated to
be so required. Repurchase agreement may be made with a bank qualified as a depository or with any
national bank or state bank in the United States which is a member of the Federal Reserve System and
whose combined capital and surplus equals or exceeds $10,000,000 or with a reporting dealer to the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
(b) The city is also authorized to enter into a reverse repurchase agreement with any
institution with which it is authorized to make a repurchase agreement. A reverse repurchase agreement
obligates the city to repurchase at a fixed future date and price a security sold by it to a financial
institution.
(c) Any investments may be sold by the City Council at any time, but if the investment is
made from a debt service fund or another fund dedicated to a particular purpose, the money received
from the sale must remain a part of the fund until used for the purpose for which the fund was created.
(C) Criteria for making wise investments. The following shall be the criteria used in making
investments for the city with no exceptions.
(1) Safety. Includes the federal insurance available up to the specified maximum with excess
bank depositee protected by the furnishing of the required collateral (110% of the excess deposit). In no
case will home mortgages be permitted as collateral even though allowed in law. Direct obligations of the
United States (Treasury certificates, notes, bonds and bills) are guaranteed by the United States. Safety of
government agency issues must be weighed in terms of experience, types of loans which agencies make,
and what organizations Congress and the states permit to invest in agency issues.
(2) Spacing of maturities. This principle must be stated AWhen the money is needed, it must be
available@. In short, the interest to be earned, the length of the investment and the estimated cash flow
needs shall be weighed so as to obtain the maximum investment return with the funds available as
required.
(3) Liquidity. A proper investment must be sufficiently liquid so that the city is able to obtain
cash if an emergency arises.
General Provisions
11
(4) Yield. The investment or deposit providing maximum earnings shall be made since the
object, of investing idle funds is to put the taxpayer=s money to a use that will yield the greatest return
consistent with safety and the city=s later need for money.
(D) Cash flow analysis.
(1) Making the cash forecast. A cash forecast is the city=s tool for determining expected
expenditures and revenues over a projected period of time which may be a fiscal calendar year or several
fiscal calendar years.
(2) Determining the amount to be kept in the checking account. This is the amount required to
cover any obligations of the city that may be outstanding plus any money that may be expended based on
the cash flow projections between investment periods and in relation to the city determined fiscal periods
plus any banking or financial institution service charges that may be incurred for the maintenance of the
city=s accounts.
(3) Accountability. Investments should be shown at cost, adjusted for any premium or
discount. An accounting schedule of investments for each year will show for each investment the date
purchased and sold, the price paid with reference to 100 as par, the total cost to the city, the amount
realized on sale, with premium, if any, and the interest received by the city.
(E) Investment depository/investment officer designations.
(1) Investment depository designation. The City Council at an annual meeting will designate
the official depository(s) as prescribed in accordance with state law and may add or delete depositories
from time to time as required for the proper conduct of city business with these actions being officially
recorded.
(2) Investment officer designation. By City Charter and this section, the City Treasurer is
designated as the primary investment officer. In the absence of the City Treasurer (absence being defined
as he or she is unavailable) the following alternates are designated to act as the investment officer: City
Clerk-Treasurer; Deputy City Clerk-Treasurer or Mayor.
(F) Penalty. Violations of the provision of this section shall fall under state law in accordance with
the magnitude of the violation.
(Ord. 114, passed 8-8-2006) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 30.14 BUDGET CALENDAR.
(A) Authorization. Pursuant to state statutes and the City Charter, the City Council requires the city
budget calendar as the required time line to meet its needs and those of the outside agencies.
Chisholm - Administration
12
(B) Budget Calendar. The following represents the dates to be used as the official budget calendar:
(1) June 1 through 10: The City Administrator had the responsibility for preparing the budget,
distributes budget calendars, worksheets and notifies departments to begin preparing the next year=s
budgets;
(2) June 10 through 15: Department head/supervisors prepare their budgets and the city=s
Administrator confers with them;
(3) July 5: Department heads/supervisors submit department budgets to the City
Administrator;
(4) July 5 through 15: The City Administrator assembles department budgets into the
preliminary city budget;
(5) July 15: The City Administrator submits the preliminary budget to the City Council. The
city must give public notice that the Council will hold a budget hearing for discussion of all items in the
budget;
(6) July 16 through August 15: The City Council considers the preliminary budget, confers
with department head/supervisors, discusses proposed taxes and estimated revenues, and makes
preliminary budget decisions;
(7) August 1: The city receives information from the state on its levy limits and the amount of
local governmental monies in the form of aid receipts for the next year. Cities will also receive
information on any credits they can expect to receive. Cities have a certain number of days from the time
they receive notice of their certified amount to file objections with the appropriate state agency as to the
accuracy of the amounts to be paid. Dates and types of aids and credits change from time to time and will
be determined by state law;
(8) August 16 through September 15: The City Council must adopt the proposed budget and
certify proposed tax levy. Results of the hearing are furnished to the County Auditor with proposed levy
amounts to be used in preparation of ATruth in Taxation@ statements to be mailed at later date;
(9) November 10: County Auditor sends out to each parcel property owner the ATruth in
Taxation@ statements disclosing the results of the budget process and the proposed property taxes
resulting therein;
(10) November 29 through December 29: The City Council holds public hearings on the final
budget proposals. Council adopts the budget and resolutions levying taxes to cover the final budget;
(11) After budget adoption: The city posts the adopted budget in the principal municipal
building and the city publishes a summary budget statement in an authorized legal newspaper
(M.S. ' 471.6965);
General Provisions
13
(12) December 28: Deadline for certifying final property tax levy to county auditor (five
working days after December 20). The city shall furnish the County Auditor with a certified copy of the
City Council resolution levying taxes. The city should submit the appropriate form(s) to the state if so
required (M.S. ' 275.065); and
(13) January 1: Implementation of calendar year budget.
(C) Budget Checklist for Council.
(1) After the City Administrator has prepared the preliminary budget, the Council must assume
full responsibility for reviewing and approving it in its final form. In this review, the Council should
consider several questions:
(a) Does the budget meet the needs of the community? Are there some services which the
city should reduce or eliminate to provide funds for new programs or for the expansion of existing
programs?
(b) Does it provide proper balance between activities, especially between more essential
and less essential services?
(c) Will the work programs assure adequate standards of service?
(d) Is the proposed budget a sound and honest one? Are revenue estimates realistic? Does
it include all expenditures and conceivable contingencies? Does it contain a contingency appropriation
for emergencies?
(e) Is the budget economical, providing the greatest value per dollar?
(f) Is the budget consistent with the ability and willingness of the citizens to support it?
(g) Does the budget discharge a city=s responsibility for the future? Is it consistent with
the city plan and with other long-term policies for the development of the community and a five year
capital improvement program?
(2) The Council should consider these questions after tentatively agreeing on the budget as a
whole.
(Ord. 115, passed 10-25-2006)
' 30.15 REIMBURSEMENTS AND ADVANCES FOR EXPENSES.
(A) Authorization. Pursuant to state statutes and this section, the elected and appointed officials and
employees of the city are entitled to reimbursements and advances for expenses related to the specific
business of the city and will be reimbursed or advanced the appropriate dollar amount in accordance with
this section and the resolutions passed specifying the amounts allowed to be paid therein.
Chisholm - Administration
14
(B) Mileage. When required to use their own vehicles for attending meetings, conferences,
seminars, judicial proceedings or in the course of normal city work, they shall be reimbursed at a rate
designated in a resolution of the City Council.
(C) Meals. When working or on city business and at the express (verbal/written by department
head/Administrator/Council) authorization of the city, they shall receive up to a maximum daily
reimbursement or specified meal allowance as designated in a resolution of the City Council.
(D) Hotel and lodging. When on city business and at the express (verbal/written by department
head/Administrator/Council) authorization of the city, they shall be reimbursed for the actual cost of
hotel/lodging based upon single occupancy room charges or as designated in a resolution of the City
Council.
(E) Air travel, train, car rental and other transportation. When on city business and at the express
(verbal/written by department head/Administrator/Council) authorization of the city, they shall be
reimbursed for coach/economy fares for airlines and other forms of transportation will be reimbursed and
computed in a manner in the city=s best interests and the most reasonable method of transportation for
cost shall be used.
(F) Telephone calls. Telephone calls made specifically for city business when city telephones are
not available will be reimbursed based on actual charges incurred. City telephone credit cards will be
used when practical and will only be used when the city telephone lines are not available. Personal
telephone calls will not be reimbursed.
(G) Laundry and dry cleaning. Laundry and dry cleaning costs will only be reimbursed at the
express authorization of the city, and if a reimbursement is permitted, it will be as designated in a
resolution of the City Council.
(H) Parking and toll charges. Parking and toll charges will be reimbursed for city business based on
actual charges at the express authorization of the city.
(I) Other special expenses. Expenses not elsewhere authorized in this section that are incurred on
or for city business at the express authorization of the city, shall be reimbursed based on the actual
charges and/or as designated in a resolution of the City Council.
(J) Advances. Upon the expressed written approval of the department head, City Administrator and
two Council members of the city for the conduct of its business, elected and appointed officials and
employees of the city may request an advance based on a completed advance estimate of the anticipated
total expenses to be incurred in the course of conducting city business. An advance cannot exceed the
anticipated total expenses and may be advanced as required prior to the anticipated expense being
incurred. Payment of advances according to normal city policy on payments.
(K) Reimbursements. All claims for expense reimbursement shall be submitted to the City Clerk=s
office with the appropriate paid receipts for a particular item. In the case of an advance, any amounts not
advanced will be reimbursed according to this section and any over payments for an advance will be
General Provisions
15
returned within ten calendar days upon returning to the city with a claim submitted verifying the proper
use of city funds. All other claims for reimbursement will be submitted within 35 days of returning to the
city and will be paid as required by normal city policy for claims payment.
(L) Definitions and authorizations.
(1) EXPRESS AUTHORIZATION OF THE CITY means receiving the department
head/supervisor/Administrator and/or City Council approval by formal approval prior to incurring the
expense for items in the current approved budget and in concurrence with the City Administrator. For
expenses not authorized in the budget, the City Administrator must approve and may require City
Council approval depending on the circumstances. Advances are dollar amounts issued prior to incurring
the expense and are to be used to defray the costs related to the purpose of the advance and at no time are
to be used for any other purpose.
(2) REIMBURSEMENT is the process of receiving payment for expenses incurred in the
course of doing city business and are permitted under this section and state statutes as items that can be
repaid for justified city expenses.
(a) No provision of this section or resolutions designated by the City Council related to the
topic of this section will supercede provisions of State Bureau of Mediation Services approved
bargaining unit. Agreements that contain provisions related to the topic of this section that are different.
(b) Approved bargaining unit agreements that specify reimbursement policies will be
followed and this section will apply in the absence of reimbursement provisions.
(M) Penalty. Violations of the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(N) Reimbursement and advance rates for business expense.
Mileage
Current internal revenue service rate
Meals
Breakfast
$5.50
Lunch
$7
Dinner
$12.50
Note: Where the meal rate is part of a conference, seminar, workshop or similar function, the rate included in
the fees for the event will be paid in lieu of the above stated schedule. A total daily maximum meal allowance of
$25 or the above schedule is the authorized amounts that can be paid for reimbursement. Any amounts in excess
are not subject to reimbursement. Reimbursement within the limits stated herein will be based on actual costs.
Hotels and lodging
A limit of $95 per night is hereby established. Any costs beyond the established
dollar amount is the responsibility of the affected party and not that of the city.
Exceptions to this rule would be those costs associated with and/or included with
a conference registration.
Chisholm - Administration
16
Laundry and dry cleaning As defined in division (G) above
Other special expenses
As defined in division (I) above
(Ord. 116, passed 11-28-2006; Res. 06-023, passed 11-28-2006)
' 30.16 CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND; EMPLOYEES, LICENSES.
(A) Applicants for city employment; purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish
regulations that will allow law enforcement access to state=s computerized criminal history information
for specified non-criminal purposes of employment background checks for the positions described in
division (B) below.
(B) Criminal history employment background investigations.
(1) The City Police Department is hereby required, as the exclusive entity within the city, to do
a criminal history background investigation on the applicants for the following positions within the city,
unless the city=s hiring authority concludes that a background investigation is not needed.
(2) Employment positions: all regular part-time, full-time and seasonal employees of the city
and other positions that work with children or vulnerable adults. Please note that the city will not obtain
all of the criminal data authorized under the Child Protection Background Check Act (M.S. '' 299C.61
and 62) on positions working with children by using the city=s Police Department to conduct
background checks. The city must access those records by using the service provided by the Bureau of
Criminal Apprehension and paying the associated fee. For more information contact the BCA or the
League of Minnesota Cities).
(3) In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen employment
applicants, the Police Department is authorized to access data maintained in the State Bureau of Criminal
Apprehensions Computerized Criminal History information system in accordance with BCA policy. Any
data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Police Department under the care and
custody of the chief law enforcement official or his or her designee. A summary of the results of the
computerized criminal history data may be released by the Police Department to the hiring authority,
including the City Council, the City Attorney and the City Administrator/Clerk or other city staff
involved in the hiring process.
(4) Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the Police Department
by written consent to undertake the investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the
provisions of M.S. Chapter 13, as it may be amended from time to time, regarding the collection,
maintenance and use of the information. Except for the positions set forth in M.S. ' 364.09, as it may be
amended from time to time, the city will not reject an applicant for employment on the basis of the
applicant=s prior conviction unless the crime is directly related to the position of employment sought and
the conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor with a jail sentence. If the city rejects
the applicant=s request on this basis, the city shall notify the applicant in writing of the following:
General Provisions
17
(a) The grounds and reasons for the denial;
(b) The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in M.S. ' 364.06, as it may
be amended from time to time;
(c) The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment; and
(d) That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon re-application.
(C) License background checks.
(1) Applicants for city licenses; purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish
regulations that will allow law enforcement access to state=s computerized criminal history information
for specified non-criminal purposes of licensing background checks.
(2) Criminal history license background investigations.
(a) The City Police Department is hereby required, as the exclusive entity within the city,
to do a criminal history background investigation on the applicants for the following licenses within the
city:
(b) City licenses:
1. Liquor, peddler licenses; and
2. Tobacco, beer, alcohol.
(c) In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen license
applicants, the Police Department is authorized to access data maintained in the State Bureau of Criminal
Apprehensions Computerized Criminal History information system in accordance with BCA policy. Any
data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Police Department under the care and
custody of the chief law enforcement official or his or her designee. A summary of the results of the
computerized criminal history data may be released by the Police Department to the licensing authority,
including the City Council, the City Administrator, Clerk and Attorney or other city staff involved in the
license approval process.
(d) Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the Police
Department by written consent to undertake the investigation. The written consent must fully comply
with the provisions of M.S. Chapter 13, as it may be amended from time to time, regarding the collection,
maintenance and use of the information. Except for the positions set forth in M.S. ' 364.09, as it may be
amended from time to time, the city will not reject an applicant for a license on the basis of the
applicant=s prior conviction unless the crime is directly related to the license sought and the conviction is
for a felony, gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor with a jail sentence.
Chisholm - Administration
18
(e) If the city rejects the applicant=s request on this basis, the city shall notify the
applicant in writing of the following:
1. The grounds and reasons for the denial;
2. The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in M.S. ' 364.06, as it
may be amended from time to time;
3. The earliest date the applicant may reapply for the license; and
4. That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon
re-application.
(Ord. 152, passed 10-26-2010)
19
CHAPTER 31: CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
31.01 Departments generally
31.02 Public Safety Department
31.03 Building Department
31.04 Volunteer Fire Department
31.05 Planning Commission
31.06 Joint Airport Commission
31.07 Chisholm-Hibbing Municipal Joint Airport Zoning Board
31.08 Recreation Board
31.09 Board of Adjustments and Appeals
31.10 Housing Advisory and Appeals Board
31.11 Charitable Gambling Control Board
' 31.01 DEPARTMENTS GENERALLY.
(A) Control. All departments of the city are under the overall general control of the Council. Heads
of all departments are responsible to the Administrator/Clerk and subject to its supervision and direction,
except as otherwise provided herein.
(B) Appointment. All department heads and employees shall be appointed by the Council. Except as
otherwise herein provided, all appointments shall be for an indeterminate term and subject to any
applicable civil service regulations.
(C) Compensation. All wages and salaries shall be fixed and determined by the Council.
(1994 Code, ' 2.20)
' 31.02 PUBLIC SAFETY DEPARTMENT.
(A) Establishment. A Public Safety Department is hereby created for the purpose of law
enforcement.
Chisholm - Administration
20
(B) Organization. The Public Safety Department shall be under the direct supervision and control of
the Public Safety Director who, as to all matters relating thereto, shall be the Chief of Police. The Public
Safety Director shall be assisted by captains and other officers and employees as the Council may deem
necessary.
(1994 Code, ' 2.21)
' 31.03 BUILDING DEPARTMENT.
(A) Established. A Building Department is hereby established.
(B) Building Inspector and other personnel. The Building Department shall be under the
supervision of the Building Inspector (Administrative Authority) designated or appointed by the Council
to carry out the duties and responsibilities delegated to him or her in the construction chapter of the city
code and to enforce the provisions of the State Building Code (SBC). For that purpose he or she shall
have the powers of a police officer. The Council may appoint other officers, inspectors and assistants and
other employees as may be necessary, from time to time. Certain of employees may be designated
Deputy Building Inspectors for the purpose of carrying out the functions of the Building Department, and
with the same powers and authority as the Building Inspector.
(C) Reports and records. The Building Inspector shall submit a report to the Council not less than
once a year covering the work of the Department during the preceding period. He or she shall incorporate
in the report a summary of his or her recommendations as to desirable amendments to the SBC and the
construction chapter of this code. The Building Inspector shall keep a permanent, accurate account of all
fees and other monies collected or received by the Department, the names of the persons upon whose
account the same were paid, the date and amount thereof, together with the location of the building or
premises to which they relate.
(1994 Code, ' 2.22)
' 31.04 VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT.
The rules and regulations of the Volunteer Fire Department shall be submitted to the Council, and if
approved by the Council, shall be enforced, and any amendments to rules and regulations shall be
approved by the Council and made a part of its minutes.
(1994 Code, ' 2.23)
' 31.05 PLANNING COMMISSION.
(A) Establishment and composition. A Planning Commission shall be comprised of five members
and shall meet all the other statutes of the state.
(B) Duties. The Planning Commission shall have all the powers and duties that are mandatory or
discretionary under the city code and statutes of the state.
City Organizations
21
(1994 Code, ' 2.31) (Ord. 117, passed 11-29-2006)
' 31.06 JOINT AIRPORT COMMISSION.
(A) Establishment and composition. The Chisholm-Hibbing Airport Commission, heretofore
created by joint ordinances of the City of Hibbing and the City of Chisholm, pursuant to M.S. ' 360.042,
as it may be amended from time to time, and acts amendatory thereof, and laws amendatory thereof and
supplementary thereto, be and the same is hereby continued and reestablished and reconstituted for a
period of 20 years from the joint passage of the ordinance by the City of Hibbing and the City of
Chisholm, which Airport Commission shall continue to be known as the Chisholm-Hibbing Airport
Commission and shall be composed of six members, three of whom shall be appointed by a majority vote
of the City Council of the City of Chisholm, and three of whom shall be appointed by a majority vote of
the City Council of the City of Hibbing. The members of the Commission may serve with compensation
as determined by the Commission and approved by the cities.
(B) Term of office. The term of the members of the Commission shall be for a period of three years
and until their successors are appointed and qualified. The present members of the Chisholm-Hibbing
Airport Commission=s term shall continue until those terms of office expire. Thereafter, each
municipality shall appoint one member for a term of three years and until their successors are appointed
and qualified. No elected or appointed officials of either the City of Chisholm or the City of Hibbing and
no appointed employee of either of the municipalities shall be a member of the Commission.
(C) Officers. The Joint Commission shall elect one of its members to be Chairperson of the
Commission, one member thereof to be Vice-Chairperson and shall appoint a Clerk or Deputy Clerk as
Secretary-Treasurer. Each appointee shall hold office for the term of one year and until his or her
successor is appointed and qualified.
(D) Duties and powers of the Commission.
(1) The Commission shall have full authority and responsibility for the maintenance and
regulation of the Chisholm-Hibbing Municipal Airport. The Commission shall engage an airport
manager who shall be directly responsible to the Chairperson of the Commission for the management,
regulation and maintenance of the Chisholm-Hibbing Municipal Airport. The name now adopted for the
airport is the Chisholm-Hibbing Municipal Airport.
(2) The Commission shall have all of the power and authority vested in the municipalities
under the laws of the state and of the United States relating to the construction, management and
operation of airports. Without limiting its general powers vested in it by law, it shall have authority to
acquire necessary property for and to hire personnel as it deems necessary, establish, construct, enlarge,
improve, maintain, equip, operate and regulate and continue to operate the airport now known as the
Chisholm-Hibbing Municipal Airport, and other air navigation facilities and airport protection privileges
to be acquired, controlled and operated by the Commission.
(3) The Commission may enter into contracts with the county and may exercise on behalf of
the City of Chisholm and the City of Hibbing all of the powers of each municipality granted by M.S.
Chisholm - Administration
22
'' 360.011 to 360.076, as it may be amended from time to time, and amendments thereto.
(4) Rules and regulations provided by M.S. ' 360.038(3), as it may be amended from time to
time, may be adopted by the Commission but shall be enacted only after approval by the respective
municipal Councils, pursuant to the provisions of M.S. ' 360.042(8), as it may be amended from time to
time.
(E) Rules and regulations. The following rules and regulations shall govern the conduct and
operation of the Chisholm-Hibbing Municipal Airport and shall be observed by all persons using,
operating at or visiting the Chisholm-Hibbing Municipal Airport.
(1) The Federal Aviation Authority Regulations, promoted by the Federal Aviation
Administration presently or hereafter in effect are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as
though fully set forth and incorporated herein.
(2) No aircraft or airman shall operate upon or over the Chisholm-Hibbing Municipal Airport
unless that aircraft or airman is duly licensed by the Federal Aviation Administration, provided that this
limitation shall not apply to students in training under a licensed instructor nor to public aircraft of the
United States government or of a state, territory or political subdivision thereof, nor to any aircraft
licensed by a foreign government with which the United States has a reciprocal agreement covering the
operation of the licensed aircraft.
(3) Any person causing damage of any kind to the Chisholm-Hibbing Municipal Airport,
whether through violation of any of these rules or through any act or omission of commission, shall be
liable therefor to the Chisholm-Hibbing Municipal Airport Commission.
(4) No person under the influence of intoxicants or narcotics shall operate or fly in any aircraft
upon or over the Chisholm-Hibbing Municipal Airport provided the prohibition shall not apply to a
passenger when accompanied by adequate medical attendants.
(5) To enforce the payment of any charge made for repairs, improvements, storage, damage or
care of any personal property made or furnished by the Airport Commission or its agents in connection
with the operation of the Chisholm-Hibbing Municipal Airport, the Airport Commission shall have a lien
upon the personal property which shall be enforceable as provided by law. To enforce the payment of any
like charge the Airport Commission or airport manager may retain possession of the personal property
until all those charges shall have been paid in full.
(6) Every aircraft owner, his or her pilot, or agent, shall be responsible for the prompt removal
from the landing area, under the supervision of the airport manager or his or her assistant, of any wrecked
aircraft.
City Organizations
23
(a) No aircraft shall be operated over the City of Chisholm or the City of Hibbing at an
altitude less than that altitude which will permit a landing outside of the congested area in the event of a
complete power failure, but in no event at an altitude of less than 1,000 feet from the ground or water. No
person shall operate aircraft engines through acceleration or deceleration while over the City of
Chisholm or the City of Hibbing in a manner as will distract, excite or disturb persons on the ground
regardless of altitude. No person shall do any aerobatics over the City of Chisholm or the City of Hibbing
at any time.
(b) All vehicular traffic shall be confined to roads, streets and avenues on the grounds of
the airport, and no person shall enter the landing area with an automobile, truck, motor scooter,
motorcycle or other vehicle; provided that this rule shall not apply to airport maintenance vehicles nor to
gasoline trucks engaged in servicing aircraft. In an emergency, ambulance and fire trucks may enter the
landing area under the direction of the Director of Aviation or airport manager or the Chief Controller on
duty in the Chisholm-Hibbing Airport Traffic Control Tower.
(7) No real property and no airport, other air navigation facility or air protection privileges,
shall be disposed of by the Commission by sale or lease or otherwise except by authority of both
Councils, but the Commission may make changes and alterations from time to time as are required in the
proper and efficient operation of the airport.
(8) The Commission may lease space, area or improvements and grant concessions for
aeronautic purposes or purposes incidental thereto subject to the provisions of M.S. ' 360.038(4), as it
may be amended from time to time.
(F) Contributions to capital costs. Subject to the qualifications hereinafter set forth, the City of
Chisholm shall contribute 40% and the City of Hibbing shall contribute 60% of the cost of additional
lands that may be added to the present Chisholm-Hibbing Airport and the capital costs of construction;
improvements and development of the airport which is not covered by the county, state and federal or
other contributions thereto. Title to the airport prior to adoption of the joint airport ordinance in 1957
shall remain in the City of Hibbing and title to any additions thereafter shall be taken in the name of the
Chisholm-Hibbing Airport.
(G) Operation costs. The City of Chisholm shall contribute 40% and the City of Hibbing shall
contribute 60% of the cost of maintaining and operating the airport and all additions thereto and the cities
of Chisholm and Hibbing may levy an amount to be determined annually to be used in operating and
maintaining the airport on the above 40%-60% basis, exclusive of contributions that may be made
therefor by the county, the federal government or any other source. Neither municipality shall charge the
Commission any rentals or other compensation for the use of the airport, easements or airport facilities,
now or hereafter acquired or installed. The amount of contribution by the City of Chisholm and the City
of Hibbing on the 40%-60% basis, may be altered, changed, increased and amended by joint resolutions
passed by the City Councils of the City of Chisholm and the City of Hibbing during the term of this
section between the two respective municipalities; provided the amount of contribution shall be and
always remains 40% by the City of Chisholm and 60% by the City of Hibbing.
(H) Budget.
Chisholm - Administration
24
(1) The Commission shall each year prior to July 16, prepare a budget for financing the airport
for the ensuing calendar year. A copy of the budget shall, not later than July 15, be furnished to the City
Council of the City of Chisholm and the City Council of the City of Hibbing, and shall contain the
following items:
(a) Estimated revenues divided as follows:
1. Federal and state grants;
2. Contributions from the City of Chisholm;
3. Contributions from the City of Hibbing;
4. Contributions from the county; and
5. Miscellaneous revenues.
(b) Estimated expenditures:
1. Personal services;
2. Services other than personal;
3. Supplies and maintenance;
4. Equipment;
5. Real estate and improvements; and
6. Miscellaneous expenditures.
(2) Final decision of the respective City Councils as to requested contributions shall be
reported to the Commission which shall adjust its budget, if necessary, so that its budget may at all times
be balanced. Money not expended in the budget may be carried over to the following year.
(3) The Commission shall not have the power to levy taxes or borrow money and it shall not
approve any claim or incur any obligation for expenditures unless there is unencumbered cash in the
appropriate airport fund to the credit of the Commission with which to pay the same.
(I) Finances. All receipts of money shall be deposited in the bank or banks selected by the Airport
Commission and credited to the account of the Joint Airport Commission. No disbursements shall be
made except by check in a manner as the Commission may determine and approve. An audit of the funds
of the Commission shall be made annually. The audits may be made independently or in conjunction
with any audit which may be made of the funds of either of the municipalities. Any employee of the
Commission who handles cash in the process of collection shall, if the Commission so requires, furnish a
surety bond in an amount as may be determined by the Commission.
City Organizations
25
(J) Reports. The Commission as soon as possible after the end of each calendar year shall propose
and present to each City Council and the county a comprehensive report of its activities and finances. The
Commission shall also prepare and present federal and state officials with reports as may be required by
law, regulation or contract.
(K) Disposition of property upon termination.
(1) This section when adopted by the City Council of the City of Chisholm and when a
concurrent ordinance is adopted by the City Council of the City of Hibbing shall constitute a contract
between the municipalities and shall be in full force and effect for 20 years thereafter; provided, that the
provisions thereof, except as to the duration of the contract, may be amended by mutual agreement of the
municipalities. Thereafter, it shall continue in force from year to year. The municipalities shall continue
the joint operation of the airport and the Joint Commission pursuant to the joint ordinances of the cities
until a time as it is agreed between both cities to jointly dissolve the Joint Airport Commission. Should
the airport ever dissolve as a municipal airport for any reason, all property, including real and personal,
shall be disposed of in a manner as shall be agreed upon by the two cities.
(2) The City of Hibbing shall at all times retain title to the lands, easements and structures
formerly included in the old Hibbing Municipal Airport which existed prior to the formation of the
Chisholm-Hibbing Joint Airport Commission in 1957. If no agreement as to disposition of additional
acquired lands, property and facilities is reached within three months after termination of the plan for a
joint operation of the airport, the respective municipal Councils shall each appoint some person, who
may be a municipal official, as its representative and the State Commissioner of Aeronautics shall
appoint a third person, who shall together compose an advisory board for the disposition of the airport
property. This Board shall as soon as possible prepare and recommend to the Council of each
municipality a complete plan for the disposition of all additional lands, structures and facilities acquired
subsequent to the origination of a Chisholm-Hibbing Joint Airport Commission in 1957.
(1994 Code, ' 2-32)
' 31.07 CHISHOLM-HIBBING MUNICIPAL JOINT AIRPORT ZONING BOARD.
(A) Establishment and composition. The County Board having taken similar action, a
Chisholm-Hibbing Municipal Joint Airport Zoning Board is hereby established. The Board shall be
composed of five members; one appointed by each of the Cities of Chisholm and Hibbing, two by the
County Board, and a Chairperson elected by majority vote of the members so appointed, all of whom
shall serve for terms of three years.
(B) Inconsistent provisions. Provisions in this section shall take precedence over provisions in this
chapter relating generally to boards and commissions to the extent of any inconsistency but only as to the
Board hereby established.
Chisholm - Administration
26
(C) Duties. It is the duty of the Board to adopt, administer and enforce airport zoning regulations
applicable to airport hazards as vested and defined in applicable laws of the state in the case made and
provided.
(1994 Code, ' 2.33)
' 31.08 RECREATION BOARD.
(A) Establishment and composition. A Recreation Board is hereby established and shall be
comprised of five members from the city community area.
(B) Board membership and officers. The Board shall elect a President, Vice President, Secretary
who may be other than an appointed Board member in which case the office will be an ex-officio
(non-voting) member of the Board, and a Treasurer who shall be the City Treasurer/Deputy City
Treasurer who will serve as an ex-officio (non-voting) member of the Board. Commissioners shall serve
with or without pay as determined by the City Council. Board members shall serve a three-year term of
office and may be eligible for reappointment to a second three-year term; provided however, that no
Commissioner shall be appointed for more than two consecutive terms on the same Commission.
Commissioner terms shall be staggered so that the terms of a portion of the members of each
Commission shall expire each year. There shall be one elected Council member on the Commissions as a
voting member. Original and successive appointees shall serve in their offices until their successors are
appointed and qualified. Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term of the Recreation Board
member by the City Council.
(C) Duties. The Recreation Board shall provide Aadvisory@ oversight for the operations and
activities of the city=s Recreation Department; its buildings, playgrounds and other recreational
facilities. It is the duty of the Recreation Board to advise on operations and capital improvements of the
Recreation Department to the City Council and/or their designated representative(s). The Recreation
Board may advise on the employment activities of the department as may be required from time to time
with all final decisions resting with the City Council and/or their designated representatives.
(D) Finances. The City Council shall provide financing for the programs and capital improvements
of the Recreation Department and the funding will be as approved in a city=s annual budget. The
Recreation Board shall provide guidance on the funding requirements for the Department.
(1994 Code, ' 2.34) (Ord. 121, passed 1-9-2007)
' 31.09 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS AND APPEALS.
(A) Establishment and composition. A Board of Adjustments and Appeals, composed of three
members, none of whom shall hold any other public office or position in the city government, except as
otherwise provided herein, is hereby established for the purpose of handling all appeals and adjustments
under provisions of the city code relating to zoning and land use in the city. All appointments thereto
shall be made by the Council for staggered terms of three years. In addition to the foregoing membership,
the City Attorney shall be an ex-officio member and no decisions or deliberations shall take place in his
City Organizations
27
or her absence. The Chairperson and Secretary shall be chosen from and by the Board membership at its
first regular meeting in January of each year to serve for the current calendar year.
(B) Duties, decisions and review. It is the duty of the Board of Adjustments and Appeals to hear and
decide all petitions for adjustment and appeals from decisions of the Planning Commission or an
administrative officer relating to the enforcement of any zoning or subdivision provision of the city code
or a statute of the state. Its decisions shall be final, subject only to judicial review.
(C) Time of filing and fee. All petitions and appeals shall be filed with the Board within 15 days after
written notice of the adverse decision is mailed. The petition or written notice of appeal shall be served
upon the City Clerk, with payment of a fee of $10.
(D) Form and contents. All petitions and appeals shall be filed by the aggrieved person and shall
briefly state the facts and circumstances giving rise to the petition or appeal. For the purpose of this
section, an AGGRIEVED PERSON shall be any person whose property rights are affected by the
decision appealed from.
(E) Hearing and procedure.
(1) Upon receipt of any petition or appeal, the City Clerk shall forthwith forward a copy
thereof to the Secretary of the Board, the Secretary of the Planning Commission, any administrative
officer involved in the enforcement thereof and the City Attorney, showing the date of receipt thereof,
(2) Within 30 days after receipt of the petition or notice of appeal by the City Clerk, the Board
shall call a hearing thereon and give notice thereof in writing to all petitioners, appellants and other
persons as the Board may determine to have an interest or property right in any decision made pursuant
thereto, which shall include the Planning Commission by notice to its Secretary and administrative
officers as it may determine. The notice shall be mailed at least 20 days prior to the date set for hearing.
Notice shall also be given to the public by publication thereof once in a legal newspaper at least 14 days
prior to the date set for hearing.
(3) At any hearing, all persons desiring to be heard shall have the opportunity, including the
Planning Commission, it being deemed to have completed its investigation by the date set for hearing.
(1994 Code, ' 2.35)
' 31.10 HOUSING ADVISORY AND APPEALS BOARD.
(A) Establishment and composition. A Housing Advisory and Appeals Board, composed of five
members who are not employees of the city, and who shall serve staggered three year terms, is hereby
established. The Building Official shall be an ex-officio member and shall act as Secretary of the Board.
Chisholm - Administration
28
(B) Powers and duties. The Board shall have all of the powers and duties set forth in the Uniform
Housing Code.
(1994 Code, ' 2.37)
' 31.11 CHARITABLE GAMBLING CONTROL BOARD.
(A) Composition. The Charitable Gambling Board will be composed of three members.
Membership shall include Chairman of the Police Commission, the City Administrator/Clerk or his or
her designee and a member selected from a list of recommendations made by the previous year licensees.
If no nomination is made by licensees, one resident of the city shall be appointed by the City Council.
(B) Duties. The Charitable Gambling Board shall have the following duties:
(1) Prepare and recommend changes in procedure and practice governing charitable gambling
in the city;
(2) To appoint one of its members as its Chairperson and to hold meetings at the call of its
Chairperson;
(3) To give proper notification to all of the charitable gambling license holders in the city of
any and all of the meetings of the Charitable Gambling Board to hear the complaints of the license
holders and to hear any recommendations of the license holders. The Charitable Gambling Board shall
thereafter make recommendations to the Council;
(4) To prepare and recommend to the Council changes in procedure and practice governing
charitable gambling in the city, and to make recommendations to the Council with regard to possible
changes in city code provisions governing charitable gambling in the city;
(5) To examine the records and/or reports of each licensed organization filed with the city
to determine the licensed organization=s net profits are expended for the purposes set forth in
' 111.09(C)(6);
(6) Govern how many sites in which charitable gambling shall conduct charitable gambling;
and
(7) Govern how many charitable gambling organizations operating within the city.
(Ord. 149, passed 9-22-2009; Ord. 160, passed 10-9-2012)
29
CHAPTER 32: PURCHASING POLICY
Section
32.01 Purpose
32.02 Purchasing agents
32.03 Purchasing procedures
32.04 Guidelines
32.05 City employee purchasing
32.06 Award recommendations
32.07 Purchasing limits
32.08 Purchasing limits over $5,000 and less than $50,000
32.09 Purchasing limits over $50,000
32.10 Emergency purchasing
' 32.01 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the regulations for purchasing for the city.
(Ord. 127, passed 6-26-2007)
' 32.02 PURCHASING AGENTS.
The City Clerk (or City Administrator if the position exists) shall serve as the AChief Purchasing
Agent@ of the city and is responsible for oversight of the city-wide purchasing function. Department
head/supervisors shall serve as Apurchasing agents@ of the city with responsibility for their specific
functional areas.
(Ord. 127, passed 6-26-2007)
' 32.03 PURCHASING PROCEDURES.
All purchases and contracts shall where practical, be based on specifications with a copy being
placed on file with the City Clerk and open to inspection by the public. Notice inviting quotes/bids
may/shall be published in the legal newspaper, trade publications and may/shall extend invitations to bid
to perspective bidders at the Chief Purchasing Agent=s or Council=s discretion. Quotes/bids shall be
received by the City Clerk to be opened at the time and place designated in the notice or by default in the
city offices. The City Clerk or designee shall at a minimum be present at all bid openings.
30
(Ord. 127, passed 6-26-2007)
' 32.04 GUIDELINES.
At least two to three competitive prices shall be solicited where practical. When feasible, quotations
or bids shall be based on plans and specifications. Competition shall be upon common merchandise,
conditions or services so as to foster the competition. Purchase orders may be used for purchases where
practical and would contain an authorized signature by the departmental purchasing agent, Chief
Purchasing Agent and/or Mayor depending on city requirements.
(Ord. 127, passed 6-26-2007)
' 32.05 CITY EMPLOYEE PURCHASING.
No city employee is empowered to order, sign or give receipt for materials (defined as: receipt by the
authorized person ordering, not someone receiving the goods on behalf of the person ordering) except
where there is an authorized purchase order, approval verbal/written by the departmental purchasing
agent and/or the Chief Purchasing Agent. Failure to follow this chapter may subject the employee (City
Council action required) to becoming personally liable for any and all costs incurred therein.
(Ord. 127, passed 6-26-2007)
' 32.06 AWARD RECOMMENDATIONS.
The Chief Purchasing Agent shall coordinate the purchasing process and recommend as
appropriate the purchase or contract most advantageous for the city. Every effort will be made to seek
award to the lowest responsible purchase or quote. Award shall be to the lowest responsible bidder. This
section does not directly apply to professional services contracts. It is the City Council who reserves the
right to accept or reject any or all of the quotes or bids and may waive informalities therein.
(Ord. 127, passed 6-26-2007)
' 32.07 PURCHASING LIMITS.
(A) Department heads/supervisors shall have the authority to authorize and/or approve purchases of
goods/services up to $1,000 based on allocations contained in department specific functional areas of
responsibility except for local improvement projects and contracts.
(B) Purchases in this section shall be ratified/confirmed by the City Council at their next regular
meeting and entered in the city=s official records (note: ratification on goods or services procured under
this section will be through Aauditing@ of the claims/bill=s list at the regular Council meeting).
(C) The department head/supervisors that have purchasing needs greater than $ 1,000 shall require
the approval of the Chief Purchasing Agent who would be vested with the authority for approval from
$1,000 up to $3,000. Purchases may be considered for approval from $3,000 to $5,000 and would require
the approval of the Mayor in addition to the Chief Purchasing Agent and department head/supervisor.
Purchasing Policy
31
(Ord. 127, passed 6-26-2007)
' 32.08 PURCHASING LIMITS OVER $5,000 AND LESS THAN $50,000.
Purchases or contracts in this category require methods which include negotiation, quotes or formal
bids in accordance with M.S. ' 471.345, as it may be amended from time to time. The Chief Purchasing
Agent shall be responsible for coordinating the preparation of specifications and approved advertising
therein. All purchases or contracts shall be approved by the City Council upon recommendation by the
Chief Purchasing Agent and entered in the city=s official records through the City Clerk.
(Ord. 127, passed 6-26-2007)
' 32.09 PURCHASING LIMITS OVER $50,000.
Purchases or contracts in this category require methods which include formal Asealed@ bids in
accordance with M.S. ' 471.345, as it may be amended from time to time. The Chief Purchasing Agent
shall be responsible for coordinating the preparation of specifications and approved advertising therein.
All purchases or contracts shall be approved by the City Council based on the lowest responsible bidder
and entered in the city=s official records through the City Clerk.
(Ord. 127, passed 6-26-2007)
' 32.10 EMERGENCY PURCHASING.
Purchases or contracts in this category require methods which exceed the departmental purchasing
agent, Chief Purchasing Agent and the Mayor=s purchasing policy authority limits and, is beyond a
regular or special Council meeting. In the event an Aemergency purchase@ is required due to
circumstances beyond the city=s control (example: national defense, severe weather and water,
wastewater system failures), the City Council requires that the Mayor, and/or one to two Council
member=s approve such a purchase from $5,000 up to maximum dollar limit of $10,000. Further, the
Council will ratify and confirm such an action at their next regular, special or emergency meeting.
Purchases exceeding $10,000 shall require the approval of the City Council at an emergency meeting as
defined in state law.
(Ord. 127, passed 6-26-2007)
Chisholm - Administration
32
33
CHAPTER 33: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES
Section
33.01 Purpose
33.02 Administrative offense defined
33.03 Notice
33.04 Payment
33.05 Referral to County District Court
33.06 Failure to pay
33.07 Disposition of penalties
33.08 Offenses and penalties
33.09 Subsequent offenses
Cross-reference:
Supplemental administrative penalties, see ' 10.98
' 33.01 PURPOSE.
(A) Administrative offense procedures established pursuant to this chapter are intended to provide
the public and the city with an informal, cost effective and expeditious alternative to traditional criminal
charges for violations of certain ordinance provisions.
(B) The procedures are intended to be voluntary on the part of those who have been charged with
administrative offenses.
(C) At any time prior to the payment of the administrative penalty as is provided for hereafter, the
individual may withdraw from participation in the procedures in which event the city may bring criminal
charges in accordance with the law. Likewise, the city, in its discretion, may choose not to initiate an
administrative offense and may bring criminal charges in the first instance.
(D) In the event a party participates in the administrative offense procedures but does not pay the
monetary penalty which may be imposed, the city will seek to collect the costs of the administrative
offense procedures as part of a subsequent criminal sentence in the event the party is charged and is
adjudicated guilty of the criminal violation.
(Ord. 147, passed 2-10-2009)
Chisholm - Administration
34
' 33.02 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSE DEFINED.
An administrative offense is a violation of a provision of this code, as defined by resolution set by
Council.
(Ord. 147, passed 2-10-2009)
' 33.03 NOTICE.
Any officer of the City Police Department or any other person employed by the city, and having
authority to enforce this code, shall, upon determining that there has been a violation, notify the violator,
or in the case of vehicular violation, attach to the vehicle a notice of the violation. The notice shall set
forth the nature, date and time of violation, the name of the official issuing the notice, and the amount of
the schedule penalty.
(Ord. 147, passed 2-10-2009)
' 33.04 PAYMENT.
Once the notice is given, the alleged violator may, within 14 days of the time of issuance of the
notice, pay the amount set forth on the schedule of penalties for the violation, or may request that the
matter be referred to the County District Court in writing, as is provided for hereafter. The penalty may
be paid in person or by mail, and the payment shall be deemed to be an admission of the violation.
(Ord. 147, passed 2-10-2009)
' 33.05 REFERRAL TO COUNTY DISTRICT COURT.
Any person contesting an administrative offense pursuant to this chapter may, within 14 days of the
time of issuance of the notice, request that the matter be referred to the County District Court to be
processed through the usual rules of the Criminal Court.
(Ord. 147, passed 2-10-2009)
' 33.06 FAILURE TO PAY.
In the event a party charged with an administrative offense fails to pay the penalty, a misdemeanor or
petty misdemeanor charge may be brought against the alleged violator in accordance with applicable
statutes.
(Ord. 147, passed 2-10-2009)
Administrative Offenses
35
' 33.07 DISPOSITION OF PENALTIES.
All penalties collected pursuant to this chapter shall be paid to the City Treasurer and may be
deposited in the city=s General Fund.
(Ord. 147, passed 2-10-2009)
' 33.08 OFFENSES AND PENALTIES.
Offenses, which may be charged as administrative offenses, and the penalties for those offenses,
may be established by resolution of the City Council from time to time. Copies of resolutions shall be
maintained in the office of the City Treasurer.
(Ord. 147, passed 2-10-2009)
' 33.09 SUBSEQUENT OFFENSES.
In the event a party is charged with a subsequent administrative offense within a 12-month period of
paying an administrative penalty for the same or substantially similar offense, the subsequent
administrative penalty shall be increased by 25% above the previous administrative penalty except as
otherwise stated in the fine schedule or by resolution.
(Ord. 147, passed 2-10-2009)
Chisholm - Administration
36
37
CHAPTER 34: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
34.01 Policy and purpose
34.02 Definitions
34.03 Establishment of emergency management organization
34.04 Powers and duties of Director
34.05 Local emergencies
34.06 Emergency regulations
34.07 Emergency management a government function
34.08 Participation in labor disputes or politics
34.99 Penalty
' 34.01 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of unprecedented size and
destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado, blizzard, destructive winds or other natural causes, or
from sabotage, hostile action or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure; and in order
to ensure that preparations of this city will be adequate to deal with those disasters, and generally, to
provide for the common defense and to protect the public peace, health and safety, and to preserve the
lives and property of the people of this city, it is hereby found and declared to be necessary:
(A) To establish a city emergency management organization responsible for city planning and
preparation for emergency government operations in time of disasters;
(B) To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies and disasters;
(C) To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this city and other political subdivisions of
this state and of other states with respect to the carrying out of emergency preparedness functions; and
(D) To comply with the provisions of M.S. ' 12.25, as it may be amended from time to time, which
requires that each political subdivision of the state shall establish a local organization for emergency
management.
Chisholm - Administration
38
' 34.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
DISASTER. A situation which creates an immediate and serious impairment to the health and
safety of any person, or a situation which has resulted in or is likely to result in catastrophic loss to
property, and for which traditional sources of relief and assistance within the affected area are unable to
repair or prevent the injury or loss.
EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for immediate action to
prevent from developing or occurring.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency
functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize
and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, tornado and other acts of
nature, or from sabotage, hostile action or from industrial hazardous material mishaps. These functions
include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, emergency medical services,
engineering, warning services, communications, radiological and chemical, evacuation, congregate care,
emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned functions of plant protection, temporary
restoration of public utility services and other functions related to civil protection, together with all other
activities necessary or incidental for carrying out the foregoing functions. EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT includes those activities sometimes referred to as Acivil defense@ functions.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES. The total personnel resources engaged in city-level
emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or any rule or order
thereunder. This includes personnel from city departments, authorized volunteers and private
organizations and agencies.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION. The staff responsible for coordinating
city-level planning and preparation for disaster response. This organization provides city liaison and
coordination with federal, state and local jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities and
assures implementation of federal and state program requirements.
' 34.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.
(A) There is hereby created within the city government an emergency management organization
which shall be under the supervision and control of the City Emergency Management Director, called the
Director.
(B) The Director shall be appointed by the City Council for an indefinite term and may be removed
by the Council at any time.
Emergency Management
39
(C) The Director shall serve with a salary as established by the City Council and shall be paid his or
her necessary expenses.
(D) The Director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operation
of the emergency preparedness organization, subject to the direction and control of the Council.
(E) The emergency management organization shall conform to and be consistent with, where
applicable, all state and federal requirements, including the National Incident Management System
framework found at 44 C.F.R. part 201, as it may be amended from time to time.
' 34.04 POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.
(A) The Director shall represent the city on any regional or state conference for emergency
management. The Director shall develop proposed mutual aid agreements with other political
subdivisions of the state for reciprocal emergency management aid and assistance in an emergency too
great to be dealt with unassisted, and shall present these agreements to the Council for its action. These
arrangements shall be consistent with the State Emergency Plan.
(B) The Director shall make studies and surveys of the human resources, industries, resources and
facilities of the city as deemed necessary to determine their adequacy for emergency management and to
plan for their most efficient use in time of an emergency or disaster. The Director shall establish the
economic stabilization systems and measures, service staffs, boards and sub-boards required, in
accordance with state and federal plans and directions subject to the approval of the Mayor.
(C) The Director shall prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for the emergency preparedness of
the city and shall present the plan to the Council for its approval. When the Council has approved the
plan, it shall be the duty of all city agencies and all emergency preparedness forces of the city to perform
the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. The plan may be modified in like manner from
time to time. The Director shall coordinate the emergency management activities of the city to the end
that they shall be consistent and fully integrated with the emergency plans of the federal government and
the state and correlated with emergency plans of the county and other political subdivisions within the
state.
(D) In accordance with the State and City Emergency Plan, the Director shall institute training
programs, public information programs and conduct practice warning alerts and emergency exercises as
may be necessary to assure prompt and effective operation of the City Emergency Plan when a disaster
occurs.
(E) The Director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing
departments and agencies of the city to the maximum extent practicable. The officers and personnel of all
city departments and agencies shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate with and extend
services and facilities to the city=s emergency management organization and to the Governor upon
request. The head of each department or agency in cooperation with the Director shall be responsible for
the planning and programming of those emergency activities as will involve the utilization of the
facilities of the department or agency.
Chisholm - Administration
40
(F) The Director shall, in cooperation with those city departments and agencies affected, assist in
the organizing, recruiting and training of emergency management personnel, which may be required on a
volunteer basis to carry out the emergency plans of the city and state. To the extent that emergency
personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or agency for emergencies, they shall be
assigned to the departments or agencies and shall be under the administration and control of the
department or agency.
(G) Consistent with the state emergency services law being M.S. '' 12.01 et seq., the Director shall
coordinate the activity of municipal emergency management organizations within the city and assist in
establishing and conducting
training programs as required to assure emergency operational capability in the several services as
provided by M.S. ' 12.25, as it may be amended from time to time.
(H) The Director shall carry out all orders, rules and regulations issued by the Governor with
reference to emergency management.
(I) The Director shall prepare and submit reports on emergency preparedness activities when
requested by the Mayor.
' 34.05 LOCAL EMERGENCIES.
(A) A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or his or her legal successor. It shall not
be continued for a period in excess of three days except by or with the consent of the Council. Any order,
or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local emergency shall be given prompt and
general publicity and shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.
(B) A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary portions of the response and recovery
aspects of applicable local or interjurisdictional disaster plans, and may authorize aid and assistance
thereunder.
(C) No jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local emergency unless expressly authorized
by the agreement under which the agency functions; however, an interjurisdictional disaster agency shall
provide aid and services in accordance with the agreement under which it functions.
Penalty, see ' 34.99
' 34.06 EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.
(A) Whenever necessary, to meet a declared emergency or to prepare for an emergency for which
adequate regulations have not been adopted by the Governor or the Council, the Council may by
resolution promulgate regulations, consistent with applicable federal or state law or regulation,
respecting: the conduct of persons and the use of property during emergencies; the repair, maintenance
and safeguarding of essential public services, emergency health, fire and safety regulations, drills or
Emergency Management
41
practice periods required for preliminary training, and all other matters which are required to protect
public safety, health and welfare in declared emergencies.
(B) Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing; shall be dated; shall refer to the
particular emergency to which it pertains, if so limited, and shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.
(1) A copy shall be kept posted and available for public inspection during business hours.
(2) Notice of the existence of these regulations and their availability for inspection at the City
Clerk=s office shall be conspicuously posted at the front of the City Hall or other headquarters of the city
or at other places in the affected area as the Council shall designate in the resolution.
(3) By resolution, the Council may modify or rescind a regulation.
(C) The Council may rescind any regulation by resolution at any time. If not sooner rescinded,
every regulation shall expire at the end of 30 days after its effective date or at the end of the emergency to
which it relates, whichever comes first. Any resolution, rule or regulation inconsistent with an
emergency regulation promulgated by the Council shall be suspended during the period of time and to
the extent conflict exists.
(D) During a declared emergency, the city is, under the provisions of M.S. ' 12.37, as it may be
amended from time to time and notwithstanding any statutory or Charter provision to the contrary,
empowered, through its Council, acting within or without the corporate limits of the city, to enter into
contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat the disaster by protecting the health and safety of
persons and property and providing emergency assistance to the victims of a disaster. The city may
exercise these powers in the light of the exigencies of the disaster without compliance with the
time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of public
work, entering rental equipment agreements, purchase of supplies and materials, limitations upon tax
levies, and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds, including, but not limited to, publication of
resolutions, publication of calls for bids, provisions of personnel laws and rules, provisions relating to
low bids and requirement for bids.
Penalty, see ' 34.99
' 34.07 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT A GOVERNMENT FUNCTION.
(A) All functions and activities relating to emergency management are hereby declared to be
governmental functions.
(B) The provisions of this section shall not affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which
he or she would otherwise be entitled under this resolution or under the worker=s compensation law
being M.S. '' 176.001 et seq., or under any pension law, nor the right of any person to receive any
benefits or compensation under any act of Congress.
' 34.08 PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTES OR POLITICS.
Chisholm - Administration
42
The emergency management organization shall not participate in any form of political activity, nor
shall it be employed directly or indirectly for political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor
dispute.
' 34.99 PENALTY.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any regulation adopted thereunder relating
to acts, omissions or conduct other than official acts of city employees or officers is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
1
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter
50. GENERAL PROVISIONS
51. REFUSE COLLECTION; RECYCLABLES
52. WATER SERVICE
53. PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SEWERS
54. STORMWATER UTILITY
Chisholm - Public Works
2
3
CHAPTER 50: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
50.01 Definitions
50.02 Fixing rates and charges for municipal utilities
50.03 Contractual contents
50.04 Rules and regulations
' 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
COMPANY, GRANTEE and FRANCHISEE. Any private utility system to which a franchise has
been granted by the city.
CONSUMER and CUSTOMER. Any user of a utility.
MUNICIPAL UTILITY. Any municipally-owned utility system, including, but not by way of
limitation, water, sewerage and refuse service.
PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION. The Public Utilities Commission of the city, and certain
specific references herein to the Acity@ shall include the city acting through the Public Utilities
Commission where the language or context clearly indicates that reference.
SERVICE. Providing a particular utility to a customer or consumer.
UTILITY. All utility services, whether the same be public municipally-owned facilities or
furnished by private utility companies.
(1994 Code, ' 3.01)
' 50.02 FIXING RATES AND CHARGES FOR MUNICIPAL UTILITIES.
(A) All rates and charges for water services, including, but not by way of limitation, rates for
service, deposits, connection fees, disconnection fees and reconnection fees shall be fixed, determined
and amended by the Public Utilities Commission and referred by it immediately to the Council together
with a suggested effective date.
Chisholm - Public Works
4
(B) No increase at that rate, fee or charge shall become effective for a period of 30 days following
the date at the rate change. Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, all the rates and charges for
sewerage and refuse service shall be fixed by resolution of the Council. The resolutions, containing the
effective date thereof, shall be kept on file and open to inspection in the office of the City Clerk, and shall
be uniformly enforced.
(1994 Code, ' 3.02)
' 50.03 CONTRACTUAL CONTENTS.
Provisions of this chapter relating to municipal utilities shall constitute portions of the contract
between the city and all consumers of municipal utility services, and every consumer shall be deemed to
assent to the same. All contracts between franchisees and consumers of utility services other than
municipal shall be in strict accord with the provisions of this chapter.
(1994 Code, ' 3.03)
' 50.04 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
(A) Billing, payment and penalty.
(1) All municipal utilities shall be billed monthly or quarterly, except that the billing period
may be shortened or lengthened to adjust for a read-out or new connection period, as the case may be, and
a utility statement shall be mailed to each consumer.
(2) All municipal utility charges shall be delinquent if they are unpaid at the close of business
on the fifth day of the month following the billing, provided that if the fifth day shall fall on a Saturday,
Sunday or legal holiday, the time shall be extended to the close of business on the next succeeding day on
which business is normally transacted.
(3) A penalty of 10% shall be added to all delinquent bills. If service is suspended due to
delinquency, it shall not be restored at that location until a disconnection and reconnection fee have been
paid in addition to the amounts due and owing for service, other fees and charges, and penalties.
(B) Application, connection and sale of service.
(1) Application for municipal utility services shall be considered made when the Public
Utilities Department receives written or oral notification of the date an applicant will be occupying
premises.
(2) No connection shall be made until consent has been received from the city to make the
same.
(3) All municipal utilities shall be sold and delivered to consumers under the then applicable
rate applied to the amount of the utilities taken as metered or ascertained in connection with those rates.
General Provisions
5
(4) Application for service shall be denied by the city if the applicant has a past due utility bill
with the city, or until satisfactory arrangements are made with the Public Utilities Department to pay the
past due utility account.
(C) Discontinuance of service.
(1) All municipal utilities may be shut off or discontinued whenever it is found that:
(a) The owner or occupant of the premises served, or any person working on any
connection with the municipal utility systems, has violated any requirement of the city code relative
thereto, or any connection therewith;
(b) Any charge for a municipal utility service, or any fees or charges in connection
therewith, imposed on the present owner or occupant of the premises served, remains delinquent for
more than 30 days after due notice of discontinuation of service; or
(c) There is fraud or misrepresentation by the owner or occupant in connection with any
application for service or delivery or charges therefor.
(2) The Public Utilities Department shall determine what accounts are delinquent and shall
then forward the accounts to the Water Superintendent or the City Clerk for approval, and, thereafter,
services shall be discontinued as hereinafter set forth. Customers who fail to pay their utilities or pay for
only one municipal utility and fail to pay others shall, after 30 days= notice, have their water and/or other
services discontinued. The customers shall have the right to appeal disputes or discrepancies in their bill.
The hearings shall be before the Public Utilities Commission during the delinquency period.
(3) A 30-day notice shall be given to all delinquent customers stating the amount due and the
due date. A shut off notice shall be given if unpaid after 30 days, allowing two business days to pay the
full amount or the water service will be disconnected. The city may add the cost of preparation and
service of the notice to all delinquent accounts.
(D) Ownership of municipal utilities. Ownership of all municipal utilities, plants, lines, mains,
extensions and appurtenances thereto, shall be and remain in the city and no person shall own any part or
portion thereof; provided, however, that private facilities and appurtenances constructed on private
property are not intended to be included in municipal ownership.
(E) Right of entry. The city has the right to enter in and upon private property, including buildings
and dwelling houses, in or upon which is installed a municipal utility, or connection therewith, at all
times reasonable under the circumstances, for the purpose of reading utility meters, for the purpose of
inspection and repair of meters or a utility system, or any part thereof, and for the purpose of connecting
and disconnecting service.
(F) Meter test. Whenever a consumer shall request the city to test any utility meter in use by him or
her, the request shall be accompanied by a cash deposit of $25 for each meter to be tested. If any meter is
found to be inaccurate the same shall be replaced with an accurate meter and the deposit thereon
Chisholm - Public Works
6
refunded. If the meter shall be found to be accurate in its recordings or calculations it shall be reinstalled
and the $5 deposit shall be retained by the city to defray the cost of the test.
(G) Unlawful acts.
(1) It is unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly break, injure, mar, deface, disturb or
in any way interfere with any buildings, attachments, machinery, apparatus, equipment, fixture or
appurtenance of any municipal utility or municipal utility system, or commit any act tending to obstruct
or impair the use of any municipal utility.
(2) It is unlawful for any person to make any connection with any municipal utility system
without first having applied for and received permission from the city to make the same.
(3) It is unlawful for any person to turn on or connect a utility when the same has been turned
off or disconnected by the city for non-payment of a bill, or for any other reason, without first having
obtained a permit to do so from the city.
(4) It is unlawful for any person to Ajumper@, or by any means or device fully or partially
circumvent a municipal utility meter, or to knowingly use or consume un-metered utilities or use the
services of any utility system, the use of which the proper billing authorities have no knowledge.
(H) Municipal utility services and charges a lien.
(1) Payment for all municipal utility (as that term is defined in ' 50.01) service and charges
shall be the primary responsibility at the owner of the premises served and shall be billed to him or her,
unless otherwise contracted for and authorized in writing by the owner and the tenant, as agent for the
owner, and consented to by the city. The city may collect the same in a civil action or, in the alternative
and at the option of the city, as otherwise provided in this division.
(2) Each account is hereby made a lien upon the premises served. All accounts which are more
than 45 days past due may, when authorized by resolution of the Council, be certified by the City Clerk of
the city, to the County Auditor, and the City Clerk in so certifying shall specify the amount thereof, the
description of the premises served, and the name of the owner thereof. The amount so certified shall be
extended by the Auditor on the tax rolls against the premises in the same manner as other taxes, and
collected by the County Treasurer, and paid to the city along with other taxes.
(I) Damage to municipal utility equipment. It is unlawful for any person to intentionally cause any
damage to any municipal utility equipment or appurtenances, including, but not limited to, meters, street
lights, water hydrants and curb cocks. Anyone intentionally causing the damage shall pay the reasonable
value thereof to the city, including labor for renewal and installation of any equipment and shall be, in
effect, an insurer of any equipment in his or her possession or with which he or she comes in contact.
(J) Municipal utility service outside the city. Premises located outside the city shall not be
connected to or served by any municipal utility, except the premises as are publicly owned, presently
served or by private line or contract. Persons needing municipal utility service whose property is located
outside the corporate limits must initiate and complete annexation proceedings in advance prior to being
General Provisions
7
provided with the service or services.
(K) Landlords and tenants. As to all premises occupied by someone other than the owner, the owner
guarantees payment of the charges for services, installation and repair made in accordance with the rules
of the Public Utilities Department or ordinances herein.
(1994 Code, ' 3.04) (Ord. 61, passed 6-19-1987) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Chisholm - Public Works
8
9
CHAPTER 51: REFUSE COLLECTION; RECYCLABLES
Section
Refuse Collection
51.01 Definitions
51.02 Deposit of refuse and garbage restricted
51.03 Storage of garbage and other refuse
51.04 Collection of garbage and other refuse
51.05 Disposal of refuse
51.06 Service charges
Recyclables
51.20 Definitions
51.21 Residential pre-collection and collection
51.22 Recyclables
51.23 Recyclables, container requirements
51.24 Collection
51.25 Collection rates
51.26 Conflict of law
REFUSE COLLECTION
' 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
AUTHORIZED GARBAGE BAGS. Only those bags designated by the city for use in the deposit
of garbage by residential customers into the city-supplied containers for garbage collection.
GARBAGE. All putrescible wastes including animal offal and carcasses of dead animals, but
excluding human excreta, sewage and other water-carried wastes.
Chisholm - Public Works
10
OTHER REFUSE. Ashes, glass, crockery, tin cans, paper, boxes, rags, old clothing and all similar
non-putrescible wastes; but does not include any material, such as earth, sand, brick, stone, plaster or
other similar substances, that may accumulate as a result of construction operations.
(1994 Code, ' 3.60.1)
' 51.02 DEPOSIT OF REFUSE AND GARBAGE RESTRICTED.
It is unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited any garbage or other refuse upon any
street, alley, vacant lot or upon any ground appurtenant to any building except in the manner provided by
this section. It is also unlawful for any person, except a duly authorized City Collector, to transport
garbage or other refuse over any street or alley or to disturb, collect or in any manner interfere with
garbage and other refuse placed in containers for collection or interfere in any manner with containers for
garbage and other refuse. It is also unlawful for any person to place garbage or refuse that is not entirely
contained in a city authorized garbage bag in any city supplied container.
(1994 Code, ' 3.60.2) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 51.03 STORAGE OF GARBAGE AND OTHER REFUSE.
(A) Except as otherwise provided in this section, all garbage and other refuse shall be placed and
kept in those containers provided by the city, which shall be the only kind and type permitted for the
keeping, storage and holding of garbage and other refuse.
(B) All garbage and other refuse shall be drained of liquid so far as practical and placed into
impervious bags of a kind and type that are authorized by the city by motion, from time to time, and the
bags shall be closed and sealed prior to being placed in the city-supplied containers. The city-supplied
containers shall be placed in those portions of the streets or alleyways as the city may deem necessary
and proper, or upon private property, pursuant to the agreement with the property owner.
(C) Any person who is supplied a container by the city for keeping, storage and holding of garbage
or other refuse shall be responsible for the container, and the person shall be responsible for replacement
at his or her own cost.
(D) Any person shall remove all existing garbage or trash stands located in the streets, alleys or
other public ways, within 60 days following passage of this section.
(E) Any container provided by the city to any person which becomes damaged so as to not be fit for
keeping, storage and holding of garbage or other refuse shall be replaced at the person=s expense,
ordinary wear and tear excepted.
(F) Disposable items such as brush, tree cuttings and other articles which do not consist of garbage
or other refuse shall be compacted and bundled and placed outside of the container, but the size of the
bundles shall not exceed three feet in length and 50 pounds in weight and shall only be placed alongside
the city container at times as the city may designate, pursuant to notice for collection thereof.
Refuse Collection; Recyclables
11
(G) It is unlawful for any person to construct, locate or place any garbage or trash stand in any street,
alley or other public ways.
(H) All residential garbage shall be placed in city designated containers in city authorized garbage
bags. Any garbage deposited in city containers that is not in city garbage bags shall be unlawful and
subject to sanctions designated under this section and criminal prosecution and penalties.
(1994 Code, ' 3.60.3) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 51.04 COLLECTION OF GARBAGE AND OTHER REFUSE.
(A) The Street and Alley Department shall provide for the collection of all garbage and other refuse
from all premises. Except for the occurrence of holidays, collections shall be made at least three times
each week from restaurants, hotels and other establishments except those which, in the judgment of the
City Clerk, would not create a health menace or other nuisance if less frequent collection were provided.
The frequency of collection from other premises shall be at the discretion of the Council.
(B) All garbage or other refuse shall be transported on the streets or alleys only in vehicles with
leak-proof bodies of easily cleanable construction and completely covered with metal or heavy canvas.
Vehicles shall be so operated that contents do not spill or drip upon streets or alleys or otherwise create a
nuisance.
(C) No person, except such as may be specifically licensed by the city, shall collect or dispose of
garbage or other refuse except through the city collection system or through a garbage grinder or
incinerator installed or maintained under permit by the City Clerk. The permit for collection and disposal
of garbage or other refuse shall be issued pursuant to application submitted to the office of the City Clerk
with license to meet the necessary health and sanitary regulations as are specified by the rules and
regulations as propounded by the Council. The licensee shall further be required to submit a bond for just
and faithful performance of the regulations and rules in an amount deemed, adequate and appropriate by
the Council. The permit shall be issued on an annual basis for which an annual charge of $500 shall be
required. The license may be cancelled for just cause pursuant to notice and hearing thereon. The hearing
is to be held before the Council at either a special or regular meeting thereof.
(1994 Code, ' 3.60.4) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 51.05 DISPOSAL OF REFUSE.
The Street and Alley Department shall provide for the disposal of garbage and other refuse collected
by the city in a sanitary manner so as not to cause a public health nuisance, the attracting of rats and flies
or other conditions detrimental to public health or comfort.
(1994 Code, ' 3.60.5)
Chisholm - Public Works
12
' 51.06 SERVICE CHARGES.
(A) There is hereby imposed upon each household and business or other establishment from which
garbage or other refuse is collected by the city a monthly charge for the service in accordance with the
schedule established from time to time by resolution of the Council.
(B) Service charges shall be charged to the owner or occupant of the premises served and shall be
payable on or before the fifth day of each month for the preceding month at an office as the Council may
by resolution establish. When any charges remain unpaid after the due date, a penalty of 10% shall be
added thereto. Receipts from service charges shall be credited to the General Fund when received, from
which fund expenses for the collection, transportation and disposal of garbage shall be paid.
(C) In addition to securing the approval of the City Clerk as herein provided, it is unlawful for any
person to hereafter install an incinerator without first securing permission of the Council, which
permission may be withheld if, in the opinion of the Council, the incinerator would create an unhealthy,
noxious or undesirable condition. At the time of the granting of the permission, the Council shall
establish a service charge for each incinerator and shall after the passage of this section establish by
resolution appropriate service charges for incinerators now in operation.
(1994 Code, ' 3.60.6) (Ord. 41, passed 5-21-1983)
RECYCLABLES
' 51.20 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ALUMINUM RECYCLABLES. Disposable containers, fabricated primarily of aluminum for
soda, beer and other beverages.
CAN RECYCLABLES. All disposable ferrous food and beverage cans.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLES. The following recyclable materials; aluminum recyclables, can
recyclables, glass recyclables, newspaper recyclables and plastic recyclables.
GLASS RECYCLABLES. Unbroken jars and bottles primarily used for packing and bottling of
various matter.
MIXED MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE. Garbage, refuse and other solid waste from residential
activities which is generated and collected in aggregate.
NEWSPAPER RECYCLABLES. Newsprint only.
Refuse Collection; Recyclables
13
PLASTIC RECYCLABLES. Milk, pop and laundry bottles fabricated from plastic, known as No.1
and 2 plastic.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING. Any structure used as a residence and consisting of one, two or
three dwelling units with individual kitchen facilities for each.
(1994 Code, ' 3.71.1)
' 51.21 RESIDENTIAL PRE-COLLECTION AND COLLECTION.
For all persons who are owners, lessees or occupants of any residential unit buildings wherein there
are three or fewer housing units, recyclable materials shall be separated from mixed municipal waste in
accordance with rules, regulations and procedures adopted by the city, for the separation of recyclable
materials from the mixed municipal waste.
(1994 Code, ' 3.71.2) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 51.22 RECYCLABLES.
(A) Newspaper recyclables shall be bundled separately and/or secured in a manner so as to prevent
them from being blown or scattered and shall be maintained in as dry a condition as practicable free of
any other substances and shall be placed in the bottom of the recycling container.
(B) Aluminum recyclables shall be clean of all contents and the recyclables shall be placed in the
recycling container.
(C) Can recyclables shall be clean of all contents and the recyclables shall be placed in the recycling
container.
(D) Glass recyclables shall be clean of all contents and the recyclables shall be placed in the
recycling container.
(E) Plastic recyclables shall be unbroken and clean of all contents and the recyclables shall be
placed in the recycling container.
(1994 Code, ' 3.71.3) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 51.23 RECYCLABLES, CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS.
Containers provided by the city in order to meet the requirements of this section shall be: maintained
in a clean and sanitary condition in accordance with all pertinent health statutes, city code provisions and
rules and regulations; and located in a manner so as to prevent them from being overturned or obstructing
pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic or being in violation of any statute, city code provisions and rules and
regulations; and all containers for recyclable materials shall be kept in an enclosed area except on the day
of collection; and on the day of collection all containers used for collection of recyclable materials shall
Chisholm - Public Works
14
be placed in a location accessible to collectors by 7:00 a.m. or at a time designated by notice by the
Council.
(1994 Code, ' 3.71.4)
' 51.24 COLLECTION.
(A) The collection, removal and disposal of designated recyclables shall be supervised by the city
which shall have the power to establish the time, method and routes of service.
(B) Collection provisions shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Notice of dates and times of collection will be published or otherwise made available to
persons affected herein;
(2) The city may establish drop-off or collection sites where any person may deposit
recyclables at times and locations as determined;
(3) It is unlawful for any person other than employees of the city, or authorized persons,
collectors or haulers to distribute, collect, remove or dispose of recyclable materials after the materials
have been placed or deposited for collection;
(4) Nothing in this section shall abridge the right of any person to give or sell the recyclable
materials to any recycling program or redemption location lawfully operated; and
(5) Nothing in this section shall abridge the right of any authorized recycling program to
lawfully operate within the city, subject to other licenses or other regulations as may be required by law.
(1994 Code, ' 3.71.5)
' 51.25 COLLECTION RATES.
The Council shall, by resolution, establish rates to be paid for the services and provide for the time
and manner for collecting those rates, and may make needful rules and regulations relative to the ultimate
disposal of recyclables.
(1994 Code, ' 3.71.6)
' 51.26 CONFLICT OF LAW.
This section shall control the disposal of all defined recyclables and any conflicts with the rules and
regulations relating to refuse collection in the city shall be resolved in favor of recycling.
(1994 Code, ' 3.71.7)
15
CHAPTER 52: WATER SERVICE
Section
52.01 Deficiency of water and shutting off water
52.02 Repair of leaks
52.03 Abandoned services penalties
52.04 Service pipes
52.05 Private water supplies
52.06 Restricted hours for sprinkling
52.07 Private fire hose connections
52.08 Opening hydrants
' 52.01 DEFICIENCY OF WATER AND SHUTTING OFF WATER.
The city is not liable for any deficiency or failure in the supply of water to customers whether
occasioned by shutting the water off for the purpose of making repairs or connections or by any other
cause whatever. In case of fire, or alarm of fire, water may be shut off to ensure a supply for firefighting.
In making repairs or construction of new works, water may be shut off at any time and kept off so long as
may be necessary.
(1994 Code, ' 3.20.1)
' 52.02 REPAIR OF LEAKS.
It is the responsibility of the consumer or owner to maintain the service pipe from the curb stop into
the house or other building. In case of failure upon the part of any consumer or owner to repair any leak
occurring in his or her service pipe within 24 hours after oral or written notice has been given the owner
or occupant of the premises, the water may be shut off and will not be turned on until a reconnection
charge has been paid and the water service has been repaired. When the waste of water is great or when
damage is likely to result from the leak, the water will be turned off if the repair is not proceeded with
immediately.
(1994 Code, ' 3.20.2)
' 52.03 ABANDONED SERVICES PENALTIES.
All service installations connected to the water system that have been abandoned or, for any reason,
have become useless for further service shall be disconnected at the main. The owner of the premises,
Chisholm - Public Works
16
served by this service, shall pay the cost of the excavation. The city shall perform the actual
disconnection and all pipe and appurtenances removed from the street right-of-way shall become the
property of the city. When new buildings are erected on the site of old ones, and it is desired to increase
the old water service, a new permit shall be taken out and the regular tapping charge shall be made as if
this were a new service. It is unlawful for any person to cause or allow any service pipe to be hammered
or squeezed together at the ends to stop the flow of water, or to save expense in properly removing the
pipe from the main. Also, the improper disposition thereof shall be corrected by the city and the cost
incurred shall be borne by the person causing or allowing the work to be performed.
(1994 Code, ' 3.20.3) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 52.04 SERVICE PIPES.
Every service pipe must be laid in a manner so as to prevent rupture by settlement. The service pipe
shall be placed not less than eight feet below the surface in all cases so arranged as to prevent rupture and
stoppage by freezing. Frozen service pipes between the main and the building shall be the responsibility
of the owner. Service pipes must extend from the curb stops to the inside of the building; or if not taken
into a building then to the hydrant or other fixtures which they are intended to supply. A valve, the same
size as the service pipe, shall be placed close to the inside wall of the building, ahead of the meter and
well protected from freezing. Type AK@ copper tubing shall be used up to and including two-inch
services. Joints on copper tubing shall be flared and kept to a minimum. Not more than one joint shall be
used for a service up to 70 feet in length. All joints shall be left uncovered until inspected. All services of
more than two inches in diameter shall be composed of cast iron mechanical joint pipe. Minimum size
connection with the water mains shall be three-fourths inch in diameter for single occupancy residences
and one inch in diameter for all other establishments.
(1994 Code, ' 3.20.4)
' 52.05 PRIVATE WATER SUPPLIES.
No water pipe of the city water system shall be connected with any pump, well, pipe, tank or any
device that is connected with any other source of water supply, and when such are found, the city shall
notify the owner or occupant to disconnect the same and, if not immediately done, the city water shall be
turned off. Before any new connections to the city system are permitted, the city shall ascertain that no
cross-connections will exist when the new connection is made. When a building is connected to Acity
water@ the private water supply may be used to serve outside hose connections only. The private water
supply may be used to serve air conditioning where ten-ton or more capacity has been installed, provided
the piping service the units is color-coded.
(1994 Code, ' 3.20.5) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 52.06 RESTRICTED HOURS FOR SPRINKLING.
Whenever the city shall determine that a shortage of water threatens the city, it may limit the times
Water Service
17
and hours during which water may be used from the city water system for lawn and garden sprinkling,
irrigation, car washing, air conditioning and other uses, or either or any of them. It is unlawful for any
water consumer to cause or permit water to be used in violation of the determination after public
announcement thereof has been made through the news media specifically indicating the restrictions
thereof.
(1994 Code, ' 3.20.6) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 52.07 PRIVATE FIRE HOSE CONNECTIONS.
Owners of lumber yards, factories, stores, elevators, warehouses, hotels and other buildings, if they
are regular municipal water consumers, may apply for and obtain permission to connect the street mains
with hydrants, large pipes and hose couplings, for use in case of fire only and free of charge for that use,
but at their own installation expense.
(1994 Code, ' 3.20.7)
' 52.08 OPENING HYDRANTS.
It is unlawful for any person, other than members of the Fire Department or other person duly
authorized by the city, in pursuance of lawful purpose, to open any fire hydrant or attempt to draw water
from the same or in any manner interfere therewith. It is also unlawful for any person so authorized to
deliver or suffer to be delivered to any other person any hydrant key or wrench, except for the purposes
strictly pertaining to their lawful use.
(1994 Code, ' 3.20.8) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Chisholm - Public Works
18
19
CHAPTER 53: PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SEWERS
Section
Public and Private Sewers, Generally
53.01 Use of public sewers required
53.02 Private sewage disposal
53.03 Building sewers and connections
53.04 Use of the public sewers
53.05 Protection of sewage works from damage
53.06 Wastewater back-ups
Wastewater Service Charges and Industrial Waste Cost Recovery
53.20 Wastewater service charges
53.21 Industrial cost recovery
53.22 General provisions
53.23 Effective date of rates
53.24 Powers and authority of enforcing agents
Sewer Laterals
53.35 Definitions
53.36 Manager=s authority to enforce
53.37 Sewer laterals, cleanouts and connections
54.38 Inspections and repairs of sewer laterals
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SEWERS, GENERALLY
' 53.01 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary
manner on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any
human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
Chisholm - Public Works
20
(B) It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this section and the NPDES permit.
(C) Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(D) The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment,
recreation or other purposes situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in
which there is now located or may in the future be located any public sanitary sewer of the city is hereby
required at his or her expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect the facilities
directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this section, within 90 days
after date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within ten feet of the property line.
(1994 Code, ' 3.30.1) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 53.02 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
Private sewage collection and disposal systems will not be permitted within the city corporate limits
except individual disposal systems which may be permitted by special permit in outlying rural areas not
served by the city sanitary sewer system.
(1994 Code, ' 3.30.2)
' 53.03 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
(A) No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into; use; alter; or
disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city or
its authorized representative.
(B) All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except those discharges in
compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the Federal Act, being 33 U.S.C. '' 1251 et
seq. and more stringent state and local standards.
(C) (1) There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
(a) For residential and commercial service; and
(b) For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
(2) In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the Council.
(a) The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Council.
Public and Private Sewers
21
(b) The industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide information
describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics and type of activity.
(D) A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it
can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump stations and
wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently handle the
additional anticipated waste load.
(E) All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be
borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
(F) A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except that
where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can
be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer
from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building
sewer.
(G) Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found,
on examination and test by the city, to meet all requirements of this section.
(H) The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be
used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to
the requirements of the rules and regulations of the Council. In the absence of code provisions or in
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9,
the City Engineer=s Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Minnesota shall apply.
(I) Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the
basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public
sewer, sanitary sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by a means which is approved in
accordance with division (H) above, and discharged to the building sewer.
(J) It is unlawful for any person to make connection of roof down spouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building
drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
(K) The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements
and applicable rules and regulations of the Council, or the procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation
Manual of Practice No. 9, and City Engineer=s specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Minnesota. All those connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight.
Chisholm - Public Works
22
(L) All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and
lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
(1994 Code, ' 3.30.3) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 53.04 USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, surface
water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted
industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
(B) Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to sewers as are specifically
designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the city. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the city, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
(C) It is unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
(1) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or
gas;
(2) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any
hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;
(3) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works; or
(4) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of a size capable of causing obstruction to the
flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
un-ground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups,
mild containers and the like, either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(D) It is unlawful for any industrial user to discharge sewage into any public sewer until the city has
adopted an industrial cost recovery system which:
(1) Meets the requirements of ' 204(b)(1)(B) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972 being 33 U.S.C. ' 204(b)(10(B) and applicable federal regulations; and
(2) Has been approved by the Agency in accordance with the conditions of any grant made to
the city by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency for the construction of any part of the sewer
system or sewage treatment works of the city.
Public and Private Sewers
23
(E) It is unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the city that the wastes can
harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming the
opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the city will give consideration to such factors as the
quantities of subject wastes in relation to the flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction
of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and maximum limits established by regulatory
agencies. The substances prohibited are:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150?F (65?C);
(2) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or oils, whether emulsified
or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between 32 and 150?F and (0 and 65?C);
(3) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any
garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower or greater shall be subject to the
review and approval of the city;
(4) Any waters or wastes containing strong, acid, iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating
solutions whether neutralized or not;
(5) Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc or similar objectionable or
toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to a degree that any like material
received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the
city for the materials;
(6) Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, in
such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the city BPA as necessary after
treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies
of jurisdiction for the discharge to the receiving waters;
(7) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of a half-life or concentration as may exceed limits
established by the city in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
(8) Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;
(9) Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg at any time except as
permitted by the city in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations;
(10) Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/l at any time except as permitted by the city in
compliance with applicable state and federal regulations;
(11) Materials which exert or cause:
Chisholm - Public Works
24
(a) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers
earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride
and sodium sulfate);
(b) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions);
(c) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as
to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works; or
(d) Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting Aslugs@ as used
within the waste industry.
(12) Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction
by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to a degree that the
sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
(F) If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers,
which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in division (E) above,
and/or which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in Chapter 1, EPA Rules and
Regulations, Subchapter D, Water Programs Part 12 8 Pretreatment Standards, Federal Register volume
38, No. 215, Thursday, November 8, 1973 and any amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of
the city may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters,
or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may: reject the wastes;
require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; require control over
the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or require payment to cover the added costs of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of division (K)
below. If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of
the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the city and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, city code provisions and laws.
(G) Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any
flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that the interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
city and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(H) Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they shall be
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.
(I) Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and when required by the city, the
owner of the property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
control manhole together with necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to
facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. The manhole, when required, shall be
accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The
Public and Private Sewers
25
manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be maintained by him or her so as
to be safe and accessible at all times.
(J) The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall provide
laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this
section and any special conditions for discharge established by the city or regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over the discharge. The number, type and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed
by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city, but no less than once per year the industry must supply a
complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the
federal, state and local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and
laboratory analyses to the city at times and in a manner as prescribed by the city. The owner shall bear the
expense of all measurements, analyses and reporting required by the city. At times as deemed necessary,
the city reserves the right to take measurements and samples for analysis by an outside laboratory
service.
(K) All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which
reference is made in this section shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at
the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be
considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building
sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of
constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property.
(The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a
premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always,
BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs
are determined from periodic grab samples.)
(L) No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement
or arrangements between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual
strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, in
accordance with '' 53.20 through 53.24, by the industrial concern, provided the payments are in
accordance with federal and state guidelines for user charge system and industrial cost recovery system.
(M) Each residential household, commercial complex, commercial business or industry shall pay to
the city the established amount set forth by EPA user charge system or industrial cost recovery for the
proper operation of the sewage treatment plant.
(1) Any building which is privately owned, whether occupied or not, shall be subject to this
payment.
(2) Any established multi-dwelling shall make payment in the amount established by the user
charge system.
(3) The payment shall be made unless the water service is discontinued and the service valve
closed.
(1994 Code, ' 3.30.4)
Chisholm - Public Works
26
' 53.05 PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE.
It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works.
Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct.
(1994 Code, ' 3.30.5) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 53.06 WASTEWATER BACK-UPS.
All building drains which have back-up problems shall have a back water valve installed at the
owner=s expense and it shall be the owner=s responsibility to see that the back water valve is kept clean
and workable. The city will assume no liability for any damages resulting from back-up.
(1994 Code, ' 3.30.6)
WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES AND INDUSTRIAL WASTE COST RECOVERY
' 53.20 WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES.
(A) Basis for wastewater service charges. The wastewater service charge for the use of and for
service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the city shall consist of a basic user charge for operation
and maintenance plus replacement, a debt service charge and a surcharge, if applicable.
(1) The debt service charge shall be computed by dividing the annual debt service of all
outstanding loans by the number of users. Through further divisions, the monthly debt service charges
can be computed.
(2) The basic user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or
sewage meters for wastes having the following normal concentrations:
(a) A five-day, 20?C biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of 200 mg/l; and
(b) A suspended solids (SS) content of 250 mg/l.
(3) It shall consist of operation and maintenance costs plus replacement and shall be computed
as follows:
(a) Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and maintain the wastewater
facilities including a replacement fund for the year, for all works categories;
Public and Private Sewers
27
(b) Proportion the estimated costs to wastewater facility categories by volume, suspended
solids and BOD, if possible;
(c) Estimate wastewater volume, pounds of SS and pounds of BOD to be treated;
(d) Proportion the estimated costs to non-industrial and industrial users by volume,
suspended solids and BOD;
(e) Compute costs per 1,000 gallons for normal sewage strength; and
(f) Compute surcharge costs per 1,000 gallons per mg/l in excess of normal sewage
strength for BOD and SS.
(4) A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waters exceed the normal concentrations for
BOD (200 mg/l) and SS (250 mg/l). The surcharge will be based on water usage as recorded by water
meters and/or sewage meters for all wastes which exceed the 200 mg/l and 250 mg/l concentration for
BOD and SS respectively. Division (F) below specifies the procedure to compute a surcharge.
(5) The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed annually by the City
Clerk for the city in his or her annual audit report. The wastewater service charge shall be revised
periodically to reflect a change in debt service or a change in operation and maintenance costs including
replacement costs. All waste service charges shall be by Council resolution.
(B) Measurement of flows. The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges and
surcharges shall be the metered water consumption read to lowest even increments of 100 gallons.
(1) If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any part, or all, of his or
her water from sources other than the public waterworks system, all or a part of which is discharged into
the public sewers, the person shall install and maintain, at his or her expense, water meters of a type
approved by the city for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from these other
sources.
(2) Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by the city if these
volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the metered water consumption records.
(3) Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be installed, owned and
maintained by the person. Following approval and installation, the meters may not be removed, unless
service is cancelled, without the consent of the city.
(C) Debt service charge. A debt service charge of $0.00 per month to each user of the wastewater
facility of the city is hereby established.
Chisholm - Public Works
28
(D) Basic user rate. There shall be and there is hereby established a minimum charge and a basic
user rate for the use of and for service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the city. A minimum
charge of $18.27 per month shall be applied to all users whose water consumption does not exceed 2,300
gallons per month.
(1) A basic user charge of $7.84 per 1,000 gallons shall be applied to all users for water
consumption in excess of 2,300 gallons per month.
(2) All non-metered residential users of the wastewater facilities shall pay a minimum flat rate
charge per month adequate to cover the costs of the minimum debt service charge, the minimum service
charge and the basic user rate of $30.00 per 1,000 gallons. The flat rate charge of $50.00 per month will
allow a maximum usage of 2,300 gallons per month.
(3) In the event use of wastewater facilities is determined by the city to be in excess of 2,300
gallons per month, the city may require the flat rate user to install metering devices on the water supply or
sewer main to measure the amount of service supplied.
(E) Surcharge rate. The rates of surcharges for BOD5 and SS shall be as follows:
CS = [Bc(B) + Sc(s)] Vu
(F) Computation of surcharge. The concentration of wastes used for computing surcharges shall be
established by waste sampling. Waste sampling shall be performed as often as may be deemed necessary
by the city and shall be binding as a basis for surcharges.
(G) Computation of wastewater service charge. The wastewater service charge shall be computed
by the following formula:
CW - CD + CM + (Vu - X) CU + CS
Where CW = Amount of wastewater service charge ($) per billing period.
CD = Debt service charge (division (C) above)
CM = Minimum charge for operation, maintenance and replacement (division (D) above).
Vu = Wastewater volume for the billing period.
X = Allowable consumption in gallons for the minimum charge (division (D) above).
Cu = Basic user rate for operation. Maintenance and replacement (division (D) above).
CS = Amount of surcharge (divisions (E) and (F) above).
Bc = $0.127/#BOD5.
Public and Private Sewers
29
Sc = $0.102/#suspended solids.
B - BOD5 - 200 mg/l.
C = SS = 250 mg/l.
(1994 Code, ' 3.31.1)
' 53.21 INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY.
When an industrial user, as defined in 40 C.F.R. ' 35.905-8, requests connection to the public
sewage collection and disposal system, an industrial cost recovery system must be developed in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. ' 35.928.
(1994 Code, ' 3.31.2)
' 53.22 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(A) Bills. The rates or charges for service shall be payable quarterly. The owner of the premises, the
occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to
the premises and the service is furnished to the premises by the city only upon the condition that the
owner of the premises, occupant and user of the services are jointly and severally liable therefor to the
city. Bills for sewer service shall be sent out by the City Clerk on the last day of each quarter succeeding
the period for which the service is billed. All sewer bills are due and payable 30 days after being sent out.
A penalty of 10% shall be added to all bills not paid by the fifteenth day after they have been rendered.
(B) Delinquent bills. It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to customers by
reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed
bills. The city's form for application for utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title,
address, room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly visible and easily
readable provisions to the effect:
(1) That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth on the bill; and
(2) That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill will be mailed containing a
cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be
discontinued for nonpayment; and
(3) That any customer disputing the correctness of his bill shall have a right to a hearing at
which time he may be represented in person and by counsel or any other person of his choosing and may
present orally or in writing his complaint and contentions to the city official in charge of utility billing.
This official shall be authorized to order that the customer's service not be discontinued and shall have
the authority to make a final determination of the customer's complaint.
(4) Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only questions of proper
Chisholm - Public Works
30
and correct billing will be considered. In the absence of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the
hearing procedure provided herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
(5) When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility service to a customer for
nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only after all bills for service then due have been paid,
along with a turn-on charge in the sum of $20.
(C) Lien; notice of delinquency. Whenever a bill for sewer service remains unpaid for 45 days after
it has been rendered, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall file with the County Recorder a statement of lien
claim. This statement shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid
bill, and a notice that the city claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges subsequent to the
period covered by the bill. If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and the City
Clerk-Treasurer has notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his or her address
be known to the Clerk-Treasurer, whenever the bill remains unpaid for the period of 45 days after it has
been rendered. The failure of the City Clerk-Treasurer to record the lien or to mail the notice or the
failure of the owner to receive the notice shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as
mentioned in division (B) above.
(D) Foreclosure of lien. Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for non-payment
of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is
the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. The foreclosure shall be by bill-in-equity in the name of the
city. The City Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute the proceedings in the name of the
city in any court having jurisdiction over the matters against any property for which the bill has remained
unpaid 45 days after it has been rendered.
(E) Revenues. There shall be maintained by the city two funds; one entitled ASewage Fund@ and the
other ASewage Permanent Improvement and Replacement Fund@. The gross revenue from the operation
of the sewage plant and department shall be divided as follows.
(1) Each month not less than 10% of the gross revenues from the operation and revenues from
the sewage plant and sewage system shall be placed into the Sewage Permanent Improvement and
Replacement Fund for use as hereinafter provided.
(2) The balance of the monies shall be placed into the Sewage Fund of the city.
(3) All the revenues and monies shall be held by the City Clerk-Treasurer separate and apart
from their private funds and separate and apart from other funds of the city.
(4) Out of the Sewage Fund of the city shall be paid the cost of operation of the Sewage
Department, including salaries, maintenance and repairs, plant lines and other ordinary expenses.
(5) Out of the Sewage Permanent Improvement and Replacement Fund shall be paid out the
cost of the purchase, construction, expansion, extension and replacement of the sewage plant, lines and
system hereafter acquired, established or operated. There shall also be paid out of the fund the cost of
replacements, permanent improvements, other than ordinary repairs, maintenance or supplies. The
Public and Private Sewers
31
Council may direct, if funds are not available in the Sewage Fund, that a part of the funds of the Sewage
Permanent Improvement and Replacement Fund may be used for the cost of replacement of repairs,
maintenance, supplies or labor, provided, however, that no resolution authorizing any expenditures from
the Sewage Permanent Improvement and Replacement Fund shall expend the funds, unless carried by a
five to six vote of the Council.
(6) The City Clerk-Treasurer shall administer the funds in every respect in a manner as
provided by laws and statutes in that case made and provided by the state, the city, its Charter and city
code provisions. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall keep a separate account for each of the funds as
hereinabove provided for.
(F) Accounts. The City Clerk-Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep
proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all
transactions relative to the sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals he or she shall cause to be
made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of
the sewerage system. In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report shall also
reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater facilities, including a replacement cost, to
indicate that sewer service charges under the waste cost recovery system and capital amounts required to
be recovered under the industrial cost recovery system do in fact meet these regulations. In this regard,
the financial information to be shown in the audit report shall include the following:
(1) Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for the current fiscal year;
(2) Billing data to show total number of gallons billed;
(3) Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year;
(4) Number of users connected to the system;
(5) Number of non-metered users; and
(6) A list of users discharging non-domestic wastes (industrial users) and volume of waste
discharged.
(G) Notice of rates. A copy of this section properly certified by the City Clerk-Treasurer shall be
filed in the office of the County Recorder, and shall be deemed notice to all owners of real estate of the
charges of the sewerage system of the city on their properties.
(H) Access to records. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or its authorized representative,
shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the city which are applicable to the city
system of user charges or industrial cost recovery for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts
and transactions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions to any
federal grant.
(1994 Code, ' 3.31.3)
Chisholm - Public Works
32
' 53.23 EFFECTIVE DATE OF RATES.
The rates and service charges established for user charges in ' 53.20(C) through (G), shall be
effective as of the next fiscal year beginning January 1, 1980 and on bills to be rendered for the next
billing cycle as may be determined by Council resolution.
(1994 Code, ' 3.31.4)
' 53.24 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF ENFORCING AGENTS.
(A) The approving authority shall be permitted to gain access to properties as may be necessary for
the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with
provisions of these regulations.
(B) Any person found to be violating any provisions of this section shall be served by the city with
written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof.
(C) Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit shall be guilty of violation of
the service contract and shall be summarily disconnected from the sanitary sewer and/or water service.
(D) The disconnection and reconnection would be at the total expense of the customer.
(E) Where acids and chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment processes are released to the
sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper treatment of sewage, the
approving authority is authorized to immediately terminate services by measures as are necessary to
protect the facilities.
(1994 Code, ' 3.31.5)
SEWER LATERALS
' 53.35 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
BACKFLOW VALVE. A check valve specifically designed to prevent the reverse flow of sewage
in a lateral.
BUILDING SEWERS. Sewer, soil pipe and drain pipes constructed within and under buildings.
CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer of the city, in the city engineer=s absence, a qualified
Public and Private Sewers
33
engineering firm acting as City Engineer of the city.
PREMISES. A lot, parcel of land, building or establishment.
SEWAGE. All water or combination of liquid and water-carried solid or semi-solid waste
conducted away from residences, business buildings, institutions and other sources, which is known as
domestic sewage, together with liquid or water-carried solid or semi-solid waste resulting from a
manufacturing process employed in industrial establishments, including the washing, cleaning or
drainwater from such process, which is known as industrial waste.
SEWER or SEWER MAIN. Any city-owned sewer pipe within a city street or public right-of-way
receiving or intended to receive the discharges of more than one sewer lateral. No sewer main
constructed henceforth shall be less than eight inches in diameter nor be laid or constructed in any city
street, easement or right-of-way or street, easement or right-of-way under the control of the city, except
to the lines, grades and specifications approved by the proper city authority.
SEWER LATERAL or LATERAL. A privately-owned pipeline connecting a building sewer to a
sewer main.
(Ord. 113, passed 7-25-2006)
' 53.36 CLERK=S AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE.
The City Clerk shall be charged with the administration of the sewerage system and the enforcement
of the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 113, passed 7-25-2006)
' 53.37 SEWER LATERALS, CLEANOUTS AND CONNECTIONS.
(A) All laterals from the building wall to the connection to the sewer main are the property of the
owner of the connected building. All property owners whose properties are connected to a sewer main or
are otherwise connected to the city=s sewer system by sewer lateral shall at their own expense maintain
the sewer lateral in a fully functioning condition and ensure the lateral is free of cracks, leaks, inflow or
infiltration of extraneous water, root intrusion or open joints. Property owners shall ensure that laterals
drain freely to the sewer main without excessive sags that collect grease and sediment.
(B) No person, firm or corporation shall break or cut into or connect to any sewer in any street,
easement or right-of-way in the city or under the control of the city without first securing a permit so to
do from the City Engineer. Prior to beginning work, detailed plans describing the work to be done shall
be submitted to and approved by the City Engineer or his or her designee.
(C) Each property utilizing the city's sewer system shall have a separate lateral connected to the
sewer main. Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence, branched or common laterals shall be permitted
only in the following instances:
Chisholm - Public Works
34
(1) Where a lateral is maintained by a homeowner=s association or other entity that is party to
a formal, recorded lateral maintenance agreement.
(2) Where more than one building or other structure is situated upon the same lot, in which case
all buildings and structures may, by permit authorized by the City Engineer, be joined in the use of one
connecting sewer; provided that the connection conforms in all other respects to the provisions of this
chapter and a drawn plan of the joint connection be first submitted to and approved by the City Engineer.
As a further condition of obtaining such a permit, all buildings and structures shall be owned by the same
person.
(3) Where, in the opinion of the City Engineer, it is impossible or impractical to connect a
building on a single lot to the main sewer except in conjunction with the connection of a building or
buildings on other lots, a joint connection may be allowed, provided that the connection conforms in all
other respects to the provisions of this chapter and a drawn plan of the joint connection be first submitted
to and approved by the City Engineer. A permit for each individual lot covering the identification of the
responsible party for maintenance and liability for maintenance and overflow damages shall be required.
(4) Where two or more structures on separate parcels are connected to a branched or common
lateral, each property shall be disconnected from the branched or common lateral and a new separate
lateral shall be constructed upon the transfer of title of either property by sale.
(D) A cleanout approved by the City Engineer shall be installed and maintained, at the sole expense
of the property owner, on all laterals. The installation of the devices shall be required as follows:
(1) When building a new structure on property with an existing lateral, or when otherwise
proposing to connect a previously unconnected structure to an existing lateral;
(2) As a condition of approval of any major building remodel project. A major building
remodel project is one that is estimated by the city to cost $50,000 or more;
(3) Prior to the close of escrow when the property is transferred via sale or other transfer of
ownership by deed, instrument or writing;
(4) Whenever the city finds that a sewage spill emanating from a lateral has reached public
property, including but not limited to a city street or the city storm drain system, or has flowed onto
private property owned by another property owner;
(5) Whenever the city finds that a sewage spill emanating from a lateral presents a threat to
public health, even if it has not flowed across a property line.
(E) (1) On laterals serving properties where the outlet of a trap for a plumbing fixture is installed or
located at an elevation which is less than two feet above the rim of the nearest manhole or other sewer
access point uphill from the point of connection of the lateral to the public sewer in any new or existing
drainage system, approved types of backflow valves may be required by the City Engineer. The
installation of the devices shall be required under the same circumstances as set forth in subsections
Public and Private Sewers
35
(D)(1) through (5) of this section.
(2) Where a backflow valve is required, the valve shall be installed in the lateral at the point of
lowest elevation of the ground surface along the alignment of the lateral, or at such other location as is
permitted by the city, providing that at any such location, the elevation of the ground surface is not less
than two feet below the lowest trap served by the building sewer.
(3) The backflow valve shall have cleanouts directly upstream and downstream of the valve.
The cleanouts shall be connected to the lateral by means of wye fittings. The backflow valve shall be
accessible from the surface and protected by the use of a precast access box of concrete or heavy-duty
plastic approved by the City Engineer.
(4) The cleanouts shall be positioned at an elevation at least three inches above the ground in
order to prevent the obstruction of the vent opening or the inflow of surface water.
(F) Any owner whose property meeting the elevation criteria of this section that has no backflow
valve, or has a defective or improperly installed backflow valve, shall be responsible for all damage that
results from the lack of such a device, or the failure of the defective or improperly installed device to
prevent such damage.
(Ord. 113, passed 7-25-2006) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 55.38 INSPECTIONS AND REPAIRS OF SEWER LATERALS.
(A) (1) Property owners shall inspect, and provide to the city a report of the results of an inspection
of, the laterals on their property prepared by a licensed plumber or a city employee using closed circuit
television (CCTV) inspection or other inspection or test method approved by the City Engineer, and if
found defective, repair the lateral, as follows:
(a) When building a new structure on property with an existing lateral, or when otherwise
proposing to connect a previously unconnected structure to an existing lateral;
(b) As a condition of approval of any major building remodel project. A major building
remodel project is one that is estimated by the city to cost $50,000 or more;
(c) Prior to the close of escrow when the property is transferred via sale or other transfer of
ownership by deed, instrument or writing;
(d) Whenever the city finds that a sewage overflow emanating from a lateral has reached
public property, including but not limited to a city street or the city storm drain system, or has flowed
onto private property owned by another property owner;
(e) Whenever the city finds that a sewage overflow emanating from a lateral presents a
threat to public health, even if it has not flowed across a property line.
(2) In the absence of a specific deadline, all inspection and testing work shall be completed
within 60 days of notification by the city that such inspection is required. Existing laterals shall not be
Chisholm - Public Works
36
used if they are found to be defective by the inspection or if they fail city mandated tests or if they were
constructed of materials deemed unacceptable by the City Engineer.
(B) As part of its periodic construction and maintenance of sewer mains, the city may discover
defective laterals. The city may order the property owner to conduct an inspection, repair or replacement
of any lateral that the city knows or reasonably suspects to be defective.
(C) The lateral shall be considered defective if it has any of the following conditions: displaced
joints, root intrusion, substantial deterioration of the lines, damaged clean-out, defective clean-out,
inflow, infiltration of extraneous water, or other conditions likely to substantially increase the chance for
a lateral blockage, or if, within a period of one year, a lateral suffers two or more blockages resulting in
overflows.
(D) Whenever defective laterals are found, the property owner, at the sole expense of the property
owner, shall repair or replace the lateral. The City Engineer shall determine the extent of repair required,
and more limited repair than complete replacement of the lateral may be permitted at the sole discretion
of the city engineer. The following requirements shall be met.
(1) A replaced or repaired lateral shall not be covered or backfilled until it has been inspected
by a representative of the city.
(2) All new and repaired laterals must pass an air pressure test as specified by the City
Engineer.
(3) All repaired or replaced laterals shall be brought into compliance with the requirements of
' 55.03. Backflow valves may be required to be installed on laterals meeting the criteria of '' 53.06 and
55.03.
(E) In the absence of a specific deadline established by the responsible authority of the city, all
repair or replacement work shall be completed within 60 days of notification by the city that such repair
or replacement is required. Repair or replacement shall consist of but not be limited to the sewer and
water utilities, sidewalk, curb, street, grading and seeding.
(F) When a lateral is completely replaced, the property owner is not required to inspect the lateral
upon sale of the property for ten years following the date of complete replacement of the lateral.
(G) Roots, grease or other material which have accumulated in a lateral cleaned or maintained shall
be prevented from entering the sewer main during the maintenance or repair of the lateral. In the event
that material is permitted to enter the main causing or contributing to the cause of a sewage spill, the
property owner and/or contractor performing such maintenance work, in addition to any criminal
penalties imposed, shall be held civilly liable to the city for any fines or other expenses incurred by the
city resulting from the spill.
(H) The city shall have the authority to recover from a property owner, the city=s expenses incurred
in responding to sewer overflows on private property. In addition to any actual expenses incurred by the
city resulting from an overflow, the city may impose civil administrative penalties against a property
Public and Private Sewers
37
owner who fails to perform any act required in this section, which failure results in an overflow reaching
public or private property other than the property owner=s property, according to the following schedule:
(1) Up to $500 for the first violation.
(2) Up to $1,000 for a second violation occurring within three years after the first violation.
(3) Up to $2,500 for each additional violation within a three-year period exceeding two
violations.
(I) The City Clerk shall have the authority to establish, waive, suspend or otherwise modify any
civil administrative penalty imposed by this section that exceeds the direct costs of the city upon a
showing by the property owner of severe financial hardship, or upon a showing that the property owner
has satisfactorily repaired the lateral to a degree sufficient to ensure avoidance of further violations.
(J) The provisions of this section shall not be construed to require or obligate the city to enter into a
reimbursement agreement if, in the sole discretion of the City Council, to so enter into the agreement
would not be in the best interests of the city or would be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the
city.
(K) (1) Where buildings are to be demolished, the following actions shall be required:
(a) Determine if the service is to be abandoned or reused in the future; and
(b) Have the service (lateral) line televised, if records are not on file showing it televised in
the past ten years. A city official shall review the video recording and records on file with the city to
determine the condition of the sewer lateral. (Typically, the Building Official, City Engineer or Public
Works Superintendent).
(2) (a) If the service line is to be abandoned but is in good condition with no apparent inflow
and infiltration issues (typically either PVC or cast iron pipe), remove or abandon service line to the
property line. Expose the sewer lateral at the lot or curb line and seal/cap the open end to the satisfaction
of the authorized city official.
(b) If the service line is to be abandoned and is in poor or failing condition and the street is
in poor or failing condition, remove or abandon the service line to the main line in the street. Then
remove the wye or tee connection at the main line, and repair the main sewer line in the street as
determined by authorized city official.
(c) If the service line is to be abandon, and is in poor or failing condition but the street is in
fair to good condition, remove or abandon the service line from the building to the property line, or as
near as possible to the back of the curb, and do either of the following alternative actions with the
remainder of the sewer line to the sewer main.
1. Dig down to the lateral, exposing the line at the lot line or close to the curb and
install, a city approved membrane liner through the remaining service stub. Seal both ends of the liner,
Chisholm - Public Works
38
and install a seal/cap on the open end at the property or curb line to the satisfaction of the authorized city
official.
2. Or, install a city-approved plug in the service line as near the main line pipe as
possible. Fill the remaining service stub with a non-permeable grout or sealant and install a seal/cap on
the open end of the pipe at the property or curb line to the satisfaction of the authorized city official.
(d) If the service line is needed in the future and the service line is in good condition
(typically either PVC or cast iron pipe) regardless of the street condition, remove or abandon the service
line to the property line. Dig down to the lateral, exposing the line at the lot line or close to the curb and
install a cap, or seal the open end of pipe at the property or curb line to the satisfaction of the authorized
city official. Provide location (ties - minimum of two) to the city official.
(e) If the service line is needed in the future, but is in poor or failing condition and the
street is in poor or failing condition, remove or abandon the service line from the building to the
mainline. Remove the old connection at the main line, and install a new wye and pipe from the main
sewer line to the lot line and install a cleanout access at the property line as determined by the authorized
city official.
(f) If the service line is needed in the future, but the old line is in poor or failing condition
and the street is in good to fair condition, the service line shall be removed or abandon to the property line
or curb. Install a sewer cleanout at the property line or near the curb. Connection to the remaining sewer
service stub between the sewer cleanout and the main line sewer pipe shall either:
1. Have a city-approved membrane liner installed and have the line capped at the lot
line below the cleanout; or
2. Have a city-approved plug installed in the service pipe as near the main line pipe
as possible, then filled with a non-permeable, but removable, grout or sealant.
(Ord. 113, passed 7-25-2006; Ord. 128, passed 6-12-2007; Ord. 150, passed 5-11-2010; Ord. 113, passed
5-10-2011) Penalty, see ' 10.99
CHAPTER 54: STORMWATER UTILITY
Section
54.01 Purpose
54.02 Establishment of stormwater drainage utility
54.03 Stormwater utility rates
39
54.04 Other land uses
54.05 Adjustment of charges
54.06 Exemptions
54.07 Payment of charge
54.08 Establishment of tax lien
54.09 Recalculation of charges
' 54.01 PURPOSE.
(A) The purpose of this chapter is to establish a city stormwater utility.
(B) The following are the objectives of this special utility:
(1) Maintain and improve the present stormwater management system;
(2) Improve the quality of water runoff to lakes which helps recharge aquifers, control lake
levels and decrease erosion and sediment to lakes;
(3) Operate and maintain stormwater facilities to protect people and property;
(4) Provide the resources to respond to small scale emergency drainage issues affecting
residents;
(5) Acquire land and/or construct stormwater detention and retention sites;
(6) Direct water from street surfaces which reduces street maintenance costs; and
(7) Encourage local watershed stormwater management improvement projects by
supplementing funding from city and other sources.
(Ord. 101, passed 9-24-2002)
' 54.02 ESTABLISHMENT OF STORMWATER DRAINAGE UTILITY.
The city stormwater utility shall be operated as a public utility pursuant to M.S. ' 444.075, as it may
be amended from time to time. Pursuant thereto, the city establishes a storm water utility and authorizes
the imposition of just and reasonable charges for the use and availability of storm sewer facilities subject
to the provisions of this section and state statutes.
(Ord. 101, passed 9-24-2002)
' 54.03 STORMWATER UTILITY RATES.
(A) Residential equivalent unit. Rates and charges for the use and availability of the system shall be
determined through the use of a Aresidential equivalent unit@ (REU). For the purposes of this section,
Chisholm - Public Works
40
one REU is defined as a single contiguous property that is a residential land use with three or fewer units,
or a commercial, industrial, general business, mining area up to 0.25 acres.
(B) Stormwater drainage charges.
(1) In determining charges the City Council shall by resolution establish a basic system rate to
be charged against one-fourth of an acre of land having an REU of one. The charge to be made against
each parcel of land shall then be determined by multiplying the REU for the parcel=s land use and size
times the basic system rate. For land uses identified as ABusiness 4@ below, the charge to be made shall
be determined using the impervious rate method, in which the impervious area of the parcel times the
impervious rate identifies the monthly charge. The REF=s for land uses within the city and the billing
classifications for the land uses are as follows:
Classification
Land Uses/Size
REU
Residential
Up to three residential units, residential lots which are
undeveloped
1
Business 1
Commercial, industrial, general business, mining, 4 +
residential units, > 0.00 acres and ? 0.25 acres
1
Business 2
Commercial, industrial, general business, mining, 4 +
Residential Units, > 0.25 acres and ? 0.50 acres
2
Business 3
Commercial, industrial, general business, mining, 4 +
residential units, > 0.50 acres and ? 0.75 acres
3
Business 4
Commercial, industrial, general business, mining, 4 +
residential units, > 0.75 acres and ? 1.00 acres
4
Business 5
Commercial, industrial, general business, mining, 4 +
residential units, > 1.00 acres
Calculate using
impervious rate method
(2) The basic system rate and the impervious rate shall be determined by resolution of the City
Council from time to time, and will be reviewed at the first regular meeting of the City Council on an
annual basis.
(Ord. 101, passed 9-24-2002)
' 54.04 OTHER LAND USES.
Other land uses not listed in the foregoing table shall be classified by the City Clerk or his or her
designee by assigning them to classes most nearly like the listed uses, based upon contributing area of the
property. An appeal from the City Clerk=s determination of the property classification may be made to
the City Council.
(Ord. 101, passed 9-24-2002)
Stormwater Utility
41
' 54.05 ADJUSTMENT OF CHARGES.
The City Council may, by resolution, adopt policies providing for the adjustment of charges for
parcels or groups of parcels, based upon land use data supplied by affected property owners, which data
demonstrates classification or category substantially different from that being used for the parcel or
parcels. The adjustment shall be made only upon recommendation of the City Clerk and shall not be
made effective retroactively.
(Ord. 101, passed 9-24-2002)
' 54.06 EXEMPTIONS.
Public street rights-of-way, public parks, public works facilities and other city property are exempt
from stormwater utility charges.
(Ord. 101, passed 9-24-2002)
' 54.07 PAYMENT OF CHARGE.
(A) Billing. Statements for charges for stormwater utility use and service for a quarterly period shall
be mailed to each property owner or user with other utility billings, and on a schedule concurrent with
other utility billings of the city and City Public Utilities Commission.
(B) Delinquencies. After the last day of the month in which payment is due, a penalty of 10% of the
unpaid account balance will be assessed and added to the amount due on the account.
(Ord. 101, passed 9-24-2002)
' 54.08 ESTABLISHMENT OF TAX LIEN.
Any past due stormwater drainage fees in excess of 90 days past due on October 1 of any year may
be certified to the County Auditor for collection with real estate taxes in the following year pursuant to
M.S. ' 444.075(3), as it may be amended from time to time. In addition, the city shall have the right to
bring a civil action or pursue legal remedies to collect unpaid charges.
(Ord. 101, passed 9-24-2002)
' 54.09 RECALCULATION OF CHARGES.
(A) If a property owner or person responsible for paying the stormwater drainage charge questions
the correctness of such a charge, the person may, upon application and documentation including
submission of a property survey, have the determination of the charges re-computed by written request to
the City Clerk or his or her designee.
Chisholm - Public Works
42
(B) The request shall be made within 30 days of the mailing of the billing in question.
(Ord. 101, passed 9-24-2002)
1
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
70. TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
71. PARKING REGULATIONS
72. MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
73. RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
74. PARKING SCHEDULES
Chisholm - Traffic Code
2
3
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
70.01 Certain statutes adopted by reference
70.02 Truck route
70.03 U-turns prohibited
70.04 Passing prohibited at intersections
70.05 Emergency vehicles
70.06 Starting, stopping, turning
70.07 Pedestrians; right-of-way
70.08 Speed in school zones
70.09 Driving through private property to avoid traffic signal
70.10 Exhibition driving
70.11 One-way streets
70.12 Motorized golf carts, operation and regulation
70.13 Open bottle law
70.14 Violation of open bottle law
' 70.01 CERTAIN STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
(A) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, Chapters 73 and 74, or in Chapter 95 of this code,
the regulatory and procedural provisions of M.S. Chapter 169, commonly referred to as the Highway
Traffic Regulation Act, as amended through laws of 1987, is hereby incorporated herein and adopted by
reference, including the penalty provisions thereof.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, Chapters 73 and 74, or in Chapter 95 of this code,
M.S. '' 171.01, 171.02, 171.08, 171.22 and 171.24, as amended through laws of 1987, are hereby
incorporated herein and adopted by reference, including the penalty provisions thereof.
(1994 Code, ' 8.01)
' 70.02 TRUCK ROUTE.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to drive a tractor, agricultural implement, truck (other than pick-up
truck), truck-trailer, tractor-trailer or truck tractor of more than one-half ton capacity, automobile trailer
or automobile to which a trailer is attached, in through traffic, upon any street except those which have
been designated and sign-posted as truck routes.
Chisholm - Traffic Code
4
(B) For the purpose of this chapter, THROUGH TRAFFIC means originating without the city and
with a destination without the city, as distinguished from LOCAL TRAFFIC, which means traffic either
originating or having a destination within the city.
(1994 Code, ' 8.02) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 70.03 U-TURNS PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle by turning so as to proceed in the opposite direction
upon any street except at a street intersection, and then only if the street intersection is not sign-posted
prohibiting a U-turn.
(1994 Code, ' 8.03) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 70.04 PASSING PROHIBITED AT INTERSECTIONS.
It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to pass another vehicle at the intersection of any two
streets; provided, however, that for the purpose of this section, a street abutting the rear of any lot or
parcel of land, commonly known as an alley, shall not be considered a street within the prohibition herein
stated; provided, further that when the driver of any motor vehicle has signaled a left-hand turn and has
properly approached the intersection, the vehicle may be passed on its right side.
(1994 Code, ' 8.04) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 70.05 EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
(A) The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to vehicles when operated with due regard for
safety, under the direction of police officers in the chase or apprehension of violators of the law or of
persons charged with or suspected of any like violation, nor to Fire Department or fire patrol vehicles
when traveling in response to a fire alarm, nor to public ambulances when traveling in emergencies.
(B) This exemption shall not, however, protect the driver of any like vehicle from the consequences
of a reckless disregard of the safety of others.
(1994 Code, ' 8.05)
' 70.06 STARTING, STOPPING, TURNING.
Traffic Regulations
5
The driver of any vehicle upon a highway before starting, stopping or turning from a direct line shall
first see that the movement can be made in safety, and if any pedestrian or cyclist may be affected by the
movement, shall give a clearly audible signal by sounding the warning device, and whenever the
operation of any other vehicle may be affected by the movement, shall give a signal either by extending
the arm horizontally from and beyond the left side of the vehicle, or by a signal lamp or signal device
plainly visible to the driver of the other vehicle, of the intention to make the movement at least 100 feet
before a stop or turn is to be made, except that the requirement of a signal by warning device shall apply
to motor vehicles only.
(1994 Code, ' 8.06) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 70.07 PEDESTRIANS; RIGHT-OF-WAY.
(A) The driver of any vehicle upon a street where the same passes through the closely built-up
portions or residence portions of the city shall yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian crossing the street
within any clearly marked crosswalk or any regular pedestrian crossing included in the prolongation of
the lateral boundary lines of the adjacent sidewalk at the end of a block.
(B) Every pedestrian crossing a street within a business or residence district at any point other than
a pedestrian crossing or crosswalk shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles upon the street.
(1994 Code, ' 8.07) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 70.08 SPEED IN SCHOOL ZONES.
It is unlawful for any person to cross or drive through a school zone at a speed other than that which
is sign-posted thereon.
(1994 Code, ' 8.08) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 70.09 DRIVING THROUGH PRIVATE PROPERTY TO AVOID TRAFFIC SIGNAL.
It is unlawful for any person to avoid obedience to any traffic control device by driving upon or
through any private property.
(1994 Code, ' 8.09) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 70.10 EXHIBITION DRIVING.
(A) Prima facie evidence. It is prima facie evidence of exhibition driving when a motor vehicle
stops, starts, accelerates, decelerates or turns at an unnecessary rate of speed so as to cause tires to squeal,
gears to grind, soil to be thrown, engine backfire, fish-tailing or skidding, or, as to two-wheeled or
three-wheeled motor vehicles, the front wheel to lose contact with the ground or roadway surface
(B) Unlawful act. It is unlawful for any person to do any exhibition driving on any street, parking lot
Chisholm - Traffic Code
6
or other public or private property, except when an emergency creates necessity for the operation to
prevent injury to persons or damage to property; provided, that this section shall not apply to driving on a
racetrack. For purposes of this section, a RACETRACK means any track or premises whereon motorized
vehicles, horses, dogs or other animals or fowl legally compete in a race or timed contest for an audience,
the members of which have directly or indirectly paid a consideration for admission.
(1994 Code, ' 8.10) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 70.11 ONE-WAY STREETS.
(A) The Council may, by resolution, designate streets as one-way streets.
(B) It is a misdemeanor for any person to travel upon any one-way street in a direction opposite that
designated when the same has been duly sign-posted.
(1994 Code, ' 8.11) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 70.12 MOTORIZED GOLF CARTS, OPERATION AND REGULATION.
(A) Operation authorized. Operation of motorized golf carts is hereby authorized on the roadways
of all streets, except as are prohibited by resolution of the Council, and only in strict compliance with this
section.
(B) Permits.
(1) Permits shall be issued only to disabled persons as defined by statute.
(2) Application for a permit to operate a motorized golf cart on the roadways of streets shall
include the name and address of the applicant and other information as may from time to time be required
by the Council. Applications for initial or renewal permits shall be accompanied by a certificate signed
by a physician stating that the applicant is capable of safely operating a motorized golf cart on the
roadway of streets.
(3) All permits shall expire on December 31, unless renewed.
(4) The fee for a permit shall be fixed by resolution of the Council.
(C) Unlawful acts. It is unlawful for any person to operate a motorized golf cart on the roadway of a
street unless:
(1) The operator has in possession a valid, current and un-revoked permit from the city;
(2) The operation is on a roadway which has not been designated as prohibited for the
operation, except crossing at an intersection;
(3) The operation is during daylight hours between sunrise and sunset;
Traffic Regulations
7
(4) The operation is not during inclement weather, or when visibility is impaired by weather,
smoke, fog or other conditions, or when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons or vehicles
thereon at a distance of 500 feet;
(5) The motorized golf cart displays a slow moving vehicle emblem, as described by statute, on
the rear thereof;
(6) The motorized golf cart is equipped with rear view mirrors as required by statute for other
vehicles;
(7) The operator has insurance coverage as provided by statute (presently M.S. ' 65B.48(5), as
it may be amended from time to time) for motorcycles; and
(8) The operator observes all traffic laws, except as cannot reasonably be applied to motorized
golf carts.
(1994 Code, ' 8.12) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 70.13 OPEN BOTTLE LAW.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to drink or consume liquor or beer in any motor vehicle when the
vehicle is upon a public highway, street or alleyway.
(B) It is unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession on his or her person while in a
private motor vehicle upon a public highway, street or alleyway, any bottle or receptacle containing
liquor or beer which has been opened, or the seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially
removed.
(C) It is unlawful for the owner of any private motor vehicle or the driver, if the owner be not then
present in the motor vehicle, to keep or allow to be kept in a motor vehicle when the vehicle is upon the
public highway, street or alleyway, any bottle or receptacle containing liquor or beer which has been
opened, or the seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed except when the bottle
or receptacle shall be kept in the trunk of the motor vehicle when the vehicle is equipped with a trunk, or
kept in some other area of the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or passengers, if the motor
vehicle is not equipped with a trunk. A utility compartment or glove compartment shall be deemed to be
within the area occupied by the driver and passengers.
(1994 Code, ' 8.31) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 70.14 VIOLATION OF OPEN BOTTLE LAW.
A violation of any provision of ' 70.13 classified therein as a petty misdemeanor when preceded by
one or more convictions within the immediate preceding 12-month period is a misdemeanor and shall be
punished as such.
(1994 Code, ' 8.31)
Chisholm - Traffic Code
8
Traffic Regulations
9
10
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
71.01 Presumption
71.02 General parking prohibitions
71.03 Unauthorized removal
71.04 House trailer, mobile home, camping trailer and bus parking
71.05 Direction to proceed
71.06 Parallel parking
71.07 Angle parking
71.08 Streets without curb
71.09 Parking in alleys
71.10 Un-metered parking hours
71.11 Truck parking
71.12 Municipal parking lots and ramps
71.13 Impounding and removing vehicles
71.14 Physically disabled parking
71.15 Snow emergency
' 71.01 PRESUMPTION.
As to any vehicle parking in violation of Chapters 70, 71, 73 and Chapter 95 when the driver thereof
is not present, it shall be presumed that the owner parked the same, or that the driver was acting as the
agent of the owner.
(1994 Code, ' 9.01)
' 71.02 GENERAL PARKING PROHIBITIONS.
It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the specific directions of a police officer or traffic control device
in any of the following places: on a sidewalk; in front of a public or private driveway; within an
intersection; within ten feet of a fire hydrant; on a crosswalk; within 20 feet of a crosswalk at any
intersection; in a sign-posted fire lane; within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign
or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway, within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing; within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the
entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance when properly sign-posted; alongside or
opposite any street excavation or obstruction when the stopping, standing or parking would obstruct
traffic; on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; upon any
Parking Regulations
11
bridge or other elevated structure upon a street; at any place where official signs prohibit or restrict
stopping, parking or both; in any alley, except for loading or unloading and then only so long as
reasonably necessary for the loading and unloading to or from adjacent premises; on any boulevard
which has been curbed; or in the Iron Man Statue Parking Lot (Veda Ponikvar Boulevard) unless for
visitation to the Iron Man Statue, not to exceed two hours in duration.
(1994 Code, ' 9.02) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.03 UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL.
It is unlawful for any person to move a vehicle not owned by the person into any prohibited area or
away from a curb a distance as is unlawful.
(1994 Code, ' 9.03) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.04 HOUSE TRAILER, MOBILE HOME, CAMPING TRAILER AND BUS PARKING.
It is unlawful for any persons to leave or park a house trailer, mobile home, camping trailer, detached
trailer, bus or other similar recreational vehicle on or within the limits of the street or right-of-way in any
residential district, except where signs are erected designating the place as a campsite, for more than two
hours.
(1994 Code, ' 9.04) (Ord. 96, passed 6-23-1998) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.05 DIRECTION TO PROCEED.
It is unlawful for any person to stop or park a vehicle on a street when directed or ordered to proceed
by any police officer invested by law with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic.
(1994 Code, ' 9.05) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.06 PARALLEL PARKING.
Each vehicle stopped or parked upon a two-way road where there is an adjacent curb shall be
stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle parallel with, and within 12 inches of, the
right-hand curb, and where painted markings appear on the curb or the street, the vehicle shall be within
the markings, front and rear, provided that upon a one-way roadway all vehicles shall be so parked,
except that the left-hand wheels of the vehicle may be parallel with and within 12 inches from the
left-hand curb, but the front of the vehicle in any event and with respect to the remainder of the vehicle,
shall be in the direction of the flow of traffic upon the one-way street; and it is unlawful to park in
violation of this section.
(1994 Code, ' 9.06) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Chisholm - Traffic Code
12
' 71.07 ANGLE PARKING.
Where angle parking has been established and is allowed, as shown by curb marking or sign-posting,
or both, each vehicle stopped or parked shall be at an angle of approximately 45 to 60 degrees with the
front wheel touching the curb and within any parking lines painted on the curb or street, provided that the
front wheel not touching the curb shall be the portion of the vehicle furthest in the direction of one-way
traffic; and it is unlawful to park in violation of this section.
(1994 Code, ' 9.07) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.08 STREETS WITHOUT CURB.
Upon streets not having a curb each vehicle shall be stopped or parked parallel and to the right of the
paving, improved or main traveled part of the street; and it is unlawful to park in violation of this section.
(1994 Code, ' 9.08) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.09 PARKING IN ALLEYS.
It is unlawful to park in streets adjoining the rear of premises, which streets are commonly referred
to as Aalleys@, except that commercial vehicles may park in those streets for a period no longer than
necessary for the purpose of loading or unloading, and when so parked, they shall be as close to the side
thereof as possible so as to not obstruct the flow of traffic.
(1994 Code, ' 9.09) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.10 UN-METERED PARKING HOURS.
Parking in streets controlled with parking meters shall be limited to the length of time stated upon
the meters. Parking on streets not controlled by parking meters shall be limited as follows.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to stop, park on or leave standing any vehicle upon any street for a
continuous period in excess of 24 hours.
(B) The Director of public Safety may, when authorized by resolution of the Council, designate
certain streets, blocks or portions of streets or blocks, as five-minute, ten-minute, 15-minute, 30-minute,
one-hour, two-hour, four-hour or eight-hour limited parking zones and shall mark by appropriate signs
any zone so established. The zones shall be established whenever necessary for the convenience of the
public or to minimize traffic hazards and preserve a free flow of traffic. It is unlawful for any person to
park a vehicle in any limited parking zone between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any weekday
for a longer period than is specified in the sign-posting of the zone.
(1994 Code, ' 9.10) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.11 TRUCK PARKING.
Parking Regulations
13
(A) It is unlawful to park a detached semi-trailer upon any street, municipally-owned parking lot or
other public property.
(B) It is unlawful to park a semi-trailer, whether or not attached to a truck-tractor, within an area
zoned as a Residential District, except for the purpose of loading and unloading the same.
(C) It is unlawful to park a commercial vehicle of one-half ton capacity or more between 8:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m. on any weekday within any parking space, but parking the vehicle for a period of not more
than 30 minutes shall be permitted in the space for the purpose of necessary access to abutting property
for loading or unloading when the access cannot reasonably be secured from an alley or from an adjacent
street where truck parking is not so restricted.
(D) Parking of commercial vehicles is permitted in duly designated and sign-posted loading zones,
and in alleys, for a period of up to 30 minutes, provided that the alley parking does not prevent the flow of
traffic therein, all of which shall be for the purpose of access to abutting or adjacent property for loading
or unloading.
(1994 Code, ' 9.12) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.12 MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS AND RAMPS.
In municipally-owned parking lots and ramps, the Council may limit the sizes and types of motor
vehicles to be parked thereon, hours of parking and prescribed method of parking, provided that the
limitations and restrictions are sign-posted or meter-posted thereon. It is unlawful to park or leave
standing any vehicle backed into a parking place, to drive in a direction opposite the flow of traffic
marked by Aone-way@ signs or arrows, or to park any vehicle in any municipally-owned parking lot or
ramp contrary to the restrictions or limitations sign-posted or meter-posted therein.
(1994 Code, ' 9.13) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.13 IMPOUNDING AND REMOVING VEHICLES.
When any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street or municipally-owned parking lot in
violation of any parking regulation, the officer is hereby authorized to require the driver or other person
in charge of the vehicle to remove the same to a position in compliance with this chapter. When any
police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any street or municipally-owned parking lot in violation of
any parking regulation, the officer is hereby authorized to impound the unlawfully parked vehicle and to
provide for the removal thereof and to remove the same to a convenient garage or other facility or place
of safety; provided, that if any charge shall be placed against the vehicle for cost of removal or storage, or
both, by anyone called upon to assist therewith the same shall be paid prior to removal from the place of
storage or safekeeping.
(1994 Code, ' 9.14) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.14 PHYSICALLY DISABLED PARKING.
Chisholm - Traffic Code
14
(A) Statutory parking privileges for physically disabled shall be strictly observed and enforced.
Police officers are authorized to tag vehicles on either private or public property in violation of the
statutory privileges.
(B) It is unlawful for any person, whether or not physically disabled, to stop, park or leave standing,
a motor vehicle: in a sign-posted fire lane at any time; or in lanes where, and during hours as parking is
prohibited to accommodate heavy traffic during morning and afternoon rush hours.
(1994 Code, ' 9.15) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 71.15 SNOW EMERGENCY.
(A) Application. Notwithstanding any other provision of the city code, this section shall apply to all
snow emergencies and snow emergency routes.
(B) Declaration of emergency. At any time after at least two inches of snow has accumulated within
a period of 24 hours, or less, the city may declare a snow emergency by communicating the declaration to
local news media. Failure to communicate with a news media shall not invalidate the declaration.
(C) Emergency in effect, expiration and extension.
(1) Four hours after a snow emergency has been declared it shall be in effect.
(2) Twenty-four hours after a snow emergency has been declared, which declaration has not
been extended, it shall expire.
(3) If at least two hours before the expiration of the initial or any extension of a snow
emergency, a declaration of extension is made by communicating the same to the news media, the snow
emergency shall be extended for an additional 24-hour period. Failure to communicate with a news
media shall not invalidate the extension.
(D) Unlawful act. It is unlawful to park or leave standing any motor vehicle in a sign-posted snow
emergency route during a declared snow emergency, whether the declaration be an initial or extended
snow emergency.
(Ord. 112, passed 12-27-2005) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Parking Regulations
15
16
CHAPTER 72: MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
Section
72.01 Definitions
72.02 Traffic regulations
72.03 Parking regulations
72.04 Enforcement
' 72.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
AIRPORT PROPERTY. Includes the property described as follows: commencing at the southeast
corner of Section 22, T.57N., R.20 W.: thence, north along the east boundary of Section 22 a distance of
333 feet: thence, south parallel to the east line of Section 22 a distance 333 feet to a point on the south line
of Section 227 thence, west along the south line of section 22 to the southeast corner of the SW
quarter-SE quarter, Section 227 thence, north along the east line of the SW quarter-SE quarter 4 of
Section 22 a distance of 860 feet: thence, southwesterly a distance of 770 feet more or less to a point
which is due north and 270 feet from the south line of the SW quarter-SE quarter, Section 22: thence,
south parallel to the east line a distance of 270 feet to a point on the south line of the SW quarter-SE
quarter, Section 22; thence, west along the south line of the SW quarter-SE quarter, Section 22 a distance
of 560 feet; thence, south parallel to the west line of the NW quarter-NE quarter, Section 27 a distance of
420 feet: thence, west parallel to the north line of the NW quarter-NE quarter, a distance of 200 feet to a
point on the west line of the NW quarter-NE quarter, Section 27: thence, south 790 feet more or less to
the southwest corner of the NW quarter-NE quarter Section 27: thence, east along the south line of the
north half of the NE quarter of Section 27 to a point which is 660 feet west of the southeast corner of the
NE quarter-NE quarter; Section 27; thence, southeasterly a distance of 1,070 feet more or less to a point
on the east line of the SE quarter-NE quarter, Section 27 to a point which is 320 feet north of the
southeast corner of the SE quarter-NE quarter, Section 27; thence south along the east line of Section 27
to the southwest corner of the NW quarter-SW quarter, Section 26, T. 57N. , R.20W, thence, east along
the south line of the NW quarter-SW quarter to the southeast corner of the NW quarter-SW quarter:
thence, south along the west line of the SE quarter-SW quarter, Section 26, to the southwest corner of the
SE quarter-SW quarter: thence, east along the south line of the SE quarter-SW quarter to the southeast
corner of the SE quarter-SW quarter: thence south along the west line of the NE quarter, Section 35,
T.57N., R. 20W., to the center of the Section 35; thence east along the south line of the SW quarter-NE
quarter, Section 35, to the southeast corner of the SW quarter-NE quarter; thence, north along the east
line of the SW quarter-NE quarter to the northeast corner of the SW quarter-NE quarter; thence, east
along the south line of the NE quarter-NE quarter Section 35, to the southeast corner of the NE
Municipal Airport
17
quarter-NE quarter of Section 35: thence, south along the west line of the SW quarter-NW quarter,
Section 36, to the southwest corner of the SW quarter-NW quarter, thence, east along the south line SW
quarter-NW quarter, to the southeast corner of the SW quarter-NW quarter, thence, south along the west
line of the NE quarter-SW quarter, a distance of 100 feet: thence, southeasterly a distance of 975 feet
more or less to a point which is 200 feet west of the southeast corner of the NE quarter-SW quarter:
thence, southeasterly a distance of 200 feet to a point on the west line of the SW quarter-SE quarter,
Section 36, which point is 150 feet south of the northwest corner of the SW quarter-SE quarter; thence,
south along the west line of the SW quarter-SE quarter, to the southwest corner of the SW quarter-SE
quarter: thence, east along the south line of the SW quarter-SE quarter to the southeast corner of the SW
quarter-SE quarter, Section 36; thence, north along the east 1/16 line of Section 36 to a point which is 360
feet south of the northeast corner of the SW quarter-NE quarter, Section 36, T.57N., R.20W: thence,
northwesterly a distance of 1,140 feet more or less to a point on the west line of the NW quarter-NE
quarter, Section 36, which point is 338 feet south of the northwest corner of the NW quarter-NE quarter,
Section 36: thence, south along the west line of the NW quarter, NE quarter, Section 36 to a point which
is 150 feet north of the southwest corner of the NW quarter-NE quarter, Section 36; thence northwesterly
a distance of 400 feet more or less to a point which is 300 feet south and 350 feet west of the northeast
corner of the NE quarter-NW quarter, Section 36; thence, west parallel to the north line of the NE
quarter-NW quarter, a distance of 210 feet: thence, north parallel to the west line of the NE quarter-NW
quarter a distance of 300 feet to a point on the north line of the NE quarter-NW quarter, Section 36;
thence, west along the north line of the NE quarter-NW quarter, Section 36 to a point which is 1,200 feet
east of the southwest corner of Section 25, T.57N., R.20W.; thence, northwesterly to a point on the west
line of Section 25, which point is 875 feet north of the southwest corner, Section 25; thence, north along
the west line of Section 25 to the northeast corner of the northeast of the southeast of Section 26, T.57N.,
R.20W.; thence, west along the north line of the NE quarter-SE quarter, to the northwest corner of the
northeast of the southeast: thence, north along the east 1/16 line of Section 26 to the northeast corner of
NW quarter-NE quarter, Section 26: thence, west along the north line of Section 26 to the northwest
corner of Section 26, which corner is also common to Sections 22, 23, 27, and 26, and is also the point of
beginning, together with any additional property, or interest therein, that may be acquired for airport
purposes.
BICYCLE. Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two
tandem wheels either of which is over 20 inches in diameter and including any device generally
recognized as a bicycle although equipped with two front or rear wheels.
OPERATE. To ride in or on, or control the operation, or in actual physical control of a vehicle or
snowmobile.
OWNER. A person other than a lien holder having the property in or title to a vehicle or snowmobile
entitled to the use or possession thereof.
MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and not deriving its power from
overhead wires.
MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a saddle or seat for the use of the rider, designed to
travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, including motor scooters, minibikes and
bicycles with motors attached.
Chisholm - Traffic Code
18
SNOWMOBILE. A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice or a natural terrain,
steered by wheels, skis or runners.
VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or
drawn upon a roadway or highway except devices moved by human power.
(1994 Code, ' 10.90.1)
' 72.02 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
(A) It is a misdemeanor for any person to operate a motor vehicle, motorcycle, bicycle or other
vehicle upon airport property except upon established roads, roadways and parking areas; this restriction
shall not apply to airport maintenance vehicles nor to service vehicles engaged in servicing aircraft. In an
emergency, ambulance and fire trucks may enter the landing area under the direction of the airport
manager.
(B) All provisions of M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be amended from time to time, regulating the
operation and use of motor vehicles shall apply to the operation of vehicles upon the roads, roadways and
parking areas on airport property of the Chisholm-Hibbing Airport.
(C) It is a misdemeanor for any person to operate a snowmobile at any time on airport property;
provided, however, that in the event a snowmobile bearing his or her registration number is operated on
airport property contrary to the provisions of this section, the registered owner will not be in violation if
it is found that:
(1) The snowmobile was reported stolen to the Commissioner of Natural Resources or a law
enforcement agency at the time of the alleged unlawful act;
(2) The registered owner demonstrates that the snowmobile either was stolen or was not in use
at the time of the alleged unlawful act: or
(3) The registered owner furnishes to law enforcement officers upon request the identity of the
person in actual physical control of the snowmobile at the time of the violation.
(D) The provisions of division (C) above do not apply to any person who rents or leases a
snowmobile if the person keeps a record of the name and address of the person or persons renting or
leasing the snowmobile, the registration number thereof, the departure date and time, and the expected
time of return thereof.
(1) The records shall be preserved for at least six months and shall be prima facie evidence that
the person named therein was the operator thereof at the time the snowmobile was operated contrary to
the provisions of this section.
(2) The provisions of this division do not prohibit or limit the prosecution of a snowmobile
operator for violating any of the provisions of this section.
Municipal Airport
19
(1994 Code, ' 10.90.20) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 72.03 PARKING REGULATIONS.
(A) The Chisholm-Hibbing Airport Commission is hereby authorized to regulate and restrict
parking of motor vehicles, motorcycles, bicycles and other vehicles upon roads, roadways and parking
areas on airport property of the Chisholm-Hibbing Airport.
(B) It is a misdemeanor for any person to stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended
or unattended, upon the paved, improved or main-traveled part of a road when it is practical to stop, park
or so leave the vehicle off that part of the road, but in any event a clear and unobstructed width of at least
20 feet of that part of the road opposite the standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other
vehicles. This division shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled while on the paved or
improved or main-traveled portion of a road in a manner and to an extent that it is impossible to avoid
stopping or temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in that position.
(C) The Chisholm-Hibbing Airport Commission, by resolution, may establish ANo Parking@ zones
in certain areas of the airport property and shall mark by appropriate signs any zone so established.
(D) The Chisholm-Hibbing Airport Commission may, by resolution, establish and designate certain
areas of airport property as limited parking zones and shall mark by appropriate signs any zones so
established.
(E) The Chisholm-Hibbing Airport Commission, by resolution, may establish and designate one or
more loading zones in certain areas on airport property and shall mark by appropriate signs any zones so
established. The zones shall be located at places most convenient for the use of the public and with regard
to traffic conditions in the area. It is a misdemeanor for any person to park any vehicle in any loading
zone except for the purpose of receiving or discharging passengers or freight and then only for a period
no longer than is necessary for the discharge or receipt of the passengers or freight.
(F) The Chisholm-Hibbing Airport Commission, by resolution, may establish and designate certain
areas limited to parking for taxicabs and rental vehicles and shall mark by appropriate signs any zones so
established.
(G) The Chisholm-Hibbing Airport Commission may designate certain areas of the airport property
as areas for the parking of motor vehicles, motorcycles, bicycles and other vehicles and may have lines or
markings painted or placed upon the curb and/or upon the parking surface designating the parking space
to be used for each vehicle in that area, and the vehicles shall park within the lines or markings so
established. It is a misdemeanor to park a vehicle across any line or marking or to park any vehicle in a
position that the same shall not be entirely within the area so designated by the lines or markings.
(H) It is a misdemeanor for any person who may own, have in charge or control any motor vehicle,
motorcycle, bicycle or any other vehicle, to place, leave or cause to be placed or left for a period of more
than 72 hours, whether attended or unattended, any motor vehicle, motorcycle, bicycle or any other
vehicle upon any designated parking area.
Chisholm - Traffic Code
20
(I) Any motor vehicle, motorcycle, bicycle or other vehicle which shall be parked or left standing
in violation of this section may be summarily removed by the airport manager or persons employed or
designated by him or her, and stored in an appropriate place. All necessary costs and expenses of towing,
removal and storing of the motor vehicle, motorcycle, bicycle or other vehicle shall first be paid to the
Secretary of the Chisholm-Hibbing Airport Commission by the person claiming the same before its
release.
(J) The Chisholm-Hibbing Airport Commission, by resolution, may establish and designate zones
to be known as Aparking meter zones@ and in the parking meter zones cause parking meters to be
installed and cause parking meter spaces to be designated and fix the time limitations for legal parking in
the zones and the hours during the day and night when parking meter or meters must be used and when
the time limitation shall be effective in compliance with the provisions of this section, and shall indicate
the time limitations by designating the same on the parking meter or meters or by appropriate signs
posted in proximity to the meter or meters in the zone.
(1) Each parking meter placed or set shall show or display by a signal that the parking space
adjacent to the meter is or is not legally in use, and each parking meter installed shall indicate by a proper
legend the legal parking time established by the Chisholm-Hibbing Airport Commission, and when
operated shall indicate on or by its dial and pointer the duration of the period of legal parking and, on
expiration of that period, shall indicate illegal or over-parking.
(2) The Chisholm-Hibbing Airport Commission may have lines or markings painted or placed
upon the parking areas adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of designating the parking space
for which the meter is to be used and each vehicle parking adjacent or next to any parking meter shall
park within the lines or markings so established. It is unlawful to park any vehicle across any like line or
marking or to park the vehicle in a position that the same shall not be entirely within the area so
designated by the lines or markings.
(3) When a vehicle shall be parked in any space adjacent to which a parking meter is located in
any zone so established by the Chisholm-Hibbing Airport Commission, the operator of the vehicle shall,
upon entering the parking space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited the coin or coins in the
parking meter as the Chisholm-Hibbing Airport Commission shall by resolution determine, and failure to
deposit the coin shall constitute a breach of this division and shall subject each person to the penalty
provided for in ' 10.99. Upon the deposit of the coins and placing the meter in operation, the parking
space may be lawfully occupied by the vehicle during the period of parking time which has been
prescribed for that parking space. If the vehicle remains in any like parking space beyond the parking
time limit fixed for the parking space, the parking meter shall by its dial and pointer indicate illegal
parking, and in that event the vehicle shall be considered as parked overtime and beyond the period of
legal parking time, and the parking of a vehicle overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time in
any parking space where a meter is located shall be unlawful.
(4) It is unlawful for any person to cause, allow or permit any vehicle operated by the person to
be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time established for any parking meter zone as
herein described.
Municipal Airport
21
(5) It is a misdemeanor for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break,
destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this division.
(6) It is a misdemeanor to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slugs,
device or metallic substance, or any other substitute, for the coins specified to be deposited in the meter.
(1994 Code, ' 10.90.3) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 72.04 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) The enforcement of this section and the rules and regulations herein contained shall be the
responsibility of the airport manager who is hereby vested with full police powers to make apprehensions
and arrests of those persons violating the provisions of this section.
(B) The Chisholm-Hibbing Airport Commission is hereby empowered to employ and appoint
special deputies as the Commission may from time to time deem necessary to enforce the provisions of
this section and when the Commission by resolution so employs and appoints special deputies the
deputies shall have police power to make apprehensions and arrests.
(1994 Code, ' 10.90.4)
22
CHAPTER 73: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Bicycle Regulations
73.01 Traffic laws apply
73.02 Manner and number riding
73.03 Hitching rides
73.04 Where to ride
73.05 Right-of-way; sidewalks
73.06 Carrying articles
73.07 Sale with reflectors
Snowmobile Traffic Control and Regulations
73.20 Scope of application
73.21 Operation on roadways and public lands
73.22 Private property
73.23 Minimum age of operator
73.24 Sidewalks and boulevards
73.25 Hours of operation
73.26 Equipment
All-Terrain Vehicle Traffic Control and Regulations
73.40 Scope of application
73.41 Operation on roadways, public lands and public waterways
73.42 Private property
73.43 Minimum age of operator
73.44 Sidewalks and boulevards
73.45 Hours of operation
73.46 Equipment
73.47 Helmet required
73.48 Prohibitions on owner
73.49 Operation of ATVs prohibited on certain roads
Recreational Vehicles
23
BICYCLE REGULATIONS
' 73.01 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY.
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of
a vehicle by this chapter, except as to those special regulations in this chapter and except as to those
provisions of this chapter which by their nature can have no application.
(1994 Code, ' 8.20.1) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 73.02 MANNER AND NUMBER RIDING.
(A) It is unlawful for any person propelling a bicycle to ride other than upon or astride a permanent
and regular seat attached thereto.
(B) No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is
designed and equipped, except on a baby seat attached to the bicycle, provided that the seat is equipped
with a harness to hold the child securely in the seat and that protection is provided against the child=s feet
hitting the spokes of the wheel or in a seat attached to the bicycle operator.
(1994 Code, ' 8.20.2) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 73.03 HITCHING RIDES.
It is unlawful for any person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle to
attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
(1994 Code, ' 8.20.3) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 73.04 WHERE TO RIDE.
(A) Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the
roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the
same direction.
(B) Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast except on paths or
parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
(C) Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders
shall use the path and shall not use the roadway.
(1994 Code, ' 8.20.4) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Chisholm - Traffic Code
24
' 73.05 RIGHT OF WAY; SIDEWALKS.
Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, the person shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing the pedestrian; provided, that it is
unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle on a sidewalk in a Business District.
(1994 Code, ' 8.20.5) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 73.06 CARRYING ARTICLES.
It is unlawful for any person operating a bicycle to carry any package, bundle or article which
prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
(1994 Code, ' 8.20.6) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 73.07 SALE WITH REFLECTORS.
It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any new bicycle unless it is equipped with
reflectors as are prescribed in ' 73.07.
(1994 Code, ' 8.20.8) Penalty, see ' 10.99
SNOWMOBILE TRAFFIC CONTROL AND REGULATIONS
' 73.20 SCOPE OF APPLICATION.
All provisions at M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be amended from time to time, being the chapter
regulating the use of motor vehicles and all provisions of the city code regulating vehicular traffic, shall
apply to the operation of snowmobiles upon the streets of the city, except for those relating to required
equipment, those which by their nature have no application, and except those which may be amended or
altered by rules and regulations by the Council.
(1994 Code, ' 8.30.1)
' 73.21 OPERATION ON ROADWAYS AND PUBLIC LANDS.
(A) Snowmobiles may be operated on roadways and public lands only as herein specified.
(B) It is unlawful to operate a snowmobile upon roadways or public lands, as follows:
(1) At a speed in excess of ten mph; or
Recreational Vehicles
25
(2) Other than single file on a roadway.
(1994 Code, ' 8.30.2) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 73.22 PRIVATE PROPERTY.
It is unlawful to operate a snowmobile on private property without the permission or consent of the
owner or occupant.
(1994 Code, ' 8.30.3) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 73.23 MINIMUM AGE OF OPERATOR.
It is unlawful for:
(A) Any person under the age of 14 years to operate a snowmobile on any public street or public
land in the city; or
(B) Any person over 14 years of age but under 18 years of age to operate a snowmobile on any
public street or public land in the city unless he or she has in his or her immediate possession a valid
snowmobile safety certificate issued by the Commissioner of Conservation.
(1994 Code, ' 8.30.4) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 73.24 SIDEWALKS AND BOULEVARDS.
It is unlawful to operate a snowmobile on a sidewalk or boulevard, except that an operator may cross
a sidewalk, boulevard or other right-of-way to obtain access to a street or alley if the crossing is made at
an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the direction of the sidewalk, boulevard or right-of-way, and
provided further, that the driver yields the right-of-way to all pedestrian or vehicular traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard.
(1994 Code, ' 8.30.5) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 73.25 HOURS OF OPERATION.
It is unlawful to operate a snowmobile within the city between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 7:30 a.m.
(1994 Code, ' 8.30.6) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 73.26 EQUIPMENT.
It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile unless it is equipped with the following:
(A) At least one headlamp and one tail lamp, each of minimum candle powers prescribed by
Chisholm - Traffic Code
26
regulation of the Commissioner of Conservation, reflector material of a minimum area of 16 square
inches mounted on each side, forward of the handlebars, and with brakes, each of which shall conform to
standards prescribed by rule of the Commissioner of Conservation; and
(B) No vehicle, including, but not limited to, sleds, toboggans and sleighs, shall be towed behind a
snowmobile upon any street between the hours of one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before
sunrise unless the vehicle is equipped with at least one tail lamp, meeting the requirements of the
equipment for a snowmobile as provided in the regulations of the Commissioner of Conservation.
(1994 Code, ' 8.30.7) Penalty, see ' 10.99
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE TRAFFIC CONTROL AND REGULATIONS
' 73.40 SCOPE OF APPLICATION.
All provisions of MSA Chapters 169 and 84.992, as they may be amended from time to time, being
the chapters regulating the use of motor vehicles and all provisions of the city code regulating vehicular
traffic, shall apply to the operation of all-terrain vehicles, hereinafter referred to as ATVs, upon the
streets of the city, except for those relating to required equipment, those which by their nature have no
application, and except those which may be amended or altered by rules and regulations by the Council.
(1994 Code, ' 8.32.1)
' 73.41 OPERATION ON ROADWAYS, PUBLIC LANDS AND PUBLIC WATERWAYS.
All-terrain vehicles may be operated on roadways, public lands and public waterways only as herein
specified. It is unlawful to operate an ATV upon roadways, public lands or public waterways as follows:
(A) At a speed in excess of ten mph; or
(B) Other than single file on a roadway.
(1994 Code, ' 8.32.2) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 73.42 PRIVATE PROPERTY.
It is unlawful to operate an ATV on private property without the permission or consent of the owner
or occupant.
(1994 Code, ' 8.32.3) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Recreational Vehicles
27
' 73.43 MINIMUM AGE OF OPERATOR.
It is unlawful for any person under 16 years of age to operate an ATV on any public street, public
land or public waterways in the city unless he or she has in his or her immediate possession a valid
driver=s license.
(1994 Code, ' 8.32.4) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 73.44 SIDEWALKS AND BOULEVARDS.
It is unlawful to operate an ATV on a sidewalk or boulevard, except that an operator may cross a
sidewalk, boulevard or other right-of-way to obtain access to a street or alley if the crossing is made at an
angle of approximately 90 degrees to the direction of the sidewalk, boulevard or right-of-way, and
provided further, that the driver yields the right-of-way to all pedestrian or vehicular traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard.
(1994 Code, ' 8.32.5)
' 73.45 HOURS OF OPERATION.
It is unlawful to operate an ATV within the city limits between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 7:30 a.m.
(1994 Code, ' 8.32.6) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 73.46 EQUIPMENT.
It is unlawful to operate an ATV unless it is equipped with the following:
(A) At least one headlight and one tail light, each of minimum candle powers prescribed by rules of
the Commissioner of Conservation;
(B) No vehicle, including, but not limited to, sleds, toboggans and sleighs, shall be towed behind an
ATV upon any street between the hours of one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise
unless the vehicle is equipped with at least one tail-lamp, meeting the requirements of the equipment for
an ATV as provided in the regulations of the Commissioner of Conservation; and
(C) Head lights and tail lights lighted at all times if vehicle is equipped with head lights and tail
lights.
(1994 Code, ' 8.32.7)
Chisholm - Traffic Code
28
' 73.47 HELMET REQUIRED.
A person less than 16 years of age shall not operate an ATV on public land unless wearing a safety
helmet approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
(1994 Code, ' 8.32.8) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 73.48 PROHIBITIONS ON OWNER.
It is unlawful for the owner of an ATV to permit it to be operated contrary to this section.
(1994 Code, ' 8.32.9) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 73.49 OPERATION OF ATVS IS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN ROADS.
(A) Lake Street, Lake Street Alleys, Third Avenue NW, County Road 67.
(B) All avenues one block each side of Lake Street.
(C) All other public ways where operation is prohibited by another public entity=s laws or
regulations.
(1994 Code, ' 8.32.10) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Recreational Vehicles
29
CHAPTER 74: PARKING SCHEDULES
ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE, CHAPTER 74
OF THE CITY CODE ENTITLED PARKING SCHEDULES
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF CHISHOLM DOES ORDAIN AS FOLLOWS:
Section 1. City Code Title VII, CHAPTER 74 is hereby amended as follows:
Schedule
I. Limited Parking
II. Fourth Street Southwest and Third Avenue southwest
SCHEDULE I. LIMITED PARKING.
(A) Unlawful acts.
(1) It is unlawful to park a vehicle on the side of a street bearing even-numbered building
numbers from 6:00 p.m. on every odd-numbered date to 6:00 p.m. on the day following, or
on streets/avenues which have been duly sign-posted.
(2) It is unlawful to park a vehicle on the side of a street bearing odd-numbered building numbers
from 6:00 p.m. on every even-numbered date to 6:00p.m. on the day following, or on streets
which have been duly sign-posted.
(3) Notwithstanding provisions of this section to the contrary, it is unlawful to:
(a) Park a vehicle on Lake Street between Central Avenue and Fourth Avenue west during
the period of 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. on each calendar day of the year from November 1 to
April 1.
(B) Exceptions. Notwithstanding provisions of this section to the contrary:
(1) Parking is permitted on both sides of the streets/avenues which are duly posted indicating
their exemption from the general calendar parking rules;
(2) Parking is permitted only on one side of the following streets/avenues:
Chisholm - Traffic Code
30
(a) South side of Fifth Street south between Second Avenue West and Fourth Avenue west;
(behind Senior High)
(b) South side of Nine and a Half Street between First Avenue North East to Fourth Avenue
North East. (by Vaughan- Steffensrud)
(c) West side of First Avenue North East between Nine and a Half Street North and Eleventh
Street North East. (by Vaughan-Steffensrud)
(d) South side of Fourth Street SW between 4th Avenue and 2nd Avenue SW.
Chisholm  Traffic Code
(3) Parking is permitted on both sides of First Avenue west between Second Street south and
Sixth Street south between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays only.
(1994 Code, & 9.11) (Ord. 94, passed 12-23-1997) Penalty, see 10.99
Section 2. This ordinance shall take effect on the date following the date of publication in the City of
Chisholms official newspaper.
Moved by Councilperson Benson and seconded by Councilperson
Cook that the foregoing ordinance be adopted.
Voting Yes: Councilors Benson, Cook, Drow, and Mayor Jugovich
Voting No: None
Absent: Councilors Campbell and Scaia
Ordinance declared adopted this 22nd day of October, 2013
CITY OF CHISHOLM
By___________________________
Michael A. Jugovich, Mayor
ATTEST:
________________________________
Mark Casey, Administrator/ City Clerk
First Reading: October 8, 2013
Second Reading: October 22, 2013
Published Chisholm Tribune Press on October 30, 2013
Parking Schedules
31
Chisholm - Traffic Code
32
SCHEDULE II. FOURTH STREET SOUTHWEST AND THIRD AVENUE SOUTHWEST.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to drive or park any vehicle upon that portion of Fourth Street
southwest lying between Second Avenue southwest and Third Avenue southwest, as relocated in the
middle of Block Eleven of Second Addition to the city, and that portion of Third Avenue southwest lying
between Third Street southwest and Fourth Street southwest between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 3:30
p.m., except on Saturday and Sunday of each week and any school holiday or vacation. The Independent
School District No. 695, St. Louis County, Minnesota, is hereby authorized to place suitable barriers
across the entrances to the aforesaid portions of the streets mentioned during the hours which they are
closed, so as to restrict the traffic thereon; provided, however, that the aforesaid streets shall be open at
all times to pedestrians, and provided further that the Council may, upon application made to it, grant
temporary permits to those persons who desire to use the aforesaid streets for vehicular traffic, which
permit shall be granted for a time and upon conditions as the Council may prescribe at the time of
granting the same.
(B) The Chief of Public Safety shall cause appropriate signs to be posted at the entrances to the
street and avenue to attest to the Council action thereon.
(1994 Code, ' 9.16) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Parking Schedules
33
1
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
90. ANIMALS
91. ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES, UNCLAIMED
PROPERTY AND EXCESS PROPERTY
92. DEPOSIT OF LITTER
93. TREES
94. NUISANCES; HEALTH; PUBLIC PROTECTION
95. STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
96. NOISE CONTROL
Chisholm - General Regulations
2
3
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
Dog and Cat Regulations; Licenses
90.01 Running at large
90.02 License required
90.03 Application
90.04 License period
90.05 Fees
90.06 Tag required
90.07 Unlawful acts
90.08 Animal pound
90.09 Notice of impounding and release from animal pound
90.10 Disturbing the peace
90.11 Immobilization of dogs
90.12 Dangerous dogs
Animals and Fowl; Keeping, Transporting, Treatment, Housing
90.25 Definitions
90.26 Keeping
90.27 Animals in transit
90.28 Treatment
90.29 Housing
90.30 Trespasses
90.31 Feeding animals
DOG AND CAT REGULATIONS; LICENSES
' 90.01 RUNNING AT LARGE.
(A) It shall be unlawful for the dog or cat of any person who owns, harbors or keeps a dog or cat, to
run at large.
Chisholm - General Regulations
4
(B) A person, who owns, harbors or keeps a dog or cat which runs at large shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(C) Dogs or cats on a leash and accompanied by a responsible person or accompanied by and under
the control and direction of a responsible person, so as to be effectively restrained by command as by
leash, shall be permitted in streets or on public land unless the city has posted an area with signs reading
ADogs or Cats Prohibited@.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 90.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
It is unlawful for any person, or other possessor of a dog or cat over four months of age to fail to
obtain a proper city license therefor.
(1994 Code, ' 10.21.2)
' 90.03 APPLICATION.
Application for a dog license shall be upon a form supplied by the city containing a certificate by a
veterinarian, duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine within the state, which certificate shall state
that the dog for which application for a license is made, has been innoculated against rabies for at least
the period for which a license is applied.
(1994 Code, ' 10.21.3)
' 90.04 LICENSE PERIOD.
All dog and cat licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year.
(1994 Code, ' 10.21.4)
' 90.05 FEES.
(A) All fees for the licensing and impounding of dogs and cats shall be fixed and determined by the
Council, adopted by resolution and uniformly enforced.
(B) The fees may from time to time be amended by the Council by resolution, and the resolution
shall be published in the official newspaper at least once each year.
(C) A copy of the resolution setting forth currently effective fees shall be kept on file in the office of
the City Clerk and open to inspection during regular business hours; provided, however, that at the time
of initial application for a spayed female license, the applicant shall file with the City Clerk a certificate
of a licensed veterinarian stating that the female has been spayed.
Animals
5
(1994 Code, ' 10.21.5)
' 90.06 TAG REQUIRED.
(A) All licensed dogs and cats shall wear a collar and have a tag firmly affixed thereto evidencing
the license for the current license period.
(B) A duplicate for a lost tag may be issued by the City Clerk upon presentation of the receipt
showing the payment of the license fee and upon payment of the fee as set by resolution of the Council
for issuance of the duplicate.
(C) Dog and cat tags shall not be transferable, and no refund shall be made on any dog or cat license
fee because of leaving the city or death of the dog or cat before expiration of the license.
(1994 Code, ' 10.21.6)
' 90.07 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to wrongfully remove or steal the collar from any dog or cat.
(B) It is unlawful for any person to destroy or attempt to destroy any dog or cat by means of poison
or any other like substance.
(1994 Code, ' 10.21.7) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 90.08 ANIMAL POUND.
(A) Any dog or cat found in the city without a tag, or running at large, shall be placed in the animal
pound, and an accurate record of the time of the placement shall be kept on each dog or cat.
(B) Every dog or cat so placed in the animal pound shall be held for redemption by the owner for a
period of not less than five regular business days.
(C) A REGULAR BUSINESS DAY is one during which the pound is open for business to the
public for at least four hours between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
(D) Impoundment records shall be preserved for a minimum of six months and shall show: the
description of the animal by specie, breed, sex, approximate age and other distinguishing traits; the
location at which the animal was seized; the date of seizure; the name and address of the person from
whom any animal four months of age or over was received; and the name and address of the person to
whom any animal four months of age or over was transferred.
(E) If unclaimed, the dog or cat shall be humanely destroyed and the carcass disposed of, unless it is
requested by a licensed educational or scientific institution under authority of M.S. ' 35.71, as it may be
amended from time to time; provided, however, that if a tag affixed to the dog or cat, or a statement by
Chisholm - General Regulations
6
the dog or cat=s owner after seizure specifies that the dog or cat should not be used for research, the dog
or cat shall not be made available to any like institution but may be destroyed after the expiration of the
five-day period.
(1994 Code, ' 10.21.8)
' 90.09 NOTICE OF IMPOUNDING AND RELEASE FROM ANIMAL POUND.
(A) Upon the impounding of any dog or cat, the owner shall be notified, or if the owner of the dog or
cat is unknown, written notice shall be posted for five days at the City Hall describing the dog or cat and
the place and time of taking.
(B) Dogs and cats shall be released to their owners, or persons previously in possession of them,
upon the purchase of a license, if one has not already been purchased, and payment of the impounding fee
as provided by resolution of the Council.
(1994 Code, ' 10.21.9)
' 90.10 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
(A) Habitual barking. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a dog which habitually
barks or cries. HABITUAL BARKING shall be defined as barking for repeated intervals of at least five
minutes with less than one minute of interruption. The barking must also be audible off of the owner=s or
caretaker=s premises.
(B) Warrant required. The Animal Control Officer or police officer shall not enter the property of
the owner of an animal described in this section, unless the officer has first obtained the permission of the
owner to do so or has obtained a warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction, to search for and
seize the animal.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 90.11 IMMOBILIZATION OF DOGS.
For the purpose of enforcement of this section, any peace officer, dog catcher or other person
assisting a peace officer or dog catcher may use a so-called tranquilizer gun or other instrument for the
purpose of immobilizing and catching a dog.
(1994 Code, ' 10.21.11)
Animals
7
' 90.12 DANGEROUS DOGS.
(A) Adoption by reference. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the regulatory and
procedural provisions of M.S. '' 347.50 to 347.565, as they may be amended from time to time
(commonly referred to as the Adangerous dog regulations@), are adopted by reference.
(B) Definitions. Definitions in this section shall have the following meanings:
(1) DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that:
(a) Has when unprovoked, inflicted substantial bodily harm on a human being on public or
private property;
(b) Has killed a domestic animal when unprovoked while off the owner's property;
(c) Has attacked one or more persons on two or more occasions; or
(d) Has been found to be potentially dangerous and after the owner has notice of the same,
the dog aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals.
(2) DOG. Both the male and female of the canine species, commonly accepted as
domesticated household pets.
(3) GREAT BODILY HARM. Bodily injury which creates a high probability of death, or
which causes serious permanent disfigurement, or which causes a permanent or protracted loss or
impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ or other serious bodily harm.
(4) OWNER. Any person or persons, firm, corporation, organization, department, or
association owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest in, or having care, custody or
control of a dog.
(5) MAINTENANCE COSTS. Any costs incurred as a result of seizing an animal for
impoundment, including, but not limited to, the capturing, impounding, keeping, treating, examining,
securing, confining, feeding, destroying, boarding or maintaining seized animals, whether these services
are provided by the city or the pound.
(6) POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that:
(a) Has when unprovoked, inflicted a bite on a human or domestic animal on public or
private property;
(b) Has when unprovoked, chased or approached a person, including a person on a
bicycle, upon the streets, sidewalks or any public or private property, other than the owner's property, in
an apparent attitude of attack; or
Chisholm - General Regulations
8
(c) Has a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, causing injury
or otherwise threatening the safety of humans or domestic animals.
(7) PROPER ENCLOSURE. Securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked
pen or structure suitable to prevent the dog from escaping and to provide protection for the dog from the
elements. A proper enclosure does not include a porch, patio or any part of a house, garage or other
structure that would allow the dog to exit of its own volition, or any house or structure in which windows
are open or in which door or window screens are the only barriers which prevent the dog from exiting.
The enclosure shall not allow the egress of the dog in any manner without human assistance. A pen or
kennel shall meet the following minimum specifications:
(a) A minimum overall floor size of 32 square feet.
(b) Sidewalls shall have a minimum height of five feet and be constructed of 11-gauge or
heavier wire. Openings in the wire shall not exceed two inches, support post shall be one and one-fourth
inch or larger steel pipe buried in the ground 18 inches or more. When a concrete floor is not provided,
the sidewalls shall be buried a minimum of 18 inches in the ground.
(c) A cover over the entire pen or kennel shall be provided. The cover shall be constructed
of the same gauge wire or heavier as the sidewalls and openings in the wire shall not exceed two inches.
(d) An entrance/exit gate shall be provided and be constructed of the same material as the
sidewalls and openings in the wire shall not exceed two inches. The gate shall be self-closing and
self-locking. The gate shall be locked at all times when the dog is in the pen or kennel.
(8) SUBSTANTIAL BODILY HARM. Bodily injury that involves a temporary but
substantial disfigurement, or that causes a temporary but substantial loss or impairment of the function of
any bodily member or organ or that causes a fracture of any bodily member.
(9) UNPROVOKED. The condition in which the dog is not purposely excited, stimulated,
agitated or disturbed.
(C) Declaration of dangerous or potentially dangerous dog.
(1) A police officer, community service officer, animal control officer or other authorized city
employee may declare a dog to be dangerous or potentially dangerous when the officer has probable
cause to believe that a dog is dangerous or potentially dangerous. The following factors will be
considered in determining a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog:
(a) Whether any injury or damage to a person by the dog was caused while the dog was
protecting or defending a person or the dog's offspring within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an
unjustified attack or assault.
(b) The size and strength of the dog, including jaw strength, and the animal's propensity to
bite humans or other domestic animals.
Animals
9
(c) Whether the dog has wounds, scarring, is observed in a fight, or has other indications
that the dog has been or will be used, trained or encouraged to fight with another animal or whose owner
is in possession of any training apparatus, paraphernalia or drugs used to prepare the dogs to fight with
other animals.
(2) Beginning six months after a dog is declared dangerous or potentially dangerous, an owner
may request annually that the city review the designation. The owner must provide evidence that the
dog's behavior has changed due to the dog's age, neutering, environment, completion of obedience
training or other factors. If enough evidence is provided, the city may rescind the designation.
(3) Exceptions.
(a) The provisions of this section do not apply to dogs used by law enforcement.
(b) Dogs may not be declared dangerous or potentially dangerous if the threat, injury, or
danger was sustained by a person who was:
1. Committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the
owner of the dog;
2. Provoking, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog, or who can be shown to
have a history of repeatedly provoking, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog; or
3. Committing or attempting to commit a crime.
(D) License required. The owner must annually license dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs
with the city and must license a newly declared dangerous or potentially dangerous dog within 14 days
after notice that a dog has been declared dangerous or potentially dangerous. Regardless of any appeal
that may be requested, the owner must comply with the requirements of M.S. ' 347.52(a) and (c), as they
may be amended from time to time, regarding proper enclosures and notification to the city upon transfer
or death of the dog, until and unless a hearing officer or court of law reverses the declaration.
(1) Process for dangerous dogs. The city will issue a license to the owner of a dangerous dog if
the owner presents sufficient evidence that:
(a) There is a proper enclosure;
(b) Written proof that there is a surety bond by a surety company authorized to conduct
business in Minnesota in the sum of at least $300,000, payable to any person injured by a dangerous dog,
or receipt of a copy of a policy of liability insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do
business in the state in the amount of at least $300,000, insuring the owner for any personal injuries
inflicted by the dangerous dog. The surety bond or insurance policy shall provide that no cancellation of
the bond or policy will be made unless the city is notified in writing by the surety company or the
insurance company at least ten days prior to the cancellation;
(c) The owner has paid the annual license fee for dangerous dogs as may be established.
Chisholm - General Regulations
10
(d) The owner has had a microchip identification implanted in the dangerous dog. The
name of the microchip manufacturer and identification number of the microchip must be provided to the
city. If the microchip is not implanted by the owner, it may be implanted by the city at the owner's
expense; and
(e) The owner provides proof that the dog has been sterilized. If the owner does not
sterilize the dog within 30 days, the city may seize the dog and sterilize it at the owner's expense.
(2) Process for potentially dangerous dogs. The city will issue a license to the owner of a
potentially dangerous dog if the owner presents sufficient evidence that:
(a) There is a proper enclosure;
(b) The owner has paid the annual license fee;
(c) The owner has had a microchip identification implanted in the potentially dangerous
dog. The name of the microchip manufacturer and identification number of the microchip must be
provided to the city. If the microchip is not implanted by the owner, it may be implanted by the city at the
owner's expense.
(3) Inspection. A pre-license inspection of the premises to insure compliance with the city code
is required. If the city issues a license to the owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, the city
shall be allowed at any reasonable time to inspect the dog, the proper enclosure and all places where the
animal is kept.
(4) Warning symbol. The owner of a dangerous dog licensed under this section must post a sign
with the uniform dangerous dog warning symbol on the property in order to inform children that there is
a dangerous dog on the property. The sign will be provided by the city upon issuance of the license.
(5) Tags. A dangerous dog licensed under this section must wear a standardized, easily
identifiable tag at all times that contains the uniform dangerous dog symbol, identifying the dog as
dangerous. The tag shall be provided by the city upon issuance of the license.
(6) License fee. The city will charge the owner an annual license fee for a dangerous or
potentially dangerous dog as may be established.
(E) Properly restrained in proper enclosure or outside of proper enclosure. While on the owner's
property, an owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog must keep it in a proper enclosure. Inside
a residential home, there must be a secured area maintained where the dog will stay when persons other
than family members are present. If the dog is outside the proper enclosure, the dog must be muzzled and
restrained by a substantial chain or leash no longer than four feet and under the physical restraint of an
adult. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will prevent the dog from biting any person or animal
but that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration.
Animals
11
(F) Notification requirements to city.
(1) Relocation or death. The owner of a dog that has been declared dangerous or potentially
dangerous must notify the City Clerk in writing if the dog is to be relocated from its current address or if
the dog has died. The notification must be given in writing within 30 days of the relocation or death. The
notification must include the current owner's name and address, and the new owner's name and the
relocation address. If the relocation address is outside of the city, the city may notify the local law
enforcement agency of the transfer of the dog into its jurisdiction.
(2) Renter's obligations. A person who owns or possesses a dangerous or potentially dangerous
dog and who will rent property from another where the dog will reside must disclose to the property
owner prior to entering the lease agreement and at the time of any lease renewal periods that the person
owns or possesses a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog that will reside at the property. A dog owner,
who is currently renting property, must notify the property owner within 14 days of city notification if the
owned dog is newly declared as dangerous or potentially dangerous and the owner keeps the dog on the
property.
(3) Transfer of ownership into the city. No dog that has been previously determined to be
dangerous or potentially dangerous by another jurisdiction shall be kept, owned or harbored in the city
unless the dog's owner complies with the requirements of this section prior to bringing the dog into the
city. Dogs in violation of this division are subject to impoundment and destruction.
(G) Seizure. Animal control may immediately seize any dangerous or potentially dangerous dog if:
(1) After 14 days after the owner has notice that the dog is declared dangerous or potentially
dangerous, the dog is not validly licensed and no appeal has been filed;
(2) After 14 days after the owner has notice that the dog is dangerous, the owner does not
secure the proper liability insurance or surety coverage as required or the required insurance is cancelled;
(3) The dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure;
(4) The dog is outside the proper enclosure and not under proper restraint, as required by
division (E) above;
(5) After 30 days after the owner has notice that the dog is dangerous, the dog is not sterilized,
as required by division (D)(1)(e) above;
(6) The dog's microchip has been removed.
(H) Reclamation. A dog seized under division (G) above may be reclaimed by the owner of the dog
upon payment of maintenance costs, and presenting proof to animal control that the requirements of this
section have been met. A dog not reclaimed under this division within seven days may be disposed of and
the owner will be liable to the city for maintenance costs. A person claiming an interest in a seized dog
may prevent disposition of the dog by posting a security in an amount sufficient to provide for the dog's
maintenance costs. The security must be posted with the city within seven days of the seizure inclusive of
Chisholm - General Regulations
12
the date seized.
(I) Subsequent offenses: seizure. If a person has been convicted of violating a provision of this
section, and the person is charged with a subsequent violation relating to the same dog, the dog may be
seized. If the owner is convicted of the crime for which the dog was seized, the court may order that the
dog be destroyed in a proper and humane manner and the owner pay the maintenance costs. If the owner
is not convicted and the dog is not reclaimed by the owner within seven days after the owner has been
notified that the dog may be reclaimed, the dog may be disposed of, used for research or destroyed.
(J) Notice, hearings.
(1) Notice. After a dog has been declared dangerous or potentially dangerous or has been
seized for destruction, the city shall give notice by delivering or mailing it to the owner of the dog, or by
posting a copy of it at the place where the dog is kept, or by delivering it to a person residing on the
property, and telephoning, if possible. The notice shall include:
(a) A description of the seized dog; the authority for and purpose of the declaration and
seizure; the time, place, and circumstances under which the dangerous dog was declared; and the
telephone number and contact person where the dog is kept;
(b) A statement that the owner of the dog may request a hearing concerning the declaration
and that failure to do so within 14 days of the date of the notice will terminate the owner's right to a
hearing;
(c) A statement that if an appeal request is made within 14 days of the notice, the owner
must immediately comply with the requirements of M.S. ' 347.52(a) and (c), as they may be amended
from time to time, regarding proper enclosures and notification to the city upon transfer or death of the
dog, until a time as the hearing officer issues an opinion;
(d) A statement that if the hearing officer affirms the dangerous dog declaration, the owner
will have 14 days from receipt of that decision to comply with all other requirements of M.S. ' 347.51,
347.515 and 347.52, as they may be amended from time to time;
(e) A form to request a hearing; and
(f) A statement that if the dog has been seized, all maintenance costs of the care, keeping,
and disposition of the dog pending the outcome of the hearing are the responsibility of the owner, unless
a court or hearing officer finds that the seizure or impoundment was not reasonably justified by law.
(2) Right to hearing.
(a) After a dog has been declared dangerous, potentially dangerous or has been seized for
destruction, the owner may appeal in writing to the city within 14 days after notice of the declaration or
seizure. Failure to do so within 14 days of the date of the notice will terminate the owner's right to a
hearing. The owner must pay a $100 fee for an appeal hearing.
Animals
13
(b) The appeal hearing will be held within 14 days of the request. The hearing officer must
be an impartial employee of the city or an impartial person retained by the city to conduct the hearing.
(c) If the declaration or destruction is upheld by the hearing officer, actual expenses of the
hearing up to a maximum of $1,000, as well as all maintenance costs, will be the responsibility of the
dog's owner. The hearing officer shall issue a decision on the matter within ten days after the hearing.
The decision shall be delivered to the dog's owner by hand delivery or registered mail as soon as practical
and a copy shall be provided to the city. The decision of the hearing officer is final.
(K) Destruction of certain dogs. The Police Chief and/or hearing officer are authorized to order the
destruction or other disposition of any dog, after proper notice is given pursuant to division (J) above and
upon a finding that:
(1) The dog has habitually destroyed property or habitually trespassed in a damaging manner
on property of persons other than the owner;
(2) The dog has been declared dangerous, the owner's right to appeal hereunder has been
exhausted or expired, and the owner has failed to comply with the provisions of this section;
(3) It is determined that the dog is infected with rabies;
(4) The dog inflicted substantial or great bodily harm on a human on public or private property
without provocation;
(5) The dog inflicted multiple bites on a human on public or private property without
provocation;
(6) The dog bit multiple human victims on public or private property in the same attack without
provocation;
(7) The dog bit a human on public or private property without provocation in an attack where
more than one dog participated in the attack; or
(8) The dog poses a danger to the public's health, safety or welfare. In determining whether the
dog poses a danger to the public's health, safety or welfare, the following factors may be considered:
(a) The dog weighs more than 20 pounds;
(b) The strength of the dog, including jaw strength;
(c) The dog's tolerance for pain;
(d) The dog's tendency to refuse to terminate an attack;
(e) The dog's propensity to bite humans or other domestic animals;
Chisholm - General Regulations
14
(f) The dog's potential for unpredictable behavior;
(g) The dog's aggressiveness;
(h) The likelihood that a bite by the dog will result in serious injury.
(L) Concealing of dogs. No person may harbor, hide or conceal a dog that the city has the authority
to seize or that has been ordered into custody for destruction or other proper disposition.
(M) Dog ownership prohibited.
(1) Except as provided below, a person shall not own a dog if the person has been:
(a) Convicted of a third or subsequent violation of divisions (D), (E) or (F) above or
similar ordinance in another jurisdiction, or M.S. '' 347.51, 347.515 or 347.52, as they may be amended
from time to time;
(b) Convicted of 2nd degree manslaughter due to negligent or intentional use of a dog
under M.S. ' 609.205(4), as it may be amended from time to time; or
(c) Convicted of gross misdemeanor harm caused by a dog under M.S. ' 609.226(1), as it
may be amended from time to time.
(2) Any person who owns a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog and is found to be in
violation of any of the provisions of this section or had owned a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog
but never achieved compliance with this section may be prohibited from ownership or custody of another
dog for a period of five years after the original declaration. Any dog found to be in violation, may be
impounded until due process is completed, pursuant to division (J) above.
(3) If any member of a household is prohibited from owning a dog in division (M)(1) or (2)
above, unless specifically approved with or without restrictions by the city, no person in the household is
permitted to own a dog.
(N) Dog ownership prohibition review. Beginning three years after a conviction under division
(M)(1) above that prohibits a person from owning a dog, and annually thereafter, the person may request
in writing to the Police Chief that the city review the prohibition. The city may consider such facts as the
seriousness of the violation or violations that led to the prohibition, any criminal convictions, or other
facts that the city deems appropriate. The city may rescind the prohibition entirely or rescind it with
limitations. The city also may establish conditions a person must meet before the prohibition is
rescinded, including, but not limited to, successfully completing dog training or dog handling courses. If
the city rescinds a person's prohibition and the person subsequently fails to comply with any limitations
imposed by the city or the person is convicted of any animal violation involving unprovoked bites or dog
attacks, the city may permanently prohibit the person from owning a dog in this state.
(O) Penalties.
Animals
15
(1) Unless stated otherwise, any person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(2) Any person who is convicted of a second or subsequent violation of any provision of
divisions (D), (E) or (F) above is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.
(3) Any person who violates division (M) above, whether an owner or household member, is
guilty of a gross misdemeanor.
ANIMALS AND FOWL; KEEPING, TRANSPORTING, TREATMENT, HOUSING
' 90.25 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ANIMALS. Includes farm animals and all other animals, reptiles and feathered birds or fowl
except dogs, cats, gerbils, hamsters and caged household birds.
FARM ANIMALS. Cattle, horses, mules, sheep, goats, swine, ponies, ducks, geese, turkeys,
chickens, guinea hens and honey bees.
(1994 Code, ' 10.22.1)
' 90.26 KEEPING.
It is unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any animal, not in transit, except: farm animals kept in
that portion of the city zoned for agricultural purposes; animals kept as part of a show licensed under the
city code; animals kept in a laboratory for scientific or experimental purposes; or animals kept in an
animal hospital or clinic for treatment by a licensed veterinarian.
(1994 Code, ' 10.22.2) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 90.27 ANIMALS IN TRANSIT.
It is unlawful for any person to transport animals unless they are: confined within a vehicle, cage or
other means of conveyance; farm animals being transported in a portion of the city zoned for agricultural
purposes; or restrained by means of bridles, halters, ropes or other means of individual restraint.
(1994 Code, ' 10.22.3) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Chisholm - General Regulations
16
' 90.28 TREATMENT.
It is unlawful for any person to treat an animal in a cruel or inhumane manner.
(1994 Code, ' 10.22.4) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 90.29 HOUSING.
It is unlawful for any person to keep any animal in any structure infested by rodents, vermin, flies or
insects.
(1994 Code, ' 10.22.5) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 90.30 TRESPASSES.
It is unlawful for any person to herd, drive or ride any animal over and upon any grass, turf,
boulevard, city park, cemetery, garden or lot without specific permission therefor from the owner.
(1994 Code, ' 10.22.6) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 90.31 FEEDING ANIMALS.
It is unlawful for any person/property owner to knowingly and purposefully feed any deer, pigeons
or water fowl within the boundaries of the city.
(Ord. 135, passed 6-10-2008) Penalty, see ' 10.99
17
CHAPTER 91: ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES, UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
AND EXCESS PROPERTY
Section
91.01 Abandoning a motor vehicle
91.02 Disposal of abandoned motor vehicles
91.03 Disposal of unclaimed property
91.04 Disposal of excess property
91.05 Persons who may not purchase; exception
' 91.01 ABANDONING A MOTOR VEHICLE.
It is unlawful for any person to abandon a motor vehicle on any public or private property without
the consent of the person in control of the property. For the purpose of this section, a MOTOR
VEHICLE is defined as in the Highway Traffic Regulation Act, being M.S. '' 169.011 et seq. and an
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE is defined as in M.S. Chapter 168B, as it may be amended from
time to time, relating to disposal of abandoned motor vehicles.
(1994 Code, ' 10.46) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 91.02 DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE. Motor vehicle as defined in M.S. Chapter 169, as it may
be amended from time to time, which has remained for a period of more than 48 hours on public property
illegally or lacking vital component parts, or has remained for a period of more than 48 hours on private
property without the consent of the person in control of the property, or in an inoperable condition such
that it has no substantial potential further use consistent with its usual function unless it is kept in an
enclosed garage or storage building. It shall also mean a motor vehicle voluntarily surrendered by its
owner to and accepted by the city. A classic car or pioneer car, as defined in M.S. Chapter 168, as it may
be amended from time to time, shall not be considered an ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE within
the meaning of this section. Vehicles on the premises of junk yards or automobile graveyards, which are
licensed and maintained in accordance with the city code, shall not be considered ABANDONED
MOTOR VEHICLES within the meaning of this section.
Chisholm - General Regulations
18
VITAL COMPONENT PARTS. The parts of a motor vehicle that are essential to the
mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including, but not limited to, the motor, drive train and wheels.
(B) Custody. The city may take into custody and impound any abandoned motor vehicle.
(C) Immediate sale. When an abandoned motor vehicle is more than seven model years of age, is
lacking vital component parts, and does not display a license plate currently valid in the state or any other
state or foreign country, it shall immediately be eligible for sale at public auction, and shall not be subject
to the notification, reclamation or title provision of this division.
(D) Notice.
(1) When an abandoned motor vehicle does not fall within the provisions of division (C)
above, the city shall give notice of the taking within ten days. The notice shall set forth the date and place
of the taking, the year, make, model and serial number of the abandoned motor vehicle, if that
information can be reasonably obtained, and the place where the vehicle is being held, shall inform the
owner and any lien holders of their right to reclaim the vehicle under division (E) below, and shall state
that failure of the owner or lien holder to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle and contents shall be
deemed a waiver by them of all rights, title and interest in the vehicle and a consent to the sale of the
vehicle and contents at a public auction pursuant to division (F) below.
(2) The notice shall be sent by mail to the registered owner, if any, of the abandoned motor
vehicle and to all readily identifiable lien holders of record. If it is impossible to determine with
reasonable certainty the identity and address of the registered owner and all lien holders, the notice shall
be published once in the official newspaper. Published notices may be grouped together for convenience
and economy.
(E) Right to reclaim.
(1) The owner or any lien holder of an abandoned motor vehicle shall have a right to reclaim
the vehicle from the city upon payment of all towing and storage charges resulting from taking the
vehicle into custody within 15 days after the date of the notice required by division (D) above.
(2) Nothing in this division (E) shall be construed to impair any lien of a garage keeper under
the laws of this state, or the right of the lien holder to foreclose. For the purposes of this division (E),
GARAGE KEEPER is an operator of a parking place or establishment, an operator of a motor vehicle
storage facility, or an operator of an establishment for the servicing, repair or maintenance of motor
vehicles.
(F) Public sale.
(1) An abandoned motor vehicle and contents taken into custody and not reclaimed under this
division (F) shall be sold to the highest bidder at public auction or sale, following one published notice
published at least seven days prior to the auction or sale. The purchaser shall be given a receipt in a form
prescribed by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles which shall be sufficient title to dispose of the vehicle. The
receipt shall also entitle the purchaser to register the vehicle and receive a certificate of title, free and
Abandoned Motor Vehicles, Unclaimed Property and Excess Property
19
clear of all liens and claims of ownership. Before a vehicle is issued a new certificate of title, it must
receive a motor vehicle safety check.
(2) From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle, the city shall reimburse itself
for the cost of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle, and all administrative, notice and publication
costs incurred pursuant to this division. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the
owner of the vehicle or entitled lien holder for 90 days and then shall be deposited in the General Fund of
the city.
(G) Disposal of vehicles not sold. Where no bid has been received for an abandoned motor vehicle,
the city may dispose of it in accordance with division (H) below.
(H) Contracts and disposal.
(1) The city may contract with any qualified person for collection, storage, incineration,
volume reduction, transportation or other services necessary to prepare abandoned motor vehicles and
other scrap metal for recycling or other methods of disposal.
(2) Where the city enters into a contract with a person duly licensed by the State Pollution
Control Agency, the Agency shall review the contract to determine whether it conforms to the Agency=s
plan for solid waste disposal. A contract that does so conform may be approved by the Agency. Where a
contract has been approved, the Agency may reimburse the city for the costs incurred under the contract
which have not been reimbursed.
(3) If the city utilizes its own equipment and personnel for disposal of the abandoned motor
vehicle, it shall be entitled to reimbursement for the cost thereof along with its other costs as herein
provided.
(1994 Code, ' 2.16.1)
' 91.03 DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.
(A) Definition. The term ABANDONED PROPERTY means tangible or intangible property that
has lawfully come into the possession of the city in the course of municipal operations, remains
unclaimed by the owner and has been in the possession of the city for at least 60 days and has been
declared such by a resolution of the Council.
(B) Preliminary notice. If the City Clerk knows the identity and whereabouts of the owner, he or she
shall serve written notice upon him or her at least 30 days prior to a declaration of abandonment by the
Council. If the city acquired possession from a prior holder, the identity and whereabouts of whom are
known by the City Clerk notice shall also be served upon him or her. The notice shall describe the
property and state that unless it is claimed and proof of ownership, or entitlement to possession
established, the matter of declaring it abandoned property will be brought to the attention of the Council
after the expiration of 30 days from the date of the notice.
(C) Notice and sale. Upon adoption of a resolution declaring certain property to be abandoned
Chisholm - General Regulations
20
property, the City Clerk shall publish a notice thereof describing the same, together with the names (if
known) and addresses (if known) of prior owners and holders thereof, and including a brief description of
the property. The text of the notice shall also state the time, place and manner of sale of all the property,
except cash and negotiables. The notice shall be published once at least three weeks prior to sale. Sale
shall be made to the highest bidder at public auction or sale conducted in the manner directed by the
Council in its resolution declaring property abandoned and stated in the notice.
(D) Fund and claims thereon. All proceeds from the sale shall be paid into the General Fund of the
city and expenses thereof paid therefrom. The former owner, if he or she makes claim within eight
months from the date of publication of the notice herein provided, and upon application and satisfactory
proof of ownership, may be paid the amount of cash or negotiables or, in the case of property sold, the
amount received therefor, less a pro rata share of the expenses of storage, publication of notice, and sale
expenses, but without interest. The payment shall be also made from the General Fund.
(1994 Code, ' 2.16.2)
' 91.04 DISPOSAL OF EXCESS PROPERTY.
(A) Declaration of surplus and authorizing sale of property. The City Clerk may, from time to time,
recommend to the Council that certain personal property (chattels) owned by the city is no longer needed
for a municipal purpose and should be sold. By action of the Council, the property shall be declared
surplus, the value estimated and the City Clerk authorized to dispose of the property in the manner stated
herein.
(B) Surplus property with a total estimated value of less than $100. The City Clerk may sell surplus
property with a total value of less than $500 through negotiated sale.
(C) Surplus property with a total estimated value between $500 and $1,000. The City Clerk shall
offer for public sale, to the highest bidder, surplus property with a total estimated value of from $500 to
$1,000. Notice of the public sale shall be given stating time and place of sale and generally describing the
property to be sold at least ten days prior to the date of sale either by publication once in the official
newspaper, or by posting in a conspicuous place in the City Hall at the City Clerk=s option. The sale shall
be by auction.
(D) Surplus property with a total estimated value over $1,000. The City Clerk shall offer for public
sale, to the highest bidder, surplus property with a total estimated value over $1,000. Notice of the public
sale shall be given stating time and place of sale and generally describing property to be sold at least ten
days prior to the date of sale by publication once in the official newspaper. The sale shall be to the person
submitting the highest bid.
(E) Receipt from sales of surplus property. All receipts from sales of surplus property under this
section shall be placed in the General Fund.
(1994 Code, ' 2.16.3)
Abandoned Motor Vehicles, Unclaimed Property and Excess Property
21
' 91.05 PERSONS WHO MAY NOT PURCHASE; EXCEPTION.
(A) No employee of the city who is a member of the administrative staff, department head, a
member of the Council or an advisor serving the city in a professional capacity, may be a purchaser of
property under this section. Other city employees may be purchasers if they are not directly involved in
the sale, if they are the highest responsible bidder, and if at least one week=s published or posted notice
of sale is given.
(B) It is unlawful for any person to be a purchaser of property under this section if the purchase is
prohibited by the terms of this section.
(1994 Code, ' 2.16.4) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Chisholm - General Regulations
22
23
CHAPTER 92: DEPOSIT OF LITTER
Section
92.01 Definitions
92.02 Litter in public places
92.03 Litter on gutters and sidewalks prohibited
92.04 Litter from vehicles
92.05 Litter in parks, lakes and streams
92.06 Litter on private property
92.07 Exceptions in proper zones
92.08 Clearing of litter from private property by city
' 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE. A litter storage and collection receptacle as required
and authorized by provisions of the city code and regulations as to the city refuse collection system.
GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from handling, preparation,
cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER. Garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein, and all other waste material which, if
thrown, deposited, maintained or stored as herein prohibited tends to create a danger to public health,
safety and welfare.
PARK. A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area in the
city, owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation.
PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets or other public ways and any and all public parks, ravines,
spaces, grounds and buildings.
REFUSE. All putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including
garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned, unlicensed or inoperative vehicles
and solid commercial and industrial wastes.
Chisholm - General Regulations
24
RUBBISH. Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and non-combustible
wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery, scrap metal, scrap lumber, used vehicle parts and similar materials.
VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or
drawn upon on a highway, including, but not limited to, devices such as automobiles, trucks, bicycles,
motorcycles, snowmobiles, trailers of any kind, and similar forms of conveyance.
(1994 Code, ' 10.01.1)
' 92.02 LITTER IN PUBLIC PLACES.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit litter in or upon any street or other public place
within the city except in public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection or in official
city landfills.
(B) Persons placing litter in authorized private receptacles shall do so in a manner so as to prevent it
from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street or other public place or upon private
property.
(1994 Code, ' 10.01.2) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 92.03 LITTER ON GUTTERS AND SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place
within the city any litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.
(B) Persons owning or occupying property, including commercial or industrial property, shall keep
the sidewalk or boulevard in front of their premises free of litter at all times.
(C) This section shall not prohibit the deposit of leaves on boulevards each fall for authorized
pickup by the city facilities.
(1994 Code, ' 10.01.3) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 92.04 LITTER FROM VEHICLES.
(A) It is unlawful for any person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, to throw or deposit litter
upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon private property.
Deposit of Litter
25
(B) No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless the vehicle is so
constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any
street, or other public place, or upon private property; nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or
truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street or other public place,
mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind.
(1994 Code, ' 10.01.4) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 92.05 LITTER IN PARKS, LAKES AND STREAMS.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit litter in any park, lake or stream within the city
except in public receptacles and in a manner so that the litter will be prevented from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any part of park, lake or stream or upon any street or other public place.
(B) Where public receptacles are not provided, all the litter shall be carried away from the park, lake
or stream by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
(1994 Code, ' 10.01.5) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 92.06 LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
It is unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, maintain or store outside any litter on any private
property within the city, whether owned by the person or not, and the owner and the person in control of
any like private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that
this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection.
(1994 Code, ' 10.01.6) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 92.07 EXCEPTIONS IN PROPER ZONES.
This chapter shall not prohibit the lawful keeping of vehicles defined as Arefuse@ herein on private
property under the following circumstances:
(A) On property duly licensed as a junkyard in an appropriate zone under the zoning regulations of
the city code;
(B) When stored inside buildings, provided the building and land usage complies with all applicable
codes and provisions of the city code regulating the special hazards and usage thereof; or
(C) Temporary outside storage, not exceeding 60 days, in appropriate industrial zones, under the
zoning regulations of the city code, while awaiting repair work thereon.
(1994 Code, ' 10.01.7)
Chisholm - General Regulations
26
' 92.08 CLEARING OF LITTER FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY BY CITY.
(A) Notice. The City Clerk, or his or her duly authorized agent, is hereby authorized and empowered
to notify the owner of any private property within the city, or the agent of the owner, to properly dispose
of litter located on the owner=s property which is prohibited by this section. The occupier of any
property shall be deemed agent of the property owner for purposes of this section. Notice shall be by
registered mail or personal service in the same manner as civil process in district court, and if by mail,
shall be addressed to the owner or his or her agent at his or her last known address. If sent by mail, and
returned because of inability to make delivery thereof, the City Clerk shall make a reasonable attempt to
deliver the same by personal service. The city shall not be required to furnish notice by personal service
outside the state.
(B) City removal. Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or agent so notified, to properly
dispose of litter as prohibited by this section within 30 days after receipt of written notice cited above, or
within 30 days after the date the same is returned to the city because of inability to make delivery or
personal service thereof, the City Clerk or his or her duly authorized agent is hereby authorized and
empowered to order the removal and disposal of the litter and pay therefor with city funds.
(C) Right to hearing. At any time prior to city removal of litter from private property, the owner, or
his or her agent, may submit a written request for a hearing before the Council to show cause why the
litter should not be removed from the property as required by this chapter. The Council shall hear all
relevant testimony, receive all evidence bearing upon the question, and thereafter make findings for or
against the proposed removal. If owner prevails, all proceedings hereunder arising from the incident shall
terminate and be dismissed by the city. If a violation of this section is found by the Council, the removal
shall be ordered immediately pursuant to division (B) above.
(D) Cost certified to taxes. When the city has effected the removal of the litter, or has paid for its
removal, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of 8% per annum from the date of the
completion of the work, if not paid by the owner prior to 30 days following the removal, shall be charged
as a lien upon the real estate affected and the same certified by the City Clerk to the County Auditor as a
special assessment for collection with regular municipal taxes in the year following the certification. The
assessment shall constitute a lien against the real estate and shall be collected in the manner provided by
law for the collection of special assessments. The certified assessment shall constitute prima facie
evidence that all legal formalities have been complied with and that the work has been properly and
satisfactorily completed.
(1994 Code, ' 10.01.8)
27
CHAPTER 93: TREES
Section
Prevention and Control of Dutch Elm Disease
93.01 Declaration of policy
93.02 Dutch Elm disease program
93.03 Nuisance declared
93.04 Abatement
93.05 Inspection and investigation
93.06 Abatement of Dutch Elm disease nuisance
93.07 Procedure for removal of infested trees and wood
93.08 Spraying elm trees
93.09 Transporting elm wood prohibited
93.10 Interference prohibited
93.11 Position of City Forester
93.12 Duties of City Forester
PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF DUTCH ELM DISEASE
' 93.01 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
(A) The city has determined that the health of the elm trees is threatened by a fatal disease known as
Dutch Elm disease. It has further determined that the loss of elm trees growing upon public and private
property would substantially depreciate the value of property and impair the safety, good order, general
welfare and convenience of the public.
(B) It is declared to be the intention of the city to control and prevent the spread of this disease and
this subchapter is intended for that purpose.
(1994 Code, ' 10.70.1)
' 93.02 DUTCH ELM DISEASE PROGRAM.
It is the intention of the city to conduct a program of plant pest control pursuant to authority granted
by M.S. ' 18G.13, as it may be amended from time to time. This program is directed specifically at the
Chisholm - General Regulations
28
control and elimination of Dutch Elm disease fungus and elm bark beetles and is undertaken at the
recommendation of the Commissioner of Agriculture. The City Forester, hereinafter provided for shall
act as coordinator between the Commissioner of Agriculture and the city in the conduct of this program.
(1994 Code, ' 10.70.2)
' 93.03 NUISANCE DECLARED.
The following things are public nuisances whenever they are found within the city:
(A) Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected to any degree with Dutch Elm disease
fungus, Ceratocystis Ulmi (Buisman) Moreau, or which harbors any of the elm bark beetles, Scolytus
Multistriatus (Eichh.) or Hylungopinus Rufipes (Marsh.); and
(B) Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including legs, branches, stumps, firewood or other elm
material from which the bark has not been removed and burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark
beetle insecticide.
(1994 Code, ' 10.70.3)
' 93.04 ABATEMENT.
It is unlawful for any person to permit any public nuisance as herein defined to remain on any
premises owned, leased, occupied or controlled by him or her. The nuisance may be abated in the manner
prescribed by this section.
(1994 Code, ' 10.70.4) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 93.05 INSPECTION AND INVESTIGATION.
(A) The City Forester, his or her agents or employees, shall inspect all premises and places within
the city as often as practicable to determine whether any conditions described herein exist thereon. They
shall investigate and report incidents of infestation by Dutch Elm fungus or elm bark beetles to the
Council.
(B) The City Forester, his or her agents or employees, may enter upon private premises at any
reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out any of the duties assigned to them hereunder.
(C) The City Forester, his or her agents or employees, upon finding conditions indicating Dutch
Elm infestation immediately shall take and send appropriate specimens or samples to the Commissioner
of Agriculture (Bureau of Plant Industry), state, for analysis, or take other steps to a diagnosis as may be
recommended by the Commissioner of Agriculture. No action to remove infected trees nor wood shall be
taken until positive diagnosis of the disease has been made.
(1994 Code, ' 10.70.5)
Trees
29
' 93.06 ABATEMENT OF DUTCH ELM DISEASE NUISANCE.
In abating the nuisances defined herein, the City Forester, his or her agents or employees, shall cause
the infected tree or wood to be removed and burned or otherwise effectively treated so as to destroy and
prevent as fully as possible the spread of Dutch Elm disease fungus and elm bark beetles. The abatement
procedures shall be carried out in accordance with the current technical and expert methods and plans as
may be designed by the Commissioner of Agriculture of the state. The city shall establish specifications
for tree removal and disposal methods consistent therewith.
(1994 Code, ' 10.70.6)
' 93.07 PROCEDURE FOR REMOVAL OF INFESTED TREES AND WOOD.
(A) (1) Whenever the City Forester, his or her agents or employee finds with reasonable certainty
that the infestation defined herein exists in any tree or wood in any public or private place in the city, he
or she shall proceed as follows.
(a) If the City Forester, his or her agents or employees finds that the danger of infestation
of other elm trees is not imminent because of elm dormancy, he or she shall make a written report of his
or her finding to the Council which shall proceed by abating the nuisance as a public improvement under
M.S. Chapter 429, as it may be amended from time to time; or abating the nuisance as provided in
division (B) below.
(b) If the City Forester, his or her agents or employees finds that danger of infestation of
other elm trees is imminent, he or she shall notify the abutting property owners by certified mail that the
nuisance will be abated within a specified time, not less than five days from the date of mailing of the
notice. The City Forester shall immediately report that action to the Council, and after the expiration of
the time limited by the notice he or she may abate the nuisance.
(c) If the City Forester finds with reasonable certainty that immediate action is required to
prevent the spread of the disease, he or she may proceed to abate the nuisance forthwith.
(2) He or she shall report that action immediately to the Council and to the abutting property
owner, or to the owner of the property where the nuisance is located.
(B) Upon receipt of the City Forester=s report required by division (A)(1)(a) above, the Council
shall by resolution order the nuisance abated. Before action is taken on the resolution the Council shall
publish notice of its intention to meet to consider taking action to abate the nuisance. This notice shall be
mailed to affected property owners and published once no less than one week prior to the meeting. The
notice shall state the time and place of the meeting, the streets affected, action proposed, the estimated
cost of the abatement, and the proposed bases of assessment, if any, of costs. At the hearing or
adjournment thereof, the Council shall hear property owners with reference to the scope and desirability
of the proposed project. The Council shall thereafter adopt a resolution confirming the original resolution
with modifications as it considers desirable and provide for the doing of the work by day labor or by
contract.
Chisholm - General Regulations
30
(C) The City Forester shall keep a record of the costs of abatements done under this section, and
shall report monthly to the City Clerk all work done for which assessments are to be made stating and
certifying the description of the land, lots, parcels involved and the amount chargeable to each.
(D) On or before September 1 of each year the City Clerk shall list the total unpaid charges for each
abatement against each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this section. The
Council may then spread the charges or any portion thereof against the property involved as a special
assessment under M.S. ' 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, and other pertinent statutes
for certification to the County Auditor and collection the following year along with current taxes.
(E) No damage shall be awarded the owner for destruction of any elm tree, elm wood or elm
material or any part thereof pursuant to this section.
(1994 Code, ' 10.70.7)
' 93.08 SPRAYING ELM TREES.
(A) Whenever the City Forester, his or her agents or employees, determines that any elm tree or elm
wood within the city is infected with Dutch Elm fungus, he or she may spray or treat all nearby high
value elm trees, with an effective elm bark beetle destroying concentrate or fungicide or both. Activities
authorized by this section shall be conducted in accordance with technical and expert opinions and plans
of the Commissioner of Agriculture and under the supervision of the Commissioner and his or her agents
whenever possible.
(B) The notice provisions of ' 93.07 apply to spraying and treatment operations conducted under
this section.
(1994 Code, ' 10.70.8)
' 93.09 TRANSPORTING ELM WOOD PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for any person to transport within the city any bark-bearing elm wood without having
obtained a permit from the City Forester. The City Forester shall grant permits only when the purpose of
this section will be served thereby.
(1994 Code, ' 10.70.9) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 93.10 INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the City Forester or his or her agents
while they are engaged in the performance of duties imposed by this section.
(1994 Code, ' 10.70.10) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Trees
31
' 93.11 POSITION OF CITY FORESTER.
The position of City Forester is hereby created. The City Clerk or other city official or person as may
be designated from time to time shall perform the duties of City Forester. The appointment to fill the
position shall be made by resolution of the Council.
(1994 Code, ' 10.70.11)
' 93.12 DUTIES OF CITY FORESTER.
It is the duty of the City Forester to coordinate, under the direction and control of the Council, all
activities of the city relating to the control and prevention of Dutch Elm disease. He or she shall
recommend to the Council the details of a program for the control of Dutch Elm disease, and perform the
duties incident to such a program adopted by the Council.
(1994 Code, ' 10.70.12)
Chisholm - General Regulations
32
33
CHAPTER 94: NUISANCES; HEALTH; PUBLIC PROTECTION
Section
Nuisances Generally
94.01 Public nuisance
94.02 Public nuisances affecting health
94.03 Public nuisances affecting morals and decency
94.04 Public nuisances affecting peace and safety
94.05 Nuisance parking and storage
94.06 Inoperable motor vehicles
94.07 Building maintenance and appearance
94.08 Duties of city officers
94.09 Abatement
94.10 Recovery of cost
Public Health, Safety and Protection
94.25 Adoption of Minnesota Uniform Fire Code
94.26 Grass and weeds on private property
94.27 Barbed wire fences
94.28 Mobile homes
94.29 Junk cars, household furnishings and appliances stored on public or private property
94.30 Storage of anhydrous ammonia
94.31 Climbing water tower
94.32 Consumption of beer or liquor on streets and public property
94.33 Consumption of beer, wine or liquor on private parking lots
94.34 Toilet installation required
NUISANCES GENERALLY
' 94.01 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
Whoever by his or her act or failure to perform a legal duty intentionally does any of the following is
guilty of maintaining a public nuisance, which is a misdemeanor:
(A) Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures or endangers the safety,
Chisholm - General Regulations
34
health, morals, comfort or repose of any considerable number of members of the public;
(B) Interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for passage any public highway or right-of-way,
or waters used by the public; or
(C) Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law or '' 94.02, 94.03 or 94.04, or any other
part of this code to be a public nuisance and for which no sentence is specifically provided.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 94.02 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:
(A) Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable matter;
(B) All diseased animals running at large;
(C) All ponds or pools of stagnant water;
(D) Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after death;
(E) Accumulations of manure, refuse or other debris;
(F) Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or fly-tight or which are so maintained
as to constitute a health hazard or to emit foul and disagreeable odors;
(G) The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal or body of water by sewage,
industrial waste or other substances;
(H) All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon public or private property;
(I) Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in unreasonable quantities;
(J) All public exposure of people having a contagious disease;
(K) Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute not operating under local license; and
(L) All unnecessary and annoying vibrations.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 94.03 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY.
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public morals and decency:
Nuisances; Health; Public Protection
35
(A) All gambling devices, slot machines and punch boards, except as otherwise authorized by
federal, state or local law;
(B) Betting, bookmaking and all apparatus used in those occupations;
(C) All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual intercourse, gambling
houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses;
(D) All places where intoxicating liquor is manufactured or disposed of in violation of law or where,
in violation of law, people are permitted to resort for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor, or where
intoxicating liquor is kept for sale or other disposition in violation of law, and all liquor and other
property used for maintaining that place. For the purposes of this section INTOXICATING LIQUOR
shall mean any ethyl alcohol, distilled, fermented, spirituous, vinous or malt beverage containing more
than 0.5% alcohol by volume; and
(E) Any vehicle used for the unlawful transportation of intoxicating liquor, or for promiscuous
sexual intercourse, or any other immoral or illegal purpose.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 94.04 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.
The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and safety:
(A) All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 24 hours after the snow or other
precipitation causing the condition has ceased to fall;
(B) All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent people from having a clear
view of all traffic approaching an intersection;
(C) All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface of a sidewalk or street as to
constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;
(D) All obnoxious noises in violation of Minn. Rules Ch. 7030, as they may be amended from time
to time which are hereby incorporated by reference into this code;
(E) The discharging of the exhaust or permitting the discharging of the exhaust of any stationary
internal combustion engine, motor boat, motor vehicle, motorcycle, all terrain vehicle, snowmobile or
any recreational device except through a muffler or other device that effectively prevents loud or
explosive noises therefrom and complies with all applicable state laws and regulations;
(F) The using or operation or permitting the using or operation of any radio receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph, paging system, machine or other device for producing or reproduction of sound
in a distinctly and loudly audible manner so as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of any person
nearby. Operation of any device referred to above between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a
Chisholm - General Regulations
36
manner so as to be plainly audible at the property line of the structure or building in which it is located, or
at a distance of 50 feet if the source is located outside a structure or building shall be prima facie evidence
of violation of this section;
(G) No person shall participate in any party or other gathering of people giving rise to noise,
unreasonably disturbing the peace, quiet or repose of another person. When a police officer determines
that a gathering is creating such a noise disturbance, the officer may order all persons present, other than
the owner or tenant of the premises where the disturbance is occurring, to disperse immediately. No
person shall refuse to leave after being ordered by a police officer to do so. Every owner or tenant of the
premises who has knowledge of the disturbance shall make every reasonable effort to see that the
disturbance is stopped;
(H) Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary public use of streets, alleys, sidewalks or
public grounds except under conditions as are permitted by this code or other applicable law;
(I) Radio aerials or television antennae erected or maintained in a dangerous manner;
(J) Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use of a public street or
sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and the free use of the street
or sidewalk;
(K) All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over streets and sidewalks, so situated
so as to endanger public safety, or not constructed and maintained as provided by ordinance;
(L) The allowing of rain water, ice or snow to fall from any building or structure upon any street or
sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk;
(M) Any barbed wire fence less than six feet above the ground and within three feet of a public
sidewalk or way;
(N) All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated or operated on private
property as to attract the public;
(O) Waste water cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or other public properties;
(P) Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery, household appliances,
automobile bodies or other material in a manner conducive to the harboring of rats, mice, snakes or
vermin, or the rank growth of vegetation among the items so accumulated, or in a manner creating fire,
health or safety hazards from accumulation;
(Q) Any well, hole or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in another condition as to
constitute a hazard to any child or other person coming on the premises where it is located;
(R) Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a public street drain, gutter or
ditch with trash or other materials;
Nuisances; Health; Public Protection
37
(S) The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk or other public property of any glass, tacks,
nails, bottles or other substance which may injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire
when passing over the substance;
(T) The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way or on adjacent private property;
(U) All other conditions or things which are likely to cause injury to the person or property of
anyone.
(V) (1) Noises prohibited.
(a) General prohibition. No person shall make or cause to be made any distinctly and
loudly audible noise that unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health,
peace, safety or welfare of any person or precludes their enjoyment of property or affects their
property=s value. This general prohibition is not limited by the specific restrictions of this section.
(b) Defective vehicles or loads. No person shall use any vehicle so out of repair or so
loaded as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
(c) Loading, unloading, unpacking. No person shall create loud or excessive noise in
loading, unloading, or unpacking any vehicle.
(d) Radios, phonographs, paging systems, and the like. No person shall use or operate or
permit the use or operation of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, paging system,
machine or other device for the production or reproduction of sound in a distinct and loudly audible
manner as to unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of any person nearby. Operation of any
such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or other device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
in a manner so as to be plainly audible at the property line of the structure or building in which it is
located, in the hallway or apartment adjacent, or at a distance of 50 feet if the source is located outside a
structure or building, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
(e) Schools, churches, hospitals and the like. No person shall create any excessive noise
on a street, alley or public grounds adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or hospital when
the noise unreasonably interferes with the working of the institution or disturbs or unduly annoys its
occupants or residents and when conspicuous signs indicate the presence of the institution.
(2) Hourly restriction of certain operations.
(a) Domestic power equipment. No person shall operate a power lawn mower, power
hedge clipper, chain saw, mulcher, garden tiller, edger, drill or other similar domestic power
maintenance equipment except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday. Snow removal equipment is
exempt from this provision.
(b) Refuse hauling. No person shall collect or remove garbage or refuse in any residential
district except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of
Chisholm - General Regulations
38
9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday.
(c) Construction activities. No person shall engage in or permit construction activities
involving the use of any kind of electric, diesel or gas-powered machine or other power equipment
except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday.
(3) Noise impact statements. The Council may require any person applying for a change in
zoning classification or a permit or license for any structure, operation, process, installation or alteration
or project that may be considered a potential noise source to submit a noise impact statement on a form
prescribed by the Council. It shall evaluate each statement and take its evaluation into account in
approving or disapproving the license or permit applied for or the zoning change requested.
(W)Reflected glare or light from private exterior lighting exceeding 0.5 footcandles as measured on
the property line of the property where the lighting is located when abutting any residential parcel, and
one footcandle when abutting any commercial or industrial parcel; and
(X) Reflected glare or light from private exterior lighting exceeding 0.5 footcandles as measured on
the property line of the property where the lighting is located when abutting any residential parcel and
one footcandle when abutting any commercial or industrial parcel.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 94.05 NUISANCE PARKING AND STORAGE.
(A) Declaration of nuisance. The outside parking and storage on residentially-zoned property of
large numbers of vehicles and vehicles, materials, supplies or equipment not customarily used for
residential purposes in violation of the requirements set forth below is declared to be a public nuisance
because it: obstructs views on streets and private property; creates cluttered and otherwise unsightly
areas; prevents the full use of residential streets for residential parking; introduces commercial
advertising signs into areas where commercial advertising signs are otherwise prohibited; decreases
adjoining landowners= and occupants= enjoyment of their property and neighborhood; and otherwise
adversely affects property values and neighborhood patterns.
(B) Unlawful parking and storage.
(1) A person must not place, store or allow the placement or storage of ice fish houses,
skateboard ramps, playhouses or other similar non-permanent structures outside continuously for longer
than 24 hours in the front-yard area of residential property unless more than 100 feet back from the front
property line.
(2) A person must not place, store or allow the placement or storage of pipe, lumber, forms,
steel, machinery or similar materials, including all materials used in connection with a business, outside
on residential property, unless shielded from public view by an opaque cover or fence.
Nuisances; Health; Public Protection
39
(3) A person must not cause, undertake, permit or allow the outside parking and storage of
vehicles on residential property unless it complies with the following requirements:
(a) No more than four vehicles per lawful dwelling unit may be parked or stored anywhere
outside on residential property, except as otherwise permitted or required by the city because of
nonresidential characteristics of the property. This maximum number does not include vehicles of
occasional guests who do not reside on the property.
(b) Vehicles that are parked or stored outside in the front-yard area must be on a paved or
graveled parking or driveway area.
(c) Vehicles, watercraft and other articles stored outside on residential property must be
owned by a person who resides on that property. Students who are away at school for periods of time but
still claim the property as their legal residence will be considered residents on the property.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 94.06 INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES.
(A) It shall be unlawful to keep, park, store or abandon any motor vehicle which is not in operating
condition, partially dismantled, used for repair of parts or as a source of repair or replacement parts for
other vehicles, kept for scrapping, dismantling or salvage of any kind, or which is not properly licensed
for operation with the state, pursuant to M.S. ' 168B.011, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to
time.
(B) This section does not apply to a motor vehicle enclosed in a building and/or kept out of view
from any street, road or alley, and which does not foster complaint from a resident of the city. A privacy
fence is permissible.
(C) Any motor vehicles described in this section constitute a hazard to the health and welfare of the
residents of the community in that the vehicles can harbor noxious diseases, furnish a shelter and
breeding place for vermin and present physical danger to the safety and well-being of children and
citizens; and vehicles containing fluids which, if released into the environment, can and do cause
significant health risks to the community.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 94.07 BUILDING MAINTENANCE AND APPEARANCE.
(A) Declaration of nuisance. Buildings, fences and other structures that have been so poorly
maintained that their physical condition and appearance detract from the surrounding neighborhood are
declared to be public nuisances because they: are unsightly; decrease adjoining landowners and
occupants= enjoyment of their property and neighborhood; and adversely affect property values and
neighborhood patterns.
Chisholm - General Regulations
40
(B) Standards. A building, fence or other structure is a public nuisance if it does not comply with
the following requirements.
(1) No part of any exterior surface may have deterioration, holes, breaks, gaps, loose or rotting
boards or timbers.
(2) Every exterior surface that has had a surface finish such as paint applied must be
maintained to avoid noticeable deterioration of the finish. No wall or other exterior surface may have
peeling, cracked, chipped or otherwise deteriorated surface finish on more than 20% of:
(a) Any one wall or other flat surface; or
(b) All door and window moldings, eaves, gutters and similar projections on any one side
or surface.
(3) No glass, including windows and exterior light fixtures, may be broken or cracked, and no
screens may be torn or separated from moldings.
(4) Exterior doors and shutters must be hung properly and have an operable mechanism to keep
them securely shut or in place.
(5) Cornices, moldings, lintels, sills, bay or dormer windows and similar projections must be
kept in good repair and free from cracks and defects that make them hazardous or unsightly.
(6) Roof surfaces must be tight and have no defects that admit water. All roof drainage systems
must be secured and hung properly.
(7) Chimneys, antennae, air vents and other similar projections must be structurally sound and
in good repair. These projections must be secured properly, where applicable, to an exterior wall or
exterior roof.
(8) Foundations must be structurally sound and in good repair.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
Nuisances; Health; Public Protection
41
' 94.08 DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.
For purposes of '' 94.08 and 94.09, the Police Department, or Sheriff or person designated by the
City Council, if the city has at the time no Police Department, may enforce the provisions relating to
nuisances. Any peace officer or designated person shall have the power to inspect private premises and
take all reasonable precautions to prevent the commission and maintenance of public nuisances. Except
in emergency situations of imminent danger to human life and safety, no police officer or designated
person shall enter private property for the purpose of inspecting or preventing public nuisances without
the permission of the owner, resident or other person in control of the property, unless the officer or
person designated has obtained a warrant or order from a court of competent jurisdiction authorizing the
entry, as provided in ' 10.20.
' 94.09 ABATEMENT.
(A) Notice. Written notice of violation; notice of the time, date, place and subject of any hearing
before the City Council; notice of City Council order; and notice of motion for summary enforcement
hearing shall be given as set forth in this section.
(1) Notice of violation. Written notice of violation shall be served by a peace officer or
designated person on the owner of record or occupant of the premises either in person or by certified or
registered mail. If the premises is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or the owner of record
or occupant refuses to accept notice of violation, notice of violation shall be served by posting it on the
premises.
(2) Notice of City Council hearing. Written notice of any City Council hearing to determine or
abate a nuisance shall be served on the owner of record and occupant of the premises either in person or
by certified or registered mail. If the premises is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or the
owner of record or occupant refuses to accept notice of the City Council hearing, notice of City Council
hearing shall be served by posting it on the premises.
(3) Notice of City Council order. Except for those cases determined by the city to require
summary enforcement, written notice of any City Council order shall be made as provided in M.S.
' 463.17 (Hazardous and Substandard Building Act), as it may be amended from time to time.
(4) Notice of motion for summary enforcement. Written notice of any motion for summary
enforcement shall be made as provided for in M.S. ' 463.17 (Hazardous and Substandard Building Act),
as it may be amended from time to time.
(B) Procedure. Whenever a peace officer or designated person determines that a public nuisance is
being maintained or exists on the premises in the city, the officer or person designated may notify in
writing the owner of record or occupant of the premises of that fact and order that the nuisance be
terminated or abated. The notice of violation shall specify the steps to be taken to abate the nuisance and
the time within which the nuisance is to be abated. If the notice of violation is not complied with within
the time specified, the officer or designated person shall report that fact forthwith to the City Council.
Chisholm - General Regulations
42
Thereafter, the City Council may, after notice to the owner or occupant and an opportunity to be heard,
determine that the condition identified in the notice of violation is a nuisance and further order that if the
nuisance is not abated within the time prescribed by the City Council, the city may seek injunctive relief
by serving a copy of the City Council order and notice of motion for summary enforcement or obtain an
administrative search and seizure warrant and abate the nuisance.
(C) Emergency procedure; summary enforcement. In cases of emergency, where delay in
abatement required to complete the notice and procedure requirements set forth in divisions (A) and (B)
above will permit a continuing nuisance to unreasonably endanger public health, safety or welfare, the
City Council may order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance. To proceed with summary
enforcement, the officer or designated person shall determine that a public nuisance exists or is being
maintained on premises in the city and that delay in abatement of the nuisance will unreasonably
endanger public health, safety or welfare. The officer or designated person shall notify in writing the
occupant or owner of the premises of the nature of the nuisance and of the city=s intention to seek
summary enforcement and the time and place of the City Council meeting to consider the question of
summary enforcement. The City Council shall determine whether or not the condition identified in the
notice to the owner or occupant is a nuisance, whether public health, safety or welfare will be
unreasonably endangered by delay in abatement required to complete the procedure set forth in division
(A) of this section, and may order that the nuisance be immediately terminated or abated. If the nuisance
is not immediately terminated or abated, the City Council may order summary enforcement and abate the
nuisance.
(D) Immediate abatement. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city, without notice or other
process, from immediately abating any condition which poses an imminent and serious hazard to human
life or safety.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 94.10 RECOVERY OF COST.
(A) Personal liability. The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been abated by the city or a
person who has caused a public nuisance on a property not owned by that person shall be personally
liable for the cost to the city of the abatement, including administrative costs. As soon as the work has
been completed and the cost determined, the City Clerk or other official shall prepare a bill for the cost
and mail it to the owner. Thereupon the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the
City Clerk.
(B) Assessment. After notice and hearing as provided in M.S. ' 429.061, as it may be amended from
time to time, if the nuisance is a public health or safety hazard on private property, the accumulation of
snow and ice on public sidewalks, the growth of weeds on private property or outside the traveled portion
of streets, or unsound or insect-infected trees, the City Clerk shall, on or before September 1 next
following abatement of the nuisance, list the total unpaid charges along with all other charges as well as
other charges for current services to be assessed under M.S. ' 429.101, as it may be amended from time
to time, against each separate lot or parcel to which the charges are attributable. The City Council may
then spread the charges against the property under that statute and other pertinent statutes for certification
Nuisances; Health; Public Protection
43
to the County Auditor and collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual
installments, not exceeding ten, as the City Council may determine in each case.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND PROTECTION
' 94.25 ADOPTION OF STATE UNIFORM FIRE CODE.
The State Uniform Fire Code is hereby adopted as though set forth verbatim herein. Three copies of
the code shall be marked ACITY OF CHISHOLM - OFFICIAL COPY@ and kept on file in the office of
the City Clerk and open to inspection and use by the public.
(1994 Code, ' 10.71)
' 94.26 GRASS AND WEEDS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
(A) It is unlawful for any owner, occupant or agent of any lot or parcel of land in the city to allow
any weeds or grass growing upon any lot or parcel of land to grow to a greater height than ten inches or to
allow the weeds or grass to go to seed.
(B) If any such owner, occupant or agent fails to comply with this height limitation and after notice
given by the City Clerk, has not within seven days of the notice complied, the city shall cause the weeds
or grass to be cut and the expenses thus incurred shall be a lien upon the real estate. The City Clerk shall
certify to the County Auditor, a statement of the amount of the cost incurred by the city. The amount
together with interest shall be entered as a special assessment against the lot or parcel of land and be
collected in the same manner as real estate taxes.
(1994 Code, ' 10.72) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 94.27 BARBED WIRE FENCES.
It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain a barbed wire fence upon his or her property, which
fence abuts upon any street or within ten feet of his or her property line with an abutting property owner.
(1994 Code, ' 10.73) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 94.28 MOBILE HOMES.
It is unlawful to park a mobile home upon private property, except in a licensed mobile home park.
(1994 Code, ' 10.74) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Chisholm - General Regulations
44
' 94.29 JUNK CARS, HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS AND APPLIANCES STORED ON
PUBLIC
OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
It is unlawful to park or store any unlicensed, unregistered or inoperable vehicle, household
furnishings or appliances on public or private property in a Residence District, unless housed within a
lawfully erected building in the Residence District, and any violation is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(1994 Code, ' 10.75) Penalty, see ' 10.75)
' 94.30 STORAGE OF ANHYDROUS AMMONIA.
It is unlawful to store anhydrous ammonia except by special permit from the Council. For the
purpose of this section, the words STORE and STORAGE shall mean confining in any type of container
except such as is then in transit upon a vehicle or other means of transportation.
(1994 Code, ' 10.76) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 94.31 CLIMBING WATER TOWER.
It is unlawful for any person, except a city employee acting within the course and scope of his
employment, to climb or attempt to climb upon any part or portion of the water tank or tanks or structural
supports of the tanks or the ladder leading from the ground to the top of the tank or tanks.
(1994 Code, ' 10.77) Penalty, see ' 10.77
' 94.32 CONSUMPTION OF BEER OR LIQUOR ON STREETS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY.
It is unlawful for any person to consume, or possess in an unsealed container, beer or liquor, as those
terms are defined in Chapter 114, on any street or other public property except city parks and other public
property when and where permission has been specifically granted by the Council; provided, that this
section shall not apply to the possession of an unsealed container in a motor vehicle on streets or public
property when the container is kept in the trunk of the vehicle if it is equipped with a trunk, or kept in
some other area of the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or passengers, if the motor vehicle is
not equipped with a trunk. For the purpose of this section, a utility or glove compartment shall be deemed
to be within the area occupied by the driver or passengers.
(1994 Code, ' 10.80) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Nuisances; Health; Public Protection
45
' 94.33 CONSUMPTION OF BEER, WINE OR LIQUOR ON PRIVATE PARKING LOTS.
It is unlawful for any person to consume or possess in an unsealed container, beer, wine or liquor, as
those terms are defined in Chapter 114, on any privately-owned parking lot which is clearly sign-posted
prohibiting the possession and consumption; provided, that this section shall not apply to the possession
of an unsealed container in a motor vehicle on privately-owned parking lots when the container is kept in
the trunk of the vehicle if it is equipped with a trunk, or kept in some other area of the vehicle not
normally occupied by the driver or passengers, if the motor vehicle is not equipped with a trunk. For the
purpose of this section, a utility or glove compartment shall be deemed to be within the area occupied by
the driver or passengers.
(1994 Code, ' 10.81)
' 94.34 TOILET INSTALLATION REQUIRED.
(A) It is the duty of every owner or occupant of any property within the city, having a dwelling
house or business building situated thereon, which property is within 500 feet of any municipal water and
sewer mains, to install a toilet in the dwelling or business building and make connection thereof with the
water and sewer mains.
(B) Whenever the noncompliance of the owner or occupant of the property is reported to the County
Health Officer, he or she shall forthwith make the investigation as he or she deems necessary or proper
and report his or her findings to the Council.
(C) If the County Health Officer finds and reports that in his or her opinion the lack of toilet
facilities is an unhealthful or unsanitary condition, the city shall forthwith serve written notice upon the
owner or occupant requiring the installation of toilet facilities upon premises described in the notice, and
connection thereof with the sewer and water mains, all of which shall be done within 30 days after
service of the written notice.
(D) Whenever any owner or occupant shall default in compliance with the written notice the
Council may by resolution direct that a toilet be installed and connection made with the water and sewer
mains and that the actual cost of the installation be paid in the first instance out of the General Revenue
Fund, and assessed against the property so benefitted.
(E) After the installation and connection is completed by order of the Council, the city shall serve a
written notice of intention to make an assessment therefor.
(F) If the assessment is not paid within ten days the city shall certify the amount thereof to the
County Auditor in the same manner as with other special assessments, provided that the Council may by
resolution provide that the assessment be spread over a term of three years upon written request by the
owner of the property.
(1994 Code, ' 10.02)
46
CHAPTER 95: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
95.01 Traffic and parking control
95.02 Scope and orders of a peace officer
95.03 Application
95.04 Ice and snow on public sidewalks
95.05 Regulation of grass, weeds, trees, structures and other objects in streets, alleys, boulevards
and other public rights-of-way
95.06 Construction and reconstruction of roadway surfacing, sidewalk, curb and gutter
95.07 Street openings or excavations
95.08 Obstructions, fire, dumping, signs and other structures
95.09 Requirement of sewer and water main service lateral installation
95.10 Load limits
95.11 Curb and gutter, street and sidewalk painting or coloring
95.12 Motorized vehicles prohibited on sidewalks
95.13 Parades
95.14 School patrol
95.15 Sliding and coasting on public sidewalks, streets and avenues
95.16 Awnings
95.17 Private use of public streets and parking lots
' 95.01 TRAFFIC AND PARKING CONTROL.
(A) Council action. No device, sign or signal shall be erected or maintained for traffic or parking
control unless the Council shall first have approved and directed the same, except as otherwise provided
in this section: provided, that when traffic and parking control is marked or sign-posted, the marking or
sign-posting shall attest to Council action thereon.
(B) Temporarily or experimentally restricting or directing traffic and parking: curb painting.
(1) When clearly marked or sign-posted, traffic and parking may be temporarily restricted for
any public or private purpose. The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized to temporarily restrict
traffic and parking in accordance herewith.
(2) Restricted or prohibited use of parking and traffic lanes may be designated by painting the
same upon streets and curbs. The work shall be done under the direction of the Director of Public Safety,
as authorized by the Council, and in compliance with provisions of this chapter and Title VII.
(3) It is unlawful to use traffic or parking lanes contrary to sign-posting or marking authorized
Streets and Sidewalks
47
and described in this section.
(1994 Code, ' 7.01) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 95.02 SCOPE AND ORDERS OF A PEACE OFFICER.
(A) Scope. The provisions of this chapter and Title VII relate exclusively to the streets, alleys and
private roads in the city, and the operation and parking of vehicles refer exclusively to the operation and
parking of vehicles upon the streets, alleys and private roads.
(B) Orders of a peace officer. It is a misdemeanor for any person to willfully fail or refuse to comply
with any lawful order or direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority to direct, control or
regulate traffic.
(1994 Code, ' 7.02) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 95.03 APPLICATION.
(A) The provisions of this chapter and Title VII applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the streets
shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles including, but not limited to, those owned or operated by the
United States, this state or any county, city, town, district or any other political subdivision of the state,
subject to the specific exemptions as set forth in this chapter and Title VII with reference to authorized
emergency vehicles.
(B) Every person riding a bicycle or an animal or driving any animal drawing a vehicle upon a
roadway shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and Title VII applicable to the driver of a
vehicle, except those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Provisions specifically
referring to bicycles shall be in addition to other provisions of the chapters applying to vehicles.
(1994 Code, ' 7.03)
' 95.04 ICE AND SNOW ON PUBLIC SIDEWALKS.
(A) Ice and snow a nuisance. All snow and ice remaining upon public sidewalks is hereby declared
to constitute a public nuisance and shall be abated by the owner or tenant of the abutting private property
within 12 hours after the snow or ice has ceased to be deposited.
(B) City to remove snow and ice. The city may cause to be removed from all public sidewalks
beginning 24 hours after snow or ice has ceased to fall, all snow and ice which may be discovered
thereon, and it shall keep a record of the cost of removal and the private property adjacent to which the
accumulations were found and removed.
(C) Cost of removal to be assessed. The City Clerk shall, upon direction of the Council, and on
receipt of the information provided for in division (B) above, extend the cost of the removal of snow or
ice as a special assessment against the lots or parcels of ground abutting on walks which were cleared,
Chisholm - General Regulations
48
and the special assessments shall at the time of certifying taxes to the County Auditor be certified for
collection as other special assessments are certified and collected.
(D) Civil suit for cost of removal. The City Clerk shall, in the alternative, upon direction of the
Council, bring suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover from the persons owning land adjacent
to which sidewalks were cleared, as provided in division (B) above, the cost of the clearing and the cost
and disbursements of a civil action therefor.
(E) City Clerk to report sidewalks cleared. The City Clerk shall present to the Council at its first
meeting after snow or ice has been cleared from the sidewalks as provided in division (B) above the
report of the city thereon, and shall request the Council to determine by resolution the manner of
collection to be used as provided in divisions (C) or (D) above.
(F) Placing snow or ice in public street or on other city property. It is unlawful for any person, not
acting under a specific contract with the city, to remove snow from private property and place the same
on a public street in a quantity, or in a manner, so as to cause a hazard to travel, without adequate
arrangements for the immediate removal thereof: and it is also unlawful for any person not acting under a
contract with the city to dump snow on other city property.
(1994 Code, ' 7.04) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 95.05 REGULATION OF GRASS, WEEDS, TREES, STRUCTURES AND OTHER
OBJECTS
IN STREETS, ALLEYS, BOULEVARDS AND OTHER PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
(A) City to control tree planting (standards). The city shall have control and supervision of planting
shrubs and trees upon, or overhanging, all the streets or other public property. The city may establish and
enforce uniform standards relating to the kinds and types of trees to be planted and the placement thereof.
The standards shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk and may be revised from time to time by
action of the Council upon the recommendation of the City Clerk.
(B) Permit required. It is a misdemeanor for any person to plant, spray, trim or remove trees or
other plants which are upon city property, including rights-of-way, without first procuring from the city a
permit in writing to do so.
(C) Duty of property owners to cut grass and weeds and maintain trees and shrubs. Every owner of
property abutting on any street shall cause the grass and weeds to be cut from the line of the property
nearest to the street to the center of the street. If the grass or weeds in such a place attain a height in excess
of ten inches it shall be prima facie evidence of a failure to comply with this division. Every owner of
property abutting on any street shall, subject to the provision herein requiring a permit therefor, trim, cut
and otherwise maintain all trees and shrubs from the line of the property nearest to the street to the center
of the street.
Streets and Sidewalks
49
(D) City may order work done. The city may, in cases of failure to comply with this section, perform
the work with employees of the city, keeping an accurate account of the cost thereof for each lot, piece or
parcel of land abutting upon the street.
(E) Assessment. If the maintenance work is performed by the city as set forth in the foregoing
division, the City Clerk shall forthwith upon completion thereof ascertain the cost attributable to each lot,
piece or parcel of abutting land. The City Clerk shall, at the next regular meeting thereof, present the
certificate to the Council and obtain its approval thereof. When the certificate has been approved it shall
be extended as to the cost therein stated as a special assessment against the abutting land and the special
assessment shall, at the time of certifying taxes to the County Auditor, be certified for collection as other
special assessments are certified and collected.
(1994 Code, ' 7.05) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 95.06 CONSTRUCTION AND RECONSTRUCTION OF ROADWAY SURFACING,
SIDEWALK, CURB AND GUTTER.
(A) Methods of procedure.
(1) Abutting or affected property owners may contract for, construct or reconstruct roadway
surfacing, sidewalk or curb and gutter in accordance with this section if advance payment is made
therefor or arrangements for payment considered adequate by the city are completed in advance.
(2) With or without petition by the methods set forth in the Local Improvement Code of
Minnesota Statutes, presently beginning with M.S. ' 429.011, as the same may from time to time be
amended.
(B) Permit required. It is a misdemeanor to construct a sidewalk, curb and gutter, driveway or
roadway surfacing in any street or other public property in the city without a permit in writing from the
Building Inspector. Application for the permit shall be made on forms approved and provided by the city
and shall sufficiently describe the contemplated improvements, the contemplated date of beginning of
work, and the length of time required to complete the same, provided, that no permit shall be required for
any like improvement ordered installed by the Council. All applications shall be referred by the Building
Inspector to the City Clerk and no permit shall be issued until approval has been received from the City
Clerk. All the applications shall contain an agreement by the applicant to be bound by this chapter and
plans and specifications consistent with the provisions of this chapter and good engineering practices
shall also accompany the application. A permit from the city shall not relieve the holder from damages to
the person or property of another caused by the work.
(C) Specifications and standards. All construction and reconstruction of roadway surfacing,
sidewalk and curb and gutter improvements, including curb cuts, shall be strictly in accordance with
specifications and standards on file in the office of the City Clerk and open to inspection and copying
there. The specifications and standards may be amended from time to time by the city, but shall be
uniformly enforced.
Chisholm - General Regulations
50
(D) Inspection. The Building Inspector shall inspect the improvements as deemed necessary or
advisable. Any work not done according to the applicable specifications and standards shall be removed
and corrected at the expense of the permit holder. Any work done hereunder may be stopped by the
Inspector if found to be unsatisfactory or not in accordance with the specifications and standards, but this
shall not place a continuing burden upon the city to inspect or supervise the work.
(1994 Code, ' 7.06)
' 95.07 STREET OPENINGS OR EXCAVATIONS.
It is unlawful for any person, except a city employee acting within the course and scope of his
employment or a contractor acting within the course and scope of a contract with the city, to make any
excavation; opening or tunnel in, over, across or upon a street or other public property without first
having obtained a written permit from the City Clerk as herein provided.
(A) Application. Application for a permit to make a street excavation shall describe with reasonable
particularity the name and address of the applicant, the place, purpose and size of the excavation, and
other information as may be necessary or desirable to facilitate the investigation hereinafter provided for,
and shall be filed with the City Clerk.
(B) Investigation and payment of estimated costs. Upon receipt of the application, the City Clerk
shall cause the investigation to be made as he or she may deem necessary to determine estimated cost of
repair, such as back-filling, compacting, resurfacing and replacement, and the conditions as to the time of
commencement of work, manner of procedure and time limitation upon the excavation. The foregoing
estimated costs shall include permanent and temporary repairs due to weather or other conditions, and the
cost of the investigation shall be included in the estimate.
(C) Protection of the city and the public.
(1) Non-completion or abandonment. Work shall progress expeditiously to completion in
accordance with any time limitation placed thereon so as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience to the
public. In the event that work is not performed in accordance therewith, or shall cease or be abandoned
without due cause, the city may, after six hours= notice in writing to the holder of the permit of its
intention to do so, correct the work, fill the excavation and repair the public property, and the cost thereof
shall be paid by the person holding the permit.
(2) Insurance. Prior to commencement of the work described in the application, the applicant
shall furnish the city satisfactory evidence in writing that the applicant will keep in effect public liability
insurance of not less than the maximum liability limits set forth in M.S. ' 466.04, as it may be amended
from time to time, issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state on which the
city is named as a co-insured.
Streets and Sidewalks
51
(3) Indemnification. Before issuance of a permit, the applicant shall, in writing, agree to
indemnify and hold the city harmless from any liability for injury or damage arising out of the action of
the applicant in performance of the work, or any expense whatsoever incurred by the city incident to a
claim or action brought or commenced by any person arising therefrom.
(D) Issuance of permit. The Building Inspector shall issue the permit after: completion of the
investigation; payment by the applicant in advance of all estimated costs as aforesaid; agreement by the
applicant to the conditions of time and manner as aforesaid; agreement in writing by the applicant to pay
all actual cost of repairs over and above the estimate, including cost of the investigation; and agreement
in writing by the applicant to be bound by all of the provisions of this section.
(E) Repairs. All temporary and permanent repairs, including back-filling, compacting and
resurfacing shall be made, or contracted for, by the city in a manner prescribed by the City Clerk and an
accurate account of costs thereof shall be kept.
(F) Cost adjustment. Within 60 days following completion of the permanent repairs the Building
Inspector shall determine actual costs of repairs, including cost of investigation, and prepare and furnish
to the permit holder an itemized statement thereof and claim additional payment from, or make refund
(without interest) to, the permit holder, as the case may be.
(G) Alternate method of charging. In lieu of the above provisions relating to cost and cost
adjustment for street openings, the city may charge on the basis of surface square feet removed,
excavated cubic feet, or a combination of surface square feet and excavated cubic feet, on an established
unit price uniformly charged.
(1994 Code, ' 7.07) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 95.08 OBSTRUCTIONS, FIRE, DUMPING, SIGNS AND OTHER STRUCTURES.
(A) Obstructions. It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or display any fence, goods or other
obstructions upon, over, across or under any street or other public property without first having obtained
a written permit from the Council, and then only in compliance in all respects with the terms and
conditions of the permit, and taking precautionary measures for the protection of the public. An electrical
cord or device of any kind is hereby included, but not by way of limitation, within the definition of an
obstruction.
(B) Fires. It is unlawful for any person to build or maintain a fire upon a roadway.
(C) Dumping in streets. It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit in any street or any other
public place any nails, dirt, glass, tin cans, metal scraps, garbage, leaves, grass or tree limbs, shreds or
rubbish, or to empty any water containing salt or other injurious chemical thereon; the effect of this
division shall extend, but not by way of limitation, to depositing grease, oil and other fuel or lubricants in
the places, and to place a motor vehicle with essential parts (as defined in state statutes) removed, except
vehicles as are temporarily disabled for a period not in excess of 12 hours.
(D) Signs and other structures. It is unlawful for any person to place or maintain a sign or other
Chisholm - General Regulations
52
structure in the traveled or untraveled portion of any street or other public property without first having
obtained a written permit from the Council. In a district zoned for other than residential use, special
permission allowing an applicant to erect and maintain signs overhanging the street may be granted upon
the terms and conditions as may be set forth in the zoning or construction provisions of the city code.
(1994 Code, ' 7.08) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 95.09 REQUIREMENT OF SEWER AND WATER MAIN SERVICE LATERAL
INSTALLATION.
(A) Requirement of sewer and water laterals. No petition for the improvement of a street shall be
considered by the Council if the petition contemplates constructing therein any part of a pavement or
stabilized base, or curb and gutter, unless all sewer and water main installations shall have been made
therein, including the installation of service laterals to the curb, if the area along the street will be served
by the utilities installed in the street.
(B) Sewer system service and water main service laterals. No sewer system shall be hereafter
constructed or extended unless service laterals to platted lots and frontage facing thereon shall be
extended simultaneously with construction of mains.
(C) Waiver. The Council may waive the requirements of this section only if it finds the effects
thereof are burdensome and upon the notice and hearing as the Council may deem necessary or proper.
(1994 Code, ' 7.09) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 95.10 LOAD LIMITS.
The City Clerk, upon the recommendation of the Director of Public Safety, may from time to time
impose upon vehicular traffic on any part or all of the streets load limits as may be necessary or desirable.
Those limits, and the specific extent or weight to which loads are limited, shall be clearly and legibly
sign-posted thereon. It is a misdemeanor for any person to operate a vehicle on any street in violation of
the limitation so posted.
(1994 Code, ' 7.10) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 95.11 CURB AND GUTTER, STREET AND SIDEWALK PAINTING OR COLORING.
It is unlawful for any person to paint, letter or color any street, sidewalk or curb and gutter for
advertising purposes, or to paint or color any street, sidewalk or curb and gutter for any purpose, except
as the same may be done by city employees acting within the course or scope of their employment;
provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to uniformly coloring concrete or other surfacing,
or uniformly painted house numbers, as the coloring shall be approved by the City Clerk.
(1994 Code, ' 7.11) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Streets and Sidewalks
53
' 95.12 MOTORIZED VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON SIDEWALKS.
It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a motorized vehicle on any public sidewalk or public
property designated for use as a pedestrian walkway or bicycle trail, except when crossing the same for
ingress and egress to private property lying on the other side thereof.
(1994 Code, ' 7.12) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 95.13 PARADES.
(A) Definition. The term PARADE means any movement of vehicles, persons or animals, or any
combination thereof, which either moves together and as a body so as to in some way impede or affect
the free and unobstructed flow of traffic, or which moves so that some part thereof is in violation of one
or more traffic laws or regulation, if the movement is without a permit hereunder.
(B) Permit required. It is unlawful to sponsor or participate in a parade for which no permit has
been obtained from the city, and it is also unlawful to obtain a parade permit and not conduct the same in
accordance with a permit granted by the city. Application for the permit shall be made to the City Clerk
and accompanied by a fee which may be set by resolution of the Council, at least 14 days in advance of
the date on which it is to occur and shall state the sponsoring organization or individuals, the route, the
length, the estimated time of commencement and termination, the general composition, and the
application shall be executed by the individuals applying therefor or the duly authorized agent or
representative of the sponsoring organization.
(C) Procedure and granting.
(1) The City Clerk shall forthwith refer all applications for parades to the Director of Public
Safety for his or her consideration which shall take no longer than seven days.
(2) If any state trunk highways are in the route the Director of Public Safety shall make all
necessary arrangements with the State Department of Highways for alternate routes or whatever may be
necessary.
(3) If the Director of Public Safety finds that a parade will not cause a hazard to persons or
property, and will cause no great inconvenience to the public, and if he or she is able to make
arrangements for necessary direction and control of traffic, he or she shall endorse his or her acceptance
and issue the permit.
(4) If the Director of Public Safety finds the parade described in the application to be a hazard,
a substantial inconvenience, or if he or she is unable to make adequate arrangements for direction or
control of traffic, he or she shall return the same to the City Clerk with his or her reasons for denial, and
the permit shall not be granted unless all conditions and objections of the Director of Public Safety are
met or removed by the applicant.
(1994 Code, ' 7.31) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Chisholm - General Regulations
54
' 95.14 SCHOOL PATROL.
(A) Appointment. The administrative officers of the schools in the city are hereby authorized to
appoint persons from and among the students attending various schools to serve without compensation as
school patrol officers.
(B) Powers and duties.
(1) School patrol officers appointed under authority of this section shall have the same powers
as any police officer to regulate traffic in the vicinity of the school from which they are chosen.
(2) Their duties shall extend to regulating the traffic at intersections near the school for the
prevention of injury to school children and other pedestrian traffic.
(C) Unlawful act. It is a misdemeanor for the driver of any motor vehicle to fail or refuse to obey the
lawful direction of a school patrol officer directing traffic.
(1994 Code, ' 7.32) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 95.15 SLIDING AND COASTING ON PUBLIC SIDEWALKS, STREETS AND AVENUES.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to slide or coast on any public sidewalk, street or avenue, upon any
sled, wagon, toboggan or other similar recreational devices.
(B) It is unlawful for any person to slide or coast on any of the hereinafter designated areas, whether
upon a sidewalk, street or avenue or public right-of-way, upon a fly roller skates, roller blades, roller skis
or skate boards. These activities shall be prohibited in the following designated area:
(1) Lake Street from Fifth Avenue N.W. to Lake Shore Drive;
(2) All Avenues between Lake Street and First Street S.W. and Lake Street and First Street
N.W.;
(3) Service Road on the east and west side of Highway #73 from First Street S.W. to Sixth
Street S.W.;
(4) All tennis courts;
(5) Industrial Drive from Sixth Street S.W. to Highway #169;
(6) Third Avenue N.W. in its entirety; and
(7) Second Avenue from Lake Street to Eighth Street N.W.
(1994 Code, ' 7.33) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Streets and Sidewalks
55
' 95.16 AWNINGS.
It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any awning or other projection attached to a
building and projecting over a public sidewalk or other public property, except that this provision shall
not apply to the awnings and projections erected or installed prior to the effective date of this section.
(1994 Code, ' 7.34) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 95.17 PRIVATE USE OF PUBLIC STREETS AND PARKING LOTS.
(A) Authority, permission and procedure.
(1) Upon an application duly made to the City Clerk and reviewed and recommended by the
Director of Public Safety, the Council may in its discretions grant special permission whereby on-street
parking or the use of city-owned parking lots or ramps or public sidewalks may be temporarily or
permanently prohibited or restricted for private reasons and purposes (including, but not limited to,
establishment of private or Aleased@ parking, Aloading zones@ or display of merchandise on sidewalks)
at places, on terms and for compensation as the Council may deem just and equitable.
(2) In establishing the amount of the compensation to be paid to the city, the Council shall
consider the amount of space, location thereof, loss of parking meter revenues, if any, public
inconvenience and hazards to persons or property.
(3) Upon complaint of any aggrieved person at any time and by reason of any specific special
permission so granted, the Council shall at its next regular meeting after receipt of the complaint, call a
hearing thereon to be held after ten days= notice in writing to applicant, complainant and other persons as
may appear to have interests therein.
(4) After the hearing the Council shall decide whether to terminate, continue or re-define the
terms of the permission and the decision shall be final and binding on all persons directly or indirectly
interested therein, except that the Council may, on its own motion, reconsider the same.
(B) Public vehicles. Free and reserved on-street parking shall be limited to city-owned
and -operated vehicles.
(C) Construction use. The use or blocking of parking stalls or spaces essential to construction work
on abutting premises may be temporarily permitted at the discretion of the Director of Public Safety,
without charge, within the limitations or conditions placed thereon by the Director of Public Safety, and
for a period of time as absolutely essential to the progress or completion of the construction.
(D) Forbidden practices.
(1) It is unlawful for any person to park or otherwise infringe upon a grant of right under this
section, when clearly and distinctly marked or sign-posted.
Chisholm - General Regulations
56
(2) It is unlawful for any person not granted the right to assert the same, or for any grantee of
the right to exceed the same under claim thereto.
(1994 Code, ' 7.40) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Streets and Sidewalks
57
58
CHAPTER 96: NOISE CONTROL
Section
96.01 Unlawful to make a loud or unnecessary noise
' 96.01 UNLAWFUL TO MAKE A LOUD OR UNNECESSARY NOISE.
It is unlawful for any person to make, or cause to be made, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise
which annoys, disturbs or affects the comfort, repose, health or peace of others by any of the following
acts:
(A) Horns and signaling devices. Using, operating or permitting to be used or operated any horn or
signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle, except as a danger warning; or
(B) Radios, video and audio tape and compact disc players. Playing, using, operating or permitting
to be played, used or operated any radio, audio or video tape or compact disc player, phonograph or other
machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in a manner so as to annoy, disturb or affect
the comfort, repose, health or peace of a person or persons of ordinary sensibilities.
(1) The play, use or operation of any radio, audio or video tape or compact disc player,
phonograph or other machine for the production or reproduction of sound in a manner so as to be plainly
audible at a distance of 50 feet from the machine or device shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of
this section.
(2) When any sound violating this section is produced or reproduced by a machine or device
that is located in or on a vehicle, it is unlawful for the owner of a vehicle, or the person in charge or
control of the vehicle if the owner is not then present in the vehicle to allow the sound.
(3) This section shall not apply to sound produced by the following:
(a) Amplifying equipment used in connection with activities which are authorized,
sponsored or permitted by the city so long as the activity is conducted pursuant to the conditions of the
license, permit or contract authorizing the activity;
(b) Church belts, chimes or carillons;
(c) School bells;
(d) Chisholm High School Band;
Noise Control
59
(e) Anti-theft devices; and
(f) Machines or devices for the production of sound on or in authorized emergency
vehicles.
(4) With the exception of the machines or devices listed in division (B)(3) above, this section
shall apply to all radios, audio and video tape and compact disc players, phonographs and machines and
devices for the production or reproduction of sound, whether on public or private property.
(Ord. 105, passed 6-10-2003) Penalty, see ' 10.99
1
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
110. GENERAL REGULATIONS AND LICENSING
111. BUSINESSES REGULATED
112. PAWNBROKERS
113. TOBACCO AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS
114. LIQUOR REGULATIONS
Chisholm - Business Regulations
2
3
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL REGULATIONS AND LICENSING
Section
110.01 Definitions
110.02 Applications
110.03 Action on application for license
110.04 Carrying
110.05 Violation for property owners
110.06 Responsibility of licensee
110.07 License fees
110.08 Conditional licenses
110.09 Posting and distributing printed matter
110.10 License denial and fixing rates; hearing
110.11 Insurance requirements
110.12 Renewal of licenses
' 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
APPLICANT. Any person making an application for a license under this chapter.
APPLICATION. A form with blanks or spaces thereon, to be filled in and completed by the
applicant as his or her request for a license, furnished by the city and uniformly required as a prerequisite
to the consideration of the issuance of a license for a business.
BOND. A corporate surety document in the form and with the provisions acceptable and
specifically approved by the city.
BUSINESS. Any activity, occupation, sale of goods or services, or transaction that is either
licensed or regulated, or both licensed and regulated, by the terms and conditions of this chapter.
LICENSE. A document issued by the city to an applicant permitting him or her to carry on and
transact a business.
LICENSEE. An applicant who, pursuant to his or her application, holds a valid, current, unexpired
and un-revoked license from the city for carrying on a business.
Chisholm - Business Regulations
4
LICENSE FEE. The money paid to the city pursuant to an application and prior to issuance of a
license to transact and carry on a business.
SALE, SELL and SOLD. All forms of barter and all manner or means of furnishing merchandise to
persons.
(1994 Code, ' 6.01)
' 110.02 APPLICATIONS.
All applications shall be made as follows.
(A) All applications shall be made at the office of the City Clerk upon forms that have been
formulated by the city for those purposes.
(B) All initial applications shall be accompanied by a payment of a single $25 fee to cover the cost
of investigation as herein provided.
(C) All the applications must be subscribed, sworn to and include, but not be limited to, the
following:
(1) Applicant=s name and citizenship;
(2) Applicant=s present address and length of time he or she has lived at that address;
(3) Applicant=s occupation and length of time so engaged;
(4) Applicant=s addresses and occupations for the three years next preceding the date of
application;
(5) Names and addresses of applicant=s employers, if any, for the three years next preceding
the date of application;
(6) Whether or not applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, gross misdemeanor or
misdemeanor, including violation of a municipal ordinance but excluding traffic violations, and if so, the
date and place of conviction and the nature of the offense;
(7) Type of license and location of premises for which application is made;
(8) At least four character references if applicant has not resided in the city for two years next
preceding the date of application; and
(9) Other information as the Council shall deem necessary considering the nature of the
business for which license application is made.
General Regulations and Licensing
5
(D) It is unlawful for any applicant to intentionally make a false statement or omission upon any
application form. Any false statement in the application, or any willful omission to state any information
called for on the application form, shall, upon discovery of the falsehood work an automatic refusal of
license, or if already issued, shall render any license or permit issued pursuant thereto, void, and of no
effect to protect the applicant from prosecution for violation of this chapter, or any part hereof.
(E) The City Clerk shall, upon receipt of each application completed in accordance herewith,
forthwith investigate the truth of statements made therein and the moral character and business reputation
of each applicant for license to an extent as he or she deems necessary. For the investigation, the City
Clerk may enlist the aid of the Chief of Public Safety. The Council shall not consider an application
before the investigation has been completed.
(F) Applications for renewal licenses may be made in an abbreviated form as the Council may by
resolution adopt.
(1994 Code, ' 6.02) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 110.03 ACTION ON APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
(A) Granting. The Council may grant any application for the period of the remainder of the then
current calendar year or for the entire ensuing license year. All applications, including proposed license
periods, must be consistent with this chapter.
(B) Issuing. If an application is granted, the City Clerk shall forthwith issue a license pursuant
thereto in the form prescribed by the Council upon proof of ownership, payment of the appropriate
license fee, and approval of the bond or insurance as to form and surety or carrier, if required. All licenses
shall be on a calendar-year basis beginning January 1 and ending December 31. Unless otherwise herein
specified, license fees shall be pro-rated on the basis of one-twelfth for each calendar month, or part
thereof remaining in the then current license year. Licenses shall be valid only at one location and on the
premises therein described. In order to effectuate the change in license year, the City Clerk is hereby
authorized to credit the applicant for any unearned portion of a license fee, or charge a pro-rated amount
only.
(C) Transfer. No license shall be transferable between persons without prior consent of the Council
and payment of the investigation fee. No license shall be transferable to a different location without prior
consent of the Council and upon payment of the fee for a duplicate license. It is unlawful to make any
transfer in violation of this division (C).
(D) Termination. Licenses shall terminate only by expiration or revocation.
(E) Refusal and revocation. The Council may, for any reasonable cause, refuse to grant any
application or revoke any license. No license shall be granted to a person of questionable moral character
or business reputation. Before revocation of any license, the Council shall give notice to the licensee and
grant the licensee opportunity to be heard. Notice to be given and the exact time of hearing shall be stated
in the resolution calling for the hearing.
Chisholm - Business Regulations
6
(F) Duplicate license. Duplicates of all original licenses may be issued by the City Clerk, without
action by the Council, upon licensee=s affidavit that the original has been lost, and upon payment of a fee
of $5 for issuance of the duplicate. All duplicate licenses shall be clearly marked ADUPLICATE@.
(1994 Code, ' 6.03)
' 110.04 CARRYING.
(A) All licensees shall post their licenses in their place of business near the licensed activity;
provided, however, that in the case of machine or other device licensing, the city may provide a sticker
for the current license year which shall be affixed to each machine or device requiring the sticker.
(B) All licensees shall display their licenses upon demand by any officer or citizen.
(1994 Code, ' 6.04)
' 110.05 VIOLATION FOR PROPERTY OWNERS.
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly permit any real property owned or controlled by him or
her to be used, without a license, for any business for which a license is required by this chapter.
(1994 Code, ' 6.05) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 110.06 RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEE.
The conduct of agents and employees of a person to whom a license or permit is issued shall be
deemed the conduct of the licensee himself or herself.
(1994 Code, ' 6.06)
' 110.07 LICENSE FEES.
License fees for all licenses required in this chapter shall be adopted, and from time to time amended
and revised, by resolution of the Council, which resolution, bearing the effective date thereof, shall be
kept on file in the office of the City Clerk, and open to public inspection. The fees when so adopted shall
be uniformly enforced.
(1994 Code, ' 6.07)
' 110.08 CONDITIONAL LICENSES.
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the Council may, upon a finding of the
necessity therefor, place the conditions and restrictions upon a license as it, in its discretion, may deem
reasonable and justified.
General Regulations and Licensing
7
(1994 Code, ' 6.09)
' 110.09 POSTING AND DISTRIBUTING PRINTED MATTER.
(A) Posting. It is unlawful for any person to attach any printed matter of any kind to any public or
private building, bridge, fence, railing, utility pole or billboard, or any other public or private property in
the city without first having obtained a license therefor.
(B) Distribution. It is unlawful for any person to distribute any printed matter door-to-door or
place-to-place within the city without first having obtained a license therefor.
(C) Prohibitions. It is unlawful for any person to attach any printed matter to any property not
owned or controlled by him or her without the permission of the owner, or insert printed matter in the
vehicle without permission.
(D) Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to posting notices required by law, or
to the distribution of newspapers, or to churches, lodges, schools or other recognized non-profit
organizations and colleges distributing bills advertising meetings or athletic or other events, or to any fair
association distributing its own advertising matter.
(1994 Code, ' 6.10) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 110.10 LICENSE DENIAL AND FIXING RATES; HEARING.
(A) Right to deny.
(1) The Council reserves to itself the right to deny any application for a license to operate any
business licensed or regulated under this chapter where the business involves service to the public, rates
charged for service, use of public streets or other public property by the applicant or the public, or the
public health, safety and convenience.
(2) The Council may also consider the location of the business in making the determination;
provided, however, that before making the determination, the Council shall hold a public hearing thereon
pursuant to the notice to interested parties and the public as it may deem necessary or proper in action
calling for the hearing.
(B) Rates. Where, under specific provisions of this chapter, the Council has reserved to itself the
right to fix or approve fees, rates or charges of a licensed or regulated business, the rates shall be uniform
for each category or class of service, and no licensee or proprietor of a regulated business shall claim or
demand payment in excess thereof.
(C) Hearing.
(1) Any applicant or licensee under this chapter who challenges denial of a license or rates
Chisholm - Business Regulations
8
fixed or approved by the Council shall have a right to a hearing before the Council upon written request
therefor.
(2) Notice of time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be given to those persons and by
means as the Council may determine in calling the hearing.
(1994 Code, ' 6.11)
' 110.11 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Whenever insurance is required by a section of this chapter, after approval by the Council, but
before the license shall issue, the applicant shall file with the City Clerk a policy or certificate of public
liability insurance showing:
(1) That the limits are at least as high as required;
(2) That coverage is effective for at least the license term approved; and
(3) That the insurance will not be cancelled or terminated without 30 days= written notice
served upon the City Clerk.
(B) Cancellation or termination of the coverage shall be grounds for license revocation.
(1994 Code, ' 6.12)
' 110.12 RENEWAL OF LICENSES.
(A) Applications for renewal of an existing license shall be made at least 30 days prior to the date of
expiration of the license, and shall contain information as is required by the city.
(B) This time requirement may be waived by the Council for good and sufficient cause.
(1994 Code, ' 6.13)
9
CHAPTER 111: BUSINESSES REGULATED
Section
111.01 Mechanical amusement devices
111.02 Billiards, pool and bowling
111.03 Dances
111.04 Shows
111.05 Peddlers
111.06 Transient photographers
111.07 Junk dealers
111.08 Draymen
111.09 Gambling
111.10 Lodging tax
111.11 Plumbers
111.12 Sheet metal worker
111.13 Gas installer
111.14 Kennels
111.15 Taxicabs
111.16 Massage parlors
' 111.01 MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
COIN AMUSEMENT. Any machine which, upon the insertion of a coin, token or slug,
operates or may be operated by the public generally for entertainment or amusement, which machine
emits music, noise or displays motion pictures.
GAME OF SKILL. Any device, excepting pool and billiard tables, bowling alleys and
shooting lanes, but including miniatures thereof, played by manipulating special equipment and
propelling balls or other projectiles across a board or field into respective positions whereby a score is
established, the object of which is to secure a special number or numbers or a high or low total score or
any other method used to indicate a winner which may be played by the public generally at a price paid
either directly or indirectly for the privilege, whether a prize is offered for the game or not.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Includes both games of skill and coin amusement
as herein defined.
OPERATOR. The person who keeps or allows amusement devices to be kept on premises
Chisholm - Business Regulations
10
owned by him or her or under his or her control which may be played by the public generally at a price
paid either directly or indirectly for this privilege.
OWNER. Any person who owns and places amusement devices by whatever arrangement on
the operator=s premises.
(B) License required. It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain a mechanical amusement
device for use by the public without first having obtained a license therefor from the city.
(C) Transfer. Notwithstanding provisions of this chapter to the contrary, a license shall be
transferable to a different location upon filing notice with the City Clerk of the transfer and payment of
the duplicate license fee.
(D) Unlawful use and devices. It is unlawful for any person to: sell or maintain a machine or device
which is for gambling or contains an automatic pay-off device; give any prize, award, merchandise, gift
or thing of value to any person on account of operation of the device; sell or maintain, or permit to be
operated in his or her place of business, any mechanical amusement device equipped with an automatic
pay-off device; or equip any mechanical amusement device with an automatic pay-off device.
(E) License restrictions. No license shall be granted to an applicant for more than 12 games of skill
at any established business.
(1994 Code, ' 6.20) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 111.02 BILLIARDS, POOL AND BOWLING.
(A) License required. It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any pool, billiard, snooker or
other game table, or any bowling alley (bowling lane), available for public use without first having
obtained a license from the city.
(B) Practices prohibited. It is unlawful for any:
(1) Minor to play pool, billiards, snooker or other table game where beer or liquor is sold or
consumed, unless accompanied by his or her parent or guardian; or
(2) For any licensee to cause or permit any minor to play pool, billiards, snooker or other
similar table game where beer or liquor is sold or consumed unless the minor is accompanied by his or
her parent or guardian.
(1994 Code, ' 6.21) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 111.03 DANCES.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Businesses Regulated
11
PUBLIC DANCE. Any dance wherein the public may participate by payment, directly or
indirectly, of an admission fee or price for dancing, which fee may be in the form of a club membership,
or payment of money, directly or indirectly.
PUBLIC DANCING PLACE. Any room, place or space open to public patronage in which
dancing, wherein the public may participate, is carried on and to which admission may be had by the
public by payment, directly or indirectly, of an admission fee or price for dancing.
(B) License required. It is unlawful for any person to operate a public dancing place, or hold a
public dance, as herein defined, without first having obtained a license therefor from the city; provided
that this section shall not be applicable to any dance sponsored by a local school or the city and held on its
property and no license shall be required for any such sponsored dance.
(C) Dance regulations.
(1) Sale of liquor prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to sell or give away, directly or
indirectly, any intoxicating liquor or permit or suffer the same to be sold or given away in any public
dancing place, unless the premises are properly licensed therefor.
(2) Obscenity and immorality prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to dance, or for a
licensee to permit or suffer any person to dance at any public dance in an indecent or immodest manner.
It is also unlawful for any person at a public dance to speak in a rude, boisterous, obscene or indecent
manner or for any licensee to suffer or permit any person so to act or speak in any public dancing place.
(3) Certain persons prohibited. No person to whom a permit has been issued shall permit to be
or remain in any public dancing place any intoxicated person, any prostitute, any person of known
immorality or any unmarried person under the age of 16 years, unless the person is accompanied by a
parent or guardian, nor any unmarried person more than 16, and under the age of 18 years unless the
person is accompanied by a parent or guardian or presents the written consent of his or her parent or
guardian to the officer in charge of the dance, and every written permit shall be retained by the officer.
(4) Police officer. Before issuance of a dance license, the applicant must make arrangements
for and show evidence of privately retaining at least one regular city police officer or auxiliary police
officer to be present at every public dance during all of the time the dance is being held.
(5) Hours of dancing. Public dances shall not be held or conducted between the hours of 1:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day.
(1994 Code, ' 6.22) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 111.04 SHOWS.
(A) License required. It is unlawful for any person to present any public show, movie, caravan,
circus, carnival, theatrical or other performance or exhibition without first having obtained a license
therefor from the city.
Chisholm - Business Regulations
12
(B) Exceptions.
(1) Performances presented in the local schools and colleges, under the sponsorship of the
schools and colleges, and primarily for the students thereof only;
(2) Performances of athletic, musical or theatrical events sponsored by local schools or
colleges using student talent only; and
(3) Any performance or event in, or sponsored by, bona fide local church and non-profit
organizations, provided that the organization shall be incorporated.
(1994 Code, ' 6.23) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 111.05 PEDDLERS.
(A) Purpose. This section is not intended to interfere with legitimate business activities of peddlers
as the same are herein defined, whether the same be local or interstate. These provisions are intended
only to, as nearly as possible, ferret out the illegitimate or confidence operators and to regulate and
control all those who would use their unique presence on property within the city, either in person or by
means of a telephone contact, or their unique proximity to its residents, for purposes of harassment,
nuisance, theft or other unlawful activities.
(B) Definition. The term PEDDLER as used in this section, means and includes door-to-door,
street-to-street, place-to-place or temporary vendors of sales or services without a fixed, determined and
permanent location at which he or she transacts his or her business, carries on his or her occupation or
practices his or her profession, and includes, but is not limited to, persons commonly referred to as
peddlers, solicitors, transient merchants and canvassers.
(C) License not required. No license shall be required of peddlers but the applicant shall register
with the office of the Department of Public Safety and furnish to it the personal background information
and data as to his or her business and mode of operation as may reasonably be required of him or her. It is
unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a peddler without having first registered as herein
required.
(D) Hours of solicitation. The hours of solicitation for peddlers in the city shall be as follows: May 1
to October 31, from 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. and from November 1 to April 30, from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
(1994 Code, ' 6.25) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 111.06 TRANSIENT PHOTOGRAPHERS.
(A) Definition. The term TRANSIENT PHOTOGRAPHER as used in this section means a person
who does not maintain a studio within the city equipped for finishing processes except an isolated case of
making a portrait or taking a photograph, and the isolated case shall involve no more than one order per
calendar month.
Businesses Regulated
13
(B) License required. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a transient
photographer without first having obtained a license therefor from the city.
(1994 Code, ' 6.26) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 111.07 JUNK DEALERS.
(A) Definition. The term JUNK as used in this section, means and includes, but is not limited to,
scrap of all kinds such as metal, paper, rags and wood.
(B) License required. It is unlawful for any person to deal in junk without having a license therefor
from the city.
(C) Restrictions.
(1) No license shall be issued to an applicant who shall have been convicted within one year of
the date of application of a violation of this section, nor to any person who has within the five preceding
years been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving stolen property.
(2) Every licensee shall maintain a record of the name and residence address of every person
with whom a transaction is consummated, the date of the purchase and the amount paid. The record shall
be posted daily and shall be open for inspection by the Police Department at all reasonable times.
(1994 Code, ' 6.27)
' 111.08 DRAYMEN.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of draying within the city without first having
obtained a license therefor.
(1994 Code, ' 6.28) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 111.09 GAMBLING.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BOARD. The Charitable Gambling Control Board or the Charitable Gambling Control
Commission.
LAWFUL GAMBLING. The operation, conduct or sale of bingo, raffles, paddlewheels,
tipboards and pull-tabs for a lawful purpose as herein defined.
LAWFUL PURPOSE.
Chisholm - Business Regulations
14
(a) One or more of the following:
1. Benefitting persons by enhancing their opportunity for religious or educational
advancement, by relieving or protecting them from disease, suffering or distress, by contributing to their
physical well-being, by assisting them in establishing themselves in life as worthy and useful citizens, or
by increasing their comprehension of and devotion to the principles upon which this nation was founded;
2. Initiating, performing or fostering worthy public works or enabling or furthering
the erection or maintenance of public structures;
3. Lessening the burdens borne by government or voluntarily supporting,
augmenting or supplementing services which government would normally render to the people; or
4. The improving, expanding, maintaining or repairing of real property owned or
leased by an organization.
(b) LAWFUL PURPOSE does not include the erection or acquisition of any real property,
unless the Board specifically authorizes the expenditures after finding that the property will be used
exclusively for one or more of the purposes specified herein.
ORGANIZATION. Any fraternal, religious, veterans or other non-profit organization, under
the designation, 501(c)(3), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10)).
PROFIT. The gross receipts collected from lawful gambling, less reasonable sums necessarily
and actually expended for gambling supplies and equipment, prizes, rent and utilities used during the
gambling occasions, compensation paid to members for conducting gambling, taxes imposed by statute
and maintenance of devices used in lawful gambling.
TRADE AREA. An area following the school boundaries of the city.
(B) Gambling forms and eligibility. All forms of legal gambling may be carried on, but only by an
organization, and subject to the provisions of this section and M.S. '' 349.11 through 349.22, as it may
be amended from time to time.
(C) Gambling regulations.
(1) State regulation adopted. Chapter 7860 of Minnesota Rules 1987 is hereby incorporated by
reference into this section, provided that nothing in the Rules shall be deemed to amend or change any
provision of the city code. It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of Chapter 7860 of
Minnesota Rules 1987.
(2) Records. Each organization licensed pursuant to this section shall file with city and
Gambling Control Board or Commission, copies of any and all records and/or reports that it is required to
file with the Gambling Control Board of the state, and the records and/or reports shall be filed
simultaneously with the filing of the Gambling Control Board of the state. In addition, each and every
Businesses Regulated
15
organization licensed pursuant to this section shall file with the City Clerk and Gambling
Commission/Board an annual report of their receipts and expenditures on a calendar year basis and the
report shall be filed with the city and Gambling Commission/Board on or before January 15 of each and
every year. In addition to expenditure reports, a list of all organizations that have requested funds and a
list of those that have received funds. Any violation of this division (C)(2) will result in revocation of the
charitable gambling organizations permit issued by the city, for a period of one year.
(3) Special bingo regulations. Bingo shall only be conducted by an organization which has
been in existence for at least three years, has at least 30 active members, and on premises which it owns.
(4) Age restrictions.
(a) It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to conduct or participate in the playing
of the game of pull-tabs.
(b) It is unlawful for any person to sell pull-tabs to any person under the age of 18.
(c) Proof of age for purchasing pull-tabs may be established only by a valid driver=s
license or state identification card, or in the case of a foreign national by a valid passport.
(5) Sale of pull-tabs.
(a) In the playing of pull-tabs, it is unlawful for any person to sell or purchase pull-tabs
except on a cash basis and checks. Credit cards and all other forms of consideration shall not be allowed.
(b) A jar operator may refuse to sell pull-tabs to any person if the jar operator believes the
sale would be in violation of any law or regulation.
(c) The jar operator shall hand the pull-tabs that are purchased to the player. A player shall
never be allowed to reach into the container to select pull-tabs.
(d) Under no circumstances shall a jar operator assist a player in the opening of pull-tabs.
(e) It is unlawful for any person to evade or circumvent or attempt to evade or circumvent
any of the provisions of this section or any state law or regulation by having someone else purchase
pull-tabs for the person.
(f) It is unlawful for any jar operator or other gambling employee of the organization
operating the gambling to either orally, in writing or otherwise provide any information to any other
person about the total number of winners played or the number of denominations of winners left in the
jar.
(6) Charitable organizations.
(a) Every charitable gambling organization, facility or establishment licensed by the state
to conduct pull-tab lawful gambling in the city shall pay to the city an amount equal to 10% of the net
Chisholm - Business Regulations
16
profits derived from lawful gambling conducted at premises within the jurisdiction of the city. For
purposes of this division, net profits are gross profits less amounts expended for allowable expenses and
paid in taxes assessed on lawful gambling computed on a calendar year basis. The payment shall be made
to the City Clerk no later than March 1.
(b) A licensed organization conducting lawful gambling within the city must expend 75%
of its expenditures for lawful purposes as described in M.S. ' 349.12(25), as it may be amended from
time to time, and within the city=s trade area.
(c) The amount of the lease payment that an organization shall pay to a lessor for premises
leased for lawful gambling may not exceed $24 per square foot per month. No charity shall pay lease
payments in excess of $1,000 per month to any establishment in the city licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages and no lease shall be based on a percentage of gross receipts or profits. For the purpose of this
section, any money or other thing of value given by a charity directly or indirectly to the liquor
establishment or to any other entity in furtherance of the liquor establishment=s interests shall be
considered a Alease payment@, regardless of the stated purpose of the transaction. No liquor
establishment shall accept lease payments in excess of the lawful limit.
(1994 Code, ' 6.29) (Ord. 100, passed 6-11-2002; Ord. 148, passed 9-22-2009; Ord. 159, passed
9-25-2012) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 111.10 LODGING TAX.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
LODGER. The person obtaining lodging from an operator.
LODGING. The furnishing for a consideration, of lodging by a hotel, motel, rooming house or
tourist court, except where the lodging shall be for a continuous period of 30 days or more to the same
lodger(s). The furnishing of rooms by religious, educational or non-profit organizations shall not
constitute LODGING for purposes of this section.
OPERATOR. A person who provides lodging to others or any officer, agent or employee of
the person.
PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, estate, receiver, trustee,
executor, administrator, assignee, syndicate or any other combination of individuals. Whenever the term
PERSON is used in any provision of this section prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied
to a corporation, association or partnership, shall mean the officers, or partners thereof as the case may
be.
RENT. The total consideration valued in money charged for lodging whether paid in money or
otherwise, but shall not include any charges for services rendered in connection with furnishing lodging
other than the room charge itself.
Businesses Regulated
17
TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The City Clerk.
(B) Imposition of tax. There is hereby imposed a tax of 3% on the rent charged by an operator for
providing lodging to any person after March 16, 1988. The tax shall be stated and charged separately and
shall be collected by the operator from the lodger. The tax collected by the operator shall be a debt owed
by the operator to the city and shall be extinguished only by payment to the city. In no case shall the tax
imposed by this section upon an operator exceed the amount of tax which the operator is authorized and
required by this section to collect from the lodger.
(C) Collections. Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this section at the time the rent is
paid. The tax collections shall be deemed to be held in trust by the operator for the city. The amount of
tax shall be separately stated from the rent charged for the lodging and those persons paying the tax shall
receive a receipt of payment from the operator.
(D) Exemptions. An exemption shall be granted to any person as to whom or whose occupancy it is
beyond the power of the city to tax. No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at
the time the rent is collected and a claim shall be made in writing and under penalty of perjury on forms
provided by the Tax Administrator. All claims shall be forwarded to the Tax Administrator when the
rents and collections are submitted as required by this section.
(E) Advertising no tax. It is unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to the public
or any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the
operator, or that it will not be added to the rent or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded. In
computing the tax to be collected, amounts of tax less than $0.01 shall be considered an additional cent.
(F) Payment and returns.
(1) The taxes imposed by this section shall be paid by the operator to the Tax Administrator
monthly not later than 25 days after the end of the month in which the taxes were collected.
(a) At the time of payment the operator shall submit a return upon forms and containing
information as the Tax Administrator may require.
(b) The return shall contain the following minimum information:
1. The total amount of rent collected for lodging during the period covered by the
return;
2. The amount of tax required to be collected and due for the period;
3. The signature of the person filing the return or that of his or her agent duly
authorized in writing;
4. The period covered by the return; and
5. The amount of uncollectible rental charges subject to the lodging tax.
Chisholm - Business Regulations
18
(2) The operator may offset against the taxes payable with respect to any reporting period, the
amount of taxes imposed by this section previously paid as a result of any transaction the consideration
for which became uncollectible during the reporting period, but only in proportion to the portion of the
consideration which became uncollectible.
(G) Examination of return, adjustments, notices and demands. The Tax Administrator shall, after
return is filed, examine the same and make any investigation or examination of the records and accounts
of the person making the return deemed necessary for determining its correctness. The tax computed on
the basis of the examination shall be the tax to be paid. If the tax due is found to be greater than that paid,
the excess shall be paid to the Tax Administrator ten days after receipt of a notice thereof given either
personally or sent by registered mail to the address shown on the return. If the tax paid is greater than the
tax found to be due, the excess shall be refunded to the person who paid the tax to the Tax Administrator
ten days after determination of the refund.
(H) Refunds. Any person may apply to the Tax Administrator for a refund of taxes paid for a
prescribed period in excess of the amount legally due for that period; provided that no application for
refund shall be considered unless filed within one year after the tax was paid, or within one year from the
filing of the return, whichever period is the longer. The Tax Administrator shall examine the claim and
make and file written findings thereon denying or allowing the claim in whole or in part and shall mail a
notice thereof by registered mail to the person at the address stated upon the return. If the claim is
allowed in whole or in part, the Tax Administrator shall credit the amount of the allowance against any
taxes due under this section from the claimant and the balance of the allowance, if any, shall be paid by
the Tax Administrator to the claimant.
(I) Failure to file a return.
(1) If any operator required by this section to file a return shall fail to do so within the time
prescribed, or shall make, willfully or otherwise, an incorrect, false or fraudulent return, the operator
shall, upon written notice and demand, file the return or corrected return within five days of receipt of the
written notice and shall at the same time pay any tax due on the basis thereof. If the person shall fail to
file the return or corrected return, the Tax Administrator shall make a return or corrected return, for the
person from the knowledge and information as the Tax Administrator can obtain, and assess a tax on the
basis thereof, which tax (less any payments theretofore made on account of the tax for the taxable period
covered by the return) shall be paid within five days of the receipt of written notice and demand for the
payment. Any return or assessment made by the Tax Administrator shall be prima facie correct and valid,
and the person shall have the burden of establishing its incorrectness or invalidity in any action or
proceeding in respect thereto.
(2) If any portion of a tax imposed by this section, including penalties thereon, is not paid
within 30 days after it is required to be paid, the City Attorney may institute legal action as may be
necessary to recover the amount due plus interest, penalties, the costs and disbursements of any action.
(3) Upon a showing of good cause, the Tax Administrator may grant an operator one 30-day
extension of time within which to file a return and make payment of taxes as required by this section
provided that interest during that period of extension shall be added to the taxes due at the rate of 10% per
Businesses Regulated
19
annum.
(J) Penalties.
(1) If any tax imposed by this section is not paid within the time herein specified for the
payment, or any extension thereof, there shall be added thereto a specific penalty equal 10% of the
amount remaining unpaid.
(2) In case of any failure to make and file a return within the time prescribed by this section,
unless it is shown that the failure is not due to willful neglect, there shall be added to the tax in addition to
the 10% specific penalty provided in division (A) above, 10% if the failure is for not more than 30 days
with an additional 5% for each additional 30 days or fraction thereof during which the failure continued,
not exceeding 25% in the aggregate. If the penalty as computed does not exceed $10, a minimum penalty
of $10 shall be assessed. The amount so added to any tax shall be collected at the same time and the same
manner and as a part of the tax unless the tax has been paid before the discovery of the negligence, in
which case the amount so added shall be collected in the same manner as the tax.
(3) If any person willfully fails to file any return or make any payment required by this section,
or willfully files a false or fraudulent return or willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any tax
or payment thereof, there shall also be imposed as a penalty an amount equal to 50% of any tax (less any
amounts paid on the basis of the false or fraudulent return) found due for the period to which the return
related. The penalty imposed by this division shall be collected as part of the tax, and shall be in addition
to any other penalties provided by this section.
(4) All payments received shall be credited first to penalties, next to interest, and then to the tax
due.
(5) The amount of tax not timely paid, together with any penalty provided by this division,
shall bear interest at the maximum rate per annum as prescribed by M.S. ' 469.190(7) from the time the
tax should have been paid until paid. Any interest and penalty shall be added to the tax and be collected as
part thereof.
(K) Administration of tax. The Tax Administrator shall administer and enforce the assessment and
collection of the taxes imposed by this section. The Tax Administrator shall cause to be prepared blank
forms for the returns and other documents required by this section and shall distribute the same
throughout the city and furnish them on application, but failure to receive or secure them shall not relieve
any person from any obligation required of him or her under this section.
(L) Examine records. The Tax Administrator and those persons acting on behalf of the Tax
Administrator authorized in writing by the Tax Administrator or the city may examine the books, papers
and records of any operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return was made,
to ascertain the tax as provided in this section. Every operator is directed and required to give to the
person authorized to examine the books, papers and records, the means, facilities and opportunity for
such examination and investigations as are hereby authorized.
(M) Unlawful acts. It is unlawful for any person to willfully fail to make a return required by this
Chisholm - Business Regulations
20
section; to fail to pay the tax after written demand for payment; to fail to remit the taxes collected or any
penalty or interest imposed by this section after written demand for such payment; or to refuse to permit
the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized agents or employees to examine the books, records and
papers under his or her control; or to willfully make any incomplete, false or fraudulent return.
(N) Use of proceeds. Five percent of the proceeds obtained from the collection of taxes pursuant to
this section shall be paid to the Tax Administrator for costs of collection. Ninety-five percent of the
proceeds obtained from the collection of taxes pursuant to this section shall be used in accordance with
M.S. ' 469.190, as it may be amended from time to time, as the same may be amended from time to time
for the purpose of marketing and promoting the city as a tourist or convention center.
(O) Appeals.
(1) Any operator aggrieved by any notice, order or determination made by the Tax
Administrator under this section may file a petition for review of the notice, order or determination
detailing the operator=s reasons for contesting the notice, order or determination. The petition shall
contain the name of the petitioner, the petitioner=s address and the location of the lodging subject to the
order, notice or determination.
(2) The petition shall be filed with the Tax Administrator within ten days after the notice, order
or determination for which review is sought has been mailed or served upon the person requesting
review.
(3) Upon receipt of the petition, the Tax Administrator shall set a date and time for a meeting
with the petitioner and shall give the petitioner at least five days prior written notice of the date, time and
place of the meeting.
(4) At the meeting, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show cause why the notice,
order or determination should be modified or withdrawn. If the meeting does not result in the matter
being resolved to the satisfaction of the petitioner, the petitioner may appeal to the Council.
(5) A petitioner seeking to appeal a decision to the Council must file a written notice of appeal
with the Council, in care of the City Clerk, within ten days after the Tax Administrator=s decision
following the meeting has been mailed to the petitioner. The matter will thereupon be placed on the
Council agenda as soon as is practical. At least five days prior to the hearing before the Council, the Tax
Administrator shall prepare and serve on the petitioner a memorandum of proposed findings of fact and
conclusions of law. A copy of the memorandum shall be presented to the Council at the time of the
appeal hearing. The Council shall then review the proposed findings of fact and conclusions to determine
whether they are correct. Upon a determination by the Council that findings and conclusions are
incorrect, the Council may modify, reverse or affirm the decision of the Tax Administrator based upon an
application of this section and the evidence presented.
(1994 Code, 6.31)
' 111.11 PLUMBERS.
Businesses Regulated
21
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the work or business of plumbing or the installation of
water or sewer pipes without a license therefor from the state.
(Ord. 107, passed 10-26-2004) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 111.12 SHEET METAL WORKER.
(A) License required. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the sheet metal business without a
license therefor from the state.
(B) Bond required. Before a license shall be granted to any person, he or she shall execute and
deposit with the City Clerk a surety bond in the amount of $1,000, which bond shall be approved by the
Council and in a form approved by the City Attorney, and conditioned to indemnify and save the city
harmless from all liability and damage caused by the negligence, of any nature, covering the work done
under the license.
(1994 Code, ' 6.41) (Ord. 107, passed 10-26-2004) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 111.13 GAS INSTALLER.
(A) License required. It is unlawful for any person to install, alter, service or repair gas piping,
appliances or appurtenances without a license therefor from the state.
(B) Bond required. Before a license shall be granted to any person, he or she shall execute and
deposit with the City Clerk a surety bond in the amount of $5,000, which bond shall be approved by the
Council and in a form approved by the City Attorney, and conditioned to indemnify and save the city
harmless from all liability and damage caused by the negligence, of any nature, covering the work done
under the license, and conditioned further that all work shall be performed in accordance with the laws of
the state.
(C) Insurance required. In addition to the surety bond requirement set forth herein, and prior to the
issuance of a license, the applicant shall furnish a certificate of insurance to be filed with the City Clerk
describing a general policy of liability insurance for personal injury and property damage, including
products and completed operation coverage, which shall have minimum limits of not less than $100,000
for injuries to or death of one person, and not less than $300,000 for injuries to or death resulting from
one accident, and not less than $100,000 for property damage.
(D) Additional condition of bonds and insurance policies. Bonds and insurance policies provided
for herein shall, in addition to any other requirement hereof, further provide that no cancellation of the
bond or insurance contract shall be made for any cause without first having given notice to the city 30
days prior to the proposed date of cancellation, of the intention to so cancel. The notice shall be served
upon the City Clerk by certified or registered mail, or by a personal service by an agent of the company.
If the personal service is made, it shall be made only on the City Clerk individually.
(1994 Code, ' 6.42) (Ord. 107, passed 10-26-2004) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Chisholm - Business Regulations
22
' 111.14 KENNELS.
(A) License required. It is unlawful for any person to maintain a kennel where dogs are kept for sale
or boarded without first having obtained a license therefor from the city. For purposes of this section, the
term KENNEL means any place where four or more dogs over six months of age are boarded, bred and
offered for sale.
(B) Restrictions. No kennel shall be licensed at a location within an area zoned residential.
(1994 Code, ' 6.43) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 111.15 TAXICABS.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
DRIVER. The person driving and having physical control over a taxicab whether he or she be
the licensee or in the employ or the licensed operator.
OPERATOR. A licensee owning or otherwise having control of one or more taxicabs.
TAXICAB. Any passenger conveyance being driven, on call or traversing a scheduled or
unscheduled route for public use or hire upon payment of a fare or at regular fare rates, but not including
such as are designed for mass transportation as buses, trains or streetcars.
(B) License required. It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a taxicab without a license
therefor from the city.
(C) License issuance and display, and vehicle marking. All licenses shall be issued for specific
conveyances, except as otherwise herein provided. License tags, including number and year for which
issued, shall be plainly visible from the front of the conveyance. Both sides of every licensed taxicab,
when in use, shall be plainly and permanently marked as such with a painted sign or appurtenances
showing the full or abbreviated name of the licensed operator.
(D) Insurance required. Before a taxicab license is issued by the Council, and at all times effective
during the licensed period, the licensee shall have and maintain public liability and bodily injury
insurance. The insurance shall cover all passengers carried by the insured licensee and shall be for public
taxicab purposes.
(E) Rates. Each applicant shall file with the City Clerk, before a taxicab license is issued or
renewed, a schedule of proposed rates to be charged by him or her during the licensed period for which
the application is made. The schedule of proposed rates shall be approved by the Council before granting
the license. Nothing herein shall prevent a taxicab licensee from petitioning the Council for review of the
rates during the licensed period, and the Council may likewise consider the petition and make new rates
Businesses Regulated
23
effective at any time. No taxicab licensee shall charge rates other than those approved by the Council.
(F) Mechanical condition. Before issuing a taxicab license, the applicant shall present to the
Council a certificate signed by a competent and experienced mechanic showing that the taxicab
conveyance is in good mechanical condition, that it is thoroughly safe for transportation of passengers
and that it is in neat and clean condition. The similar certificate may be required from time to time during
the licensed period. In lieu of the certificate the Council may accept the report of the Chief of Police
relative thereto.
(1994 Code, ' 6.50) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 111.16 MASSAGE PARLORS.
(A) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
MASSAGE. The performance of manipulative exercises upon the human body of another by
rubbing, kneading, stroking or tapping with the hand or hands or with any mechanical or bathing device.
MASSAGE PARLOR. Any place or establishment wherein a massage is made available to the
public for a monetary or valuable consideration.
(B) It is unlawful for any person, partnership or corporation to own, establish, maintain or operate a
massage parlor without a license therefor from the city in accordance with this section.
(C) The annual license fee for a massage parlor is $1,000.
(D) The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) A duly licensed medical doctor, osteopath, chiropractor, nurse or physical therapist while
engaged in the practice of their respective profession;
(2) A person engaging in the practice of massage on his or her spouse or relative within the first
degree of consanguinity in either of their residences; or
(3) A place or establishment which is a duly licensed hospital, dispensary, convalescent home
or nursing home.
(E) In any prosecution for violation of this section, these exceptions shall constitute affirmative
defenses and it shall be incumbent upon the defendant to show that he or she or the place involved is not
subject to the provisions of this section.
(1994 Code, ' 6.51) Penalty, see ' 10.99
24
CHAPTER 112: PAWNBROKERS
Section
112.01 Definitions
112.02 License required
112.03 License fees
112.04 Application required
112.05 Bond required
112.06 Records required
112.07 Daily reports to police
112.08 Receipt required
112.09 Redemption period
112.10 Victims to report their loss and law enforcement to make comparisons
112.11 Police order to hold property
112.12 Inspection of items
112.13 Label required
112.14 Prohibited acts
112.15 Denial, suspension or revocation
112.16 Business at only one place
' 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
BILLABLE TRANSACTION. Every reportable transaction by a pawnbroker is a BILLABLE
TRANSACTION, except renewals, redemptions or extensions of existing pawns on items previously
reported and continuously in the licensee=s possession, voided transactions and confiscations.
PAWNBROKER. Any natural person, partnership or corporation, either as principal, or agent or
employee thereof, who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal property, or other valuable thing, or
who deals in the purchasing of personal property, or other valuable thing on condition of selling the same
back again at a stipulated price, or who loans money secured by chattel mortgage on personal property,
taking possession of the property or any part thereof so mortgaged. To the extent that a
PAWNBROKER=s business includes buying personal property previously used, rented or leased, or
selling it on consignment, the provisions of this section shall be applicable. This definition shall exclude
bondsmen and brokers.
Pawnbrokers
25
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION. Every transaction conducted by a pawnbroker in which
merchandise is received through a pawn, purchase, consignment or trade, or in which a pawn is renewed,
extended or redeemed, or for which a unique transaction number or identifier is generated by their
point-of-sale software, or an item is confiscated by law enforcement, is REPORTABLE, except:
(1) The bulk purchase or consignment of new or used merchandise from a merchant,
manufacturer or wholesaler having an established permanent place of business, and the retail sale of the
merchandise, provided the pawnbroker must maintain a record of the purchase or consignment which
describes each item, and must mark each item in a manner which relates it to that transaction record; and
(2) Retail and wholesale sales of merchandise originally received by pawn or purchase, and for
which all applicable hold and/or redemption periods have expired.
(Ord. 156, passed 5-22-2012)
' 112.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a pawnbroker without a license therefor
from the city.
(Ord. 156, passed 5-22-2012) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 112.03 LICENSE FEES.
(A) The annual license fees for licenses issued under this section shall be $0.60 per billable
transaction payable to the city to be forwarded to the City of Minneapolis for the use of their automated
pawn system program. No other fees shall be charged for one year after which the City Council shall
review the annual license fee and make a determination as to the appropriate payment.
(B) The billable transaction fee reflects the cost of processing transactions and other related
regulatory expenses as determined by the City Council, and shall be reviewed and adjusted, if necessary,
annually. Licensees shall be notified in writing 30 days before any adjustment is implemented.
(C) Billable transaction fees shall be billed monthly and are due and payable within 30 days. Failure
to do so is a violation of this section.
(Ord. 156, passed 5-22-2012) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 112.04 APPLICATION REQUIRED.
(A) If the applicant is a natural person:
(1) The name, place and date of birth, street resident address and phone number of applicant;
(2) Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States or resident alien;
Chisholm - Business Regulations
26
(3) Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a name other than the
applicant=s name, and if so, the name or names used and information concerning dates and places used;
(4) The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a designation, name or style other
than the name of the applicant and a certified copy of the certificate as required by M.S. ' 333.01, as it
may be amended from time to time;
(5) The street address at which the applicant has lived during the preceding five years;
(6) The type, name and location of every business or occupation in which the applicant has
been engaged during the preceding five years and the name(s) and address(es) of the applicant=s
employer(s) and partner(s), if any, for the preceding five years;
(7) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, crime or violation of any
ordinance other than a traffic ordinance. If so, the applicant must furnish information as to the time, place
and offense of all the convictions;
(8) The physical description of the applicant; and
(9) If the applicant does not manage the business, the name of the manager(s) or other
person(s) in charge of the business and all information concerning each of them as required in divisions
(A)(1) through (8) above.
(B) If the applicant is a partnership:
(1) The name(s) and address(es) of all general and limited partners and all information
concerning each general partner required in division (A) above;
(2) The name(s) of the managing partner(s) and the interest of each partner in the licensed
business;
(3) A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with the application. If the
partnership is required to file a certificate as to a trade name pursuant to M.S. ' 333.01, as it may be
amended from time to time, a certified copy of the certificate must be attached to the application; and
(4) If the applicant does not manage the business, the name of the manager(s) or other
person(s) in charge of the business and all information concerning each of them required in divisions
(A)(1) through (8) above.
(C) If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:
(1) The name of the corporation or business firm, and if incorporated, the state of
incorporation;
Pawnbrokers
27
(2) A true copy of the certificate of incorporation, articles of incorporation or association
agreement and by-laws shall be attached to the application. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a
certificate of authority as required by M.S. ' 303.06, as it may be amended from time to time, must be
attached;
(3) The name of the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business and all information
concerning each manager, proprietor or agent required in divisions (A)(1) through (8) above; and
(4) A list of all persons who control or own an interest in excess of 5% in the organization or
business firm or who are officers of the corporation or business firm and all information concerning the
persons required in divisions (A)(1) through (8) above. This division (C)(4), however, shall not apply to
a corporation whose stock is publicly traded on a stock exchange and is applying for a license to be
owned and operated by it.
(D) For all applicants, whether or not the applicant holds a current pawnbroker, precious metal
dealer or secondhand goods dealer license from any other governmental unit, and whether or not the
applicant has previously been denied, or had revoked or suspended, a pawnbroker, precious metal dealer
or secondhand dealer license from any other governmental unit:
(1) The location of the business premises;
(2) If the applicant does not own the business premises, a true and complete copy of the
executed lease;
(3) The legal description of the premises to be licensed;
(4) Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are due and payable for the
premises to be licensed have been paid, and if not paid, the years and amounts that are unpaid;
(5) Whenever the application is for premises either planned or under construction or
undergoing substantial alteration, the application must be accompanied by a set of preliminary plans
showing the design of the proposed premises to be licensed; and
(6) Other information as the City Council or issuing authority may require.
(E) New manager:
(1) When a licensee places a manager in charge of a business, or if the named manager(s) in
charge of a licensed business changes, the licensee must complete and submit the appropriate application
within 14 days. The application must include all appropriate information required in this section; and
(2) Upon completion of an investigation of a new manager, the licensee must pay $15 for the
cost of the investigation to assure compliance with this section.
Chisholm - Business Regulations
28
(F) All applications for a license under this section must be signed and sworn to under oath or
affirmation by the applicant. If the application is that of a natural person, it must be signed and sworn to
by the person; if that of a corporation, by an officer thereof; if that of a partnership, by one of the general
partners; and if that of an unincorporated association, by the manager or managing officer thereof.
(G) The Police Department must investigate into the truthfulness of the statements set forth in the
application and shall endorse the findings thereon. The applicant must furnish to the Police Department
evidence as the investigator may reasonably require in support of the statements set forth in the
application.
(H) No licenses under this section will be issued to an applicant who is a natural person, a
partnership if the applicant has any general partner or managing partner, a corporation or other
organization if the applicant has any manager, proprietor or agent in charge of the business to be licensed,
if the applicant:
(1) Is a minor at the time that the application is filed;
(2) Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the occupation licensed as prescribed by
M.S. ' 364.03(2), as it may be amended from time to time, and has not shown competent evidence of
sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of a licensee under this section as
prescribed by M.S. ' 364.03(3); or
(3) Is not of good moral character or repute.
(Ord. 156, passed 5-22-2012)
' 112.05 BOND REQUIRED.
(A) Before a license will be issued, every applicant must submit a $1,000 bond on the forms
provided by the licensing authority. All bonds must be conditioned that the principal will observe all laws
in relation to pawnbrokers, and will conduct business in conformity thereto, and that the principal will
account for and deliver to any person legally entitled any goods which have come into the principal=s
hand through the principal=s business as a pawnbroker, or in lieu thereof, will pay the reasonable value
in money to the person.
(B) The bond shall contain a provision that no bond may be canceled except upon 30 days written
notice to the city, which shall be served upon licensing authority.
(Ord. 156, passed 5-22-2012)
' 112.06 RECORDS REQUIRED.
At the time of any reportable transaction other than renewals, extensions, redemptions or
confiscations, every licensee must immediately record in English the following information by using ink
or other indelible medium on forms or in a computerized record approved by the Police Department:
Pawnbrokers
29
(A) A complete and accurate description of each item including, but not limited to, any trademark,
identification number, serial number, model number, brand name or other identifying mark on the item;
(B) The purchase price, amount of money loaned upon, or pledged therefor;
(C) The maturity date of the transaction and the amount due, including monthly and annual interest
rates and all pawn fees and charges;
(D) Date, time and place the item of property was received by the licensee, and the unique alpha
and/or numeric transaction identifier that distinguishes it from all other transactions in the licensee=s
records;
(E) Full name, current residence address, current residence telephone number, date of birth and
accurate description of the person from whom the item of the property was received, including: sex,
height, weight, race, color of eyes and color hair;
(F) The identification number and state of issue from any of the following forms of identification of
the seller:
(1) Current valid Minnesota driver=s license;
(2) Current valid Minnesota identification card; and
(3) Current valid photo identification card issued by another state or province of Canada.
(G) The signature of the person identified in the transaction;
(H) (1) Effective 60 days from the date of notification by the Police Department of acceptable
video standards the licensee must also take a color photograph or color video recording of:
(a) Each customer involved in a billable transaction; and
(b) Every item pawned or sold that does not have a unique serial or identification number
permanently engraved or affixed.
(2) If a photograph is taken, it must be at least two inches in length by two inches in width and
must be maintained in a manner so that the photograph can be readily matched and correlated with all
other records of the transaction to which they relate. The photographs must be available to the Police
Department upon request. The major portion of the photograph must include an identifiable facial image
of the person who pawned or sold the item. Items photographed must be accurately depicted. The
licensee must inform the person that he or she is being photographed by displaying a sign of sufficient
size in a conspicuous place in the premises. If a video photograph is taken, the video camera must focus
on the person paying or selling the item so as to include an identifiable image of that person=s face. Items
photographed by video must be accurately depicted. Video photographs must be electronically
Chisholm - Business Regulations
30
referenced by time and date so they can be readily matched and correlated with all other records of the
transaction to which they relate. The licensee must inform the person that he or she is being videotaped
by displaying a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous place on the premises. The licensee must keep the
exposed videotape for three months.
(I) Effective 60 days from the date of notification by the Police Department licensees must fulfill
the color photograph requirements in division (H) above by submitting them as digital images, in a
format specified by the issuing authority, electronically cross-referenced to the reportable transaction
with which they are associated. Notwithstanding the digital images may be captured from required video
recordings, this provision does not alter or amend the requirements in division (H) above;
(J) Renewals, extensions, redemptions and confiscations. For renewals, extensions, redemptions
and confiscations the licensee shall provide the original transaction identifier, the date of the current
transaction, and the type of transaction; and
(K) Inspection of records. Records must at all reasonable times be open to inspection by the Police
Department. Data entries shall be retained for at least three years from the date of transaction. Entries of
required digital images shall be retained a minimum of 90 days.
(Ord. 156, passed 5-22-2012)
' 112.07 DAILY REPORTS TO POLICE.
(A) Effective no later than 60 days after the Police Department provides licensees with the current
version of the automated pawn system interchange file specification, licensees must submit every
reportable transaction to the Police Department daily in the following manner: licensees must provide to
the Police Department all reportable transaction information by transferring it from their computer to the
automated pawn system via modem using the current version of the automated pawn system interchange
file specification. All required records must be transmitted completely and accurately after the close of
business each day in accordance with standards and procedures established by the issuing authority. Any
transaction that does not meet the automated pawn system interchange file specification must be
corrected and resubmitted the next business day. The licensee must display a sign of sufficient size, in a
conspicuous place in the premises, which informs patrons that all transactions are reported to the Police
Department daily.
(B) Licensees will be charged for each billable transaction reported to the Police Department.
(1) If a licensee is unable to successfully transfer the required reports by modem, the licensee
must provide the Police Department, upon request, printed copies of all reportable transactions along
with the video tape(s) for that date, by noon the next business day.
(2) If the problem is determined to be outside the licensee=s system, the licensee must continue
to provide the reports required in division (A) above and resubmit all the transactions via modem when
the error is corrected.
(3) If a licensee is unable to capture, digitize or transmit the photographs required in
Pawnbrokers
31
' 111.06(I), the licensee must immediately take all required photographs with a still camera,
cross-reference the photographs to the correct transaction and make the pictures available to the Police
Department upon request.
(4) Regardless of the cause or origin of the technical problems that prevented the licensee from
uploading their reportable transactions, upon correction of the problem, the licensee shall upload every
reportable transaction from every business date the problem had existed.
(5) Notwithstanding divisions (B)(1), (2) and (3) above, the Police Department may, upon
presentation of extenuating circumstances, delay the implementation of the daily reporting penalty.
(Ord. 156, passed 5-22-2012)
' 112.08 RECEIPT REQUIRED.
(A) Every licensee must provide a receipt to the party identified in every reportable transaction and
must maintain a duplicate of that receipt for three years.
(B) The receipt must include at least the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the licensed business;
(2) The date and time the item was received by the licensee;
(3) Whether the item was pawned or sold, or the nature of the transaction;
(4) An accurate description of each item received including, but not limited to, any trademark,
identification number, serial number, model number, brand name or other identifying mark on such an
item;
(5) The signature or unique identifier of the licensee or employee that conducted the
transaction;
(6) The amount advanced or paid;
(7) The monthly and annual interest rates, including all pawn fees and charges;
(8) The last regular day of business by which the item must be redeemed by the pledger
without risk that the item will be sold, and the amount necessary to redeem the pawned item on that date;
(9) The full name, current residence address, current residence telephone number and date of
birth of the pledger or seller;
(10) The identification number and state of issue from any of the following forms of
identification of the seller:
Chisholm - Business Regulations
32
(a) Current valid Minnesota driver=s license;
(b) Current valid Minnesota identification card; and
(c) Current valid photo driver=s license or identification card issued by another state or
province of Canada.
(11) Description of the pledger or seller including approximate sex, height, weight, race, color
of eyes and color of hair;
(12) The signature of the pledger or seller; and
(13) All printed statements as required by M.S. ' 325J.04, subdivision 2, as it may be amended
from time to time, or any other applicable statutes.
(Ord. 156, passed 5-22-2012)
' 112.09 REDEMPTION PERIOD.
Any person pledging, pawning or depositing an item for security must have a minimum of 90 days
from the date of that transaction to redeem the item before it may be forfeited and sold. During the 90-day
holding period items may not be removed from the licensed location. Licensees are prohibited from
redeeming any item to anyone other than the person to whom the receipt was issued or to any person
identified in a written and notarized authorization to redeem the property identified in the receipt or to a
person identified in writing by the pledger at the time of the initial transaction and signed by the pledger,
or with approval of a police officer. Written authorization for release of property to persons other than
original pledger must be maintained along with original transaction record in accordance with '
112.06(J) above.
(Ord. 156, passed 5-22-2012)
' 112.10 VICTIMS TO REPORT THEIR LOSS AND LAW ENFORCEMENT TO MAKE
COMPARISONS.
(A) Any item purchased or accepted in trade by a licensee must not be sold or otherwise transferred
for seven days from the date of the transaction.
(B) An individual may redeem an item 72 hours after the item was received on deposit excluding
Sundays and legal holidays.
(Ord. 156, passed 5-22-2012)
' 112.11 POLICE ORDER TO HOLD PROPERTY.
(A) Investigative hold. Whenever a law enforcement official from any agency notifies a licensee not
Pawnbrokers
33
to sell an item, the item must not be sold or removed from the premises. The investigative hold shall be
confirmed in writing by the originating agency within 72 hours and will remain in effect for 15 days from
the date of initial notification, or until the investigate order is canceled, or until an order to
hold/confiscate is issued, pursuant to divisions (B) or (C) below, whichever comes first.
(B) Order to hold. Whenever a police officer notifies a licensee not to sell an item, the item must not
be sold or removed from the licensed premises until authorized to be released by a police officer. The
order to hold shall expire 90 days from the date it is placed unless a police officer determines the hold is
still necessary and notifies the licensee in writing.
(C) Order to confiscate.
(1) If an item is identified as stolen or evidence in a criminal case a police officer may:
(a) Physically confiscate and remove it from the shop, pursuant to a written order from a
police officer; or
(b) Place the item on hold or extend the hold as provided in division (B) above and leave it
in the shop.
(2) When an item is confiscated, the person doing so shall provide identification upon request
of the licensee, and shall provide the licensee the name and phone number of the confiscating agency and
investigator, and the case number related to the confiscation.
(3) When an order to hold/confiscate is no longer necessary, a police officer shall so notify the
licensee.
(Ord. 156, passed 5-22-2012)
' 112.12 INSPECTION OF ITEMS.
At all times during the terms of the license, the licensee must allow law enforcement officials to
enter the premises where the licensed business is located, during normal business hours, except in an
emergency, for the purpose of inspecting the premises and inspecting items, ware and merchandise and
records therein to verify compliance with this section or other applicable laws.
(Ord. 156, passed 5-22-2012)
' 112.13 LABEL REQUIRED.
Licensees must attach a label to every item at the time it is pawned, purchased or received in
inventory from any reportable transaction. Permanently recorded on this label must be the number or
name that identifies the transaction in the shop=s records, the transaction date, the name of the item and
the description or the model and serial number of the item as reported to the Police Department,
whichever is applicable, and the date the item is out of pawn or can be sold, if applicable. Labels shall not
be reused.
Chisholm - Business Regulations
34
(Ord. 156, passed 5-22-2012)
' 112.14 PROHIBITED ACTS.
It shall be unlawful for:
(A) Any person under the age of 18 years to pawn or sell or attempt to pawn or sell goods with any
licensee;
(B) A licensee to receive any goods from a person under the age of 18 years;
(C) A licensee to receive any goods from a person of unsound mind or an intoxicated person;
(D) A licensee to receive any goods, unless the seller presents identification in the form of a valid
driver=s license, a valid state identification card or current valid photo driver=s license or identification
card issued by the state or providence of residency of the person from whom the item was received;
(E) A licensee to receive any item of property that possesses an altered or obliterated serial number
or operation identification number or any item of property that has had its serial number removed;
(F) A person to pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave or deposit any article of property not their own
with a licensee;
(G) A person to pawn, pledge, sell, consign, lease or deposit the property of another, whether with
permission or without, with any licensee;
(H) A person to pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave or deposit any article or property in which another
has a security interest with any licensee; and/or
(I) A person seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave or deposit any article of property with
any licensee to give a false or fictitious name, to give a false date of birth, to give a false or out of date
address of residence or telephone number or to present a false or altered identification, or the
identification of another to any licensee.
(Ord. 156, passed 5-22-2012) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 112.15 DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
Any license under this section may be denied, suspended or revoked for one or more of the following
reasons:
(A) The proposed use does not comply with the zoning code;
(B) The proposed use does not comply with any health, building, building maintenance or other
Pawnbrokers
35
provision of this city code or state law;
(C) The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with one or more provisions of this section;
(D) The applicant is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien, or upon whom it is
impractical or impossible to conduct a background or financial investigation due to the unavailability of
information;
(E) Fraud, misrepresentation or bribery in securing or renewing a license;
(F) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the application and investigation for, or in
the course of, the applicant=s business;
(G) Violation within the preceding five years, of any law relating to theft, damage or trespass to
property, sale of a controlled substance, or operation of a business; and/or
(H) The owner of the premises licensed or to be licensed would not qualify for a license under the
terms of this section.
(Ord. 156, passed 5-22-2012)
' 112.16 BUSINESS AT ONLY ONE PLACE.
A license under this section authorizes the licensee to carry on its business only at the permanent
place of business designated in the license.
(Ord. 156, passed 5-22-2012)
36
CHAPTER 113: TOBACCO AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Section
113.01 Purpose
113.02 Definitions
113.03 License
113.04 Fees
113.05 Basis for denial of license
113.06 Prohibited sales
113.07 Vending machines
113.08 Self-service sales
113.09 Responsibility
113.10 Compliance check and inspections
113.11 Signage
113.12 Violations
113.13 Affirmative defense
Cross-reference:
Unlawful use and furnishing of tobacco, see ' 131.01
' 113.01 PURPOSE.
Because the city recognizes that many persons under the age of 18 years purchase tobacco, tobacco
products and tobacco-related devices, and the sales, possession and use are violations of state laws, and
because studies which the city hereby accepts and adopts, have shown that most smokers begin smoking
before they have reached the age of 18 years and that those persons who reach the age of 18 years without
having started smoking are significantly less likely to begin smoking, and because smoking has been
shown to be the cause of several serious health problems which subsequently place a financial burden on
all levels of government, this chapter shall be intended to regulate the sale of tobacco, tobacco products
and tobacco-related devices for the purpose of enforcing and furthering existing laws, to protect minors
against the serious effects associated with the illegal use of tobacco, tobacco products and
tobacco-related devices and to further the official public policy of the state in regard to preventing young
people from starting to smoke, as stated in M.S. ' 144.391, as it may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 93, passed 12-23-1997)
Tobacco and Tobacco Products
37
' 113.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
COMPLIANCE CHECKS. The system the city uses to investigate and ensure that those
authorized to sell tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco-related devices are following and complying
with the requirements of this chapter.
INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED. The practice of selling any tobacco or tobacco product wrapped
individually for sale. Individually wrapped tobacco and tobacco shall include, but not be limited to,
single cigarette packs, single bags or cans of loose tobacco in any form, and single cans or other
packaging of snuff or chewing tobacco. Cartons or other packaging containing nine or fewer packs or
other containers as described in this definition shall be considered INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED.
Cartons or other packaging containing more than nine packs or other containers as described in this
definition shall not be considered INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED.
LOOSIES. The common term used to refer to a single or individually packaged cigarette.
MINOR. Any natural person who has not yet reached the age of 18 years.
MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any form of business operated out of a truck, van,
automobile or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and not a fixed address store front or other
permanent type of structure authorized for sales transactions.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of business where tobacco, tobacco products or
tobacco-related devices are available for sale.
SALE. Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter or other consideration.
SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING. Open displays of tobacco, tobacco products or
tobacco-related devices in any way where any persons shall have access to the products without the
assistance or intervention of an employee of the premises maintaining the self-service merchandising.
SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING shall not include vending machines.
TOBACCO or TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Any substance or item containing tobacco leaf,
including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, fine cut or other chewing tobacco,
cheroots, stogies, perique, granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed and other smoking tobacco,
snuff flowers, cavendish, shorts, plug and twist tobaccos, dipping tobaccos, refuse scraps, clippings,
cutting, and sweepings of tobacco, and other kinds and forms of tobacco leaf prepared in a manner so as
to be suitable for chewing, sniffing or smoking.
TOBACCO-RELATED DEVICES. Any tobacco products as well as pipes, rolling papers or other
devices used in a manner which enables the chewing, sniffing or smoking of tobacco or tobacco
products.
TRAINING PROGRAM. Every licensee shall have in effect a training program for employees that
Chisholm - Business Regulations
38
instructs them about the law prohibiting the sale of tobacco to minors, related civil and criminal penalties
and the licensee=s policy regarding the sale of tobacco products including, without limitation, the
penalties for violating this chapter and applicable provisions of state law.
VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric or electronic, or, other type of device which
dispenses tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco-related devices upon the insertion of money, tokens or
other forms of payment directly into the machine by the person seeking to purchase the tobacco, tobacco
product or tobacco-related device.
(Ord. 93, passed 12-23-1997)
' 113.03 LICENSE.
No personnel shall sell or offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco-related devices
without first having obtained a license from the city for each location within the city from which the sales
shall be conducted.
(A) Application. An application for a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco-related
devices shall be made on a form provided by the city. The application shall contain the full name of the
applicant, the applicant=s residential and business address and telephone numbers, the name and address
of the business for which the license is sought and any additional information the city deems necessary.
Each location will be required to obtain a separate license. Every person applying for a license to sell, at
retail, any tobacco product shall certify on the annual license application that the person has implemented
a training program as required by the definition in ' 113.02. Upon receipt of a completed application, the
City Clerk shall forward the application to the Council for action at a regularly scheduled Council
meeting. If the Clerk shall determine that an application is incomplete, he or she shall return the
application with notice of the information necessary to make the application complete.
(B) Action. The Council may either approve or deny the license, or it may delay action for a
reasonable period of time, as necessary, to complete any investigation of the application or applicant it
deems necessary. If the Council shall approve the license, the Clerk shall issue the license to the
applicant. If the Council denies the license, notice of the denial shall be given to the applicant along with
the notice of the applicant=s right to appeal the Council=s decision.
(C) Term. All licenses under this chapter shall be issued for one calendar year from the date of
January 1 to December 31.
(D) Revocation or suspension. Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended
for a violation of this chapter.
(E) Moveable place of business. No license shall be issued to a moveable place of business. Only
fixed location businesses shall be eligible to be licensed under this chapter.
Tobacco and Tobacco Products
39
(F) Transfers. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid only on the premises for which
the license was issued and only for the person to whom the license was issued. No transfer of any license
to another location or person shall be valid without the proper fee and prior approval of the City Council.
No refund shall be provided to the existing licensee on transfer.
(G) Display. All licenses shall be conspicuously posted at the place for which the license is issued
and shall be exhibited to any person upon request.
(H) Renewals. The renewal of a license issued under this section shall be handled in the same
manner as the original application. The request for a renewal shall be made at least 45 days, but no more
than 60 days, before the expiration of the current license. The issuance of a license issued under this
chapter shall be considered a privilege and not an absolute right of the applicant and shall not entitle the
holder to an automatic renewal of the license.
(Ord. 93, passed 12-23-1997)
' 113.04 FEES.
No license shall be issued under this chapter until the appropriate license fee shall be paid in full.
The fee for a license under this chapter shall be as follows: 1998 - $100. The Council shall by motion set
the appropriate licensing fee annually thereafter as the Council deems appropriate in its discretion. The
license fee shall not be pro-rated for any partial year.
(Ord. 93, passed 12-23-1997)
' 113.05 BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
The following shall be grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license under this chapter
and if a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it shall be revoked upon the discovery that
the person was ineligible for the license under this section:
(A) The applicant is under the age of 18 years;
(B) The applicant has been convicted, within the past five years, of any violation of a federal, state
or local law, ordinance provisions or other regulation relating to tobacco, tobacco products or
tobacco-related devices. This provision may be waived by the City Council;
(C) The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco-related devices
revoked within the preceding 12 months from the date of the application;
(D) The applicant fails to provide any information required on the application, or provides false or
misleading information; or
(E) The applicant is prohibited by federal, state or other local law, ordinance or other regulation,
from holding a license.
(Ord. 93, passed 12-23-1997)
Chisholm - Business Regulations
40
' 113.06 PROHIBITED SALES.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any licensee or employee, or agent of any licensee to sell or
offer to sell any tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco-related device:
(A) To any person under the age of 18 years;
(B) By means of any type of vending machine; or
(C) By any other means or to any other person prohibited by federal, state or other local law,
ordinance provision or other regulation.
(Ord. 93, passed 12-23-1997)
' 113.07 VENDING MACHINES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow the sale of tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco-related
devices within the city by means of a vending machine.
(Ord. 93, passed 12-23-1997) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 113.08 SELF-SERVICE SALES.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to allow the sale of loosies or individually packaged tobacco,
tobacco products or tobacco-related devices by any means where the customer may have access to these
items without having to request the item from the licensee or the licensee=s employee.
(B) All loosies or individually packaged tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco-related devices
shall be stored behind the counter or other area not freely accessible to customers.
(Ord. 93, passed 12-23-1997) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 113.09 RESPONSIBILITY.
All licenses under this chapter shall be responsible for the actions of their employees in regard to the
sale of tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco-related devices on the licensed premises and the sale of that
item by an employee shall be considered a sale by the license holder.
(Ord. 93, passed 12-23-1997)
' 113.10 COMPLIANCE CHECK AND INSPECTIONS.
Tobacco and Tobacco Products
41
(A) The city shall conduct at least one unannounced compliance check once per year.
(B) All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the city police or other authorized city
officials during regular business hours.
(Ord. 93, passed 12-23-1997)
' 113.11 SIGNAGE.
Each licensee shall have easily readable signs clearly posted near the cashier which indicates to the
clerk and purchaser the year of birth to be of legal age to purchase tobacco products. AYou must have
been born on or before today=s date in the year _____ to be of legal age to purchase tobacco products@ is
considered to be acceptable signage.
(Ord. 93, passed 12-23-1997)
' 113.12 VIOLATIONS.
(A) Notice. Upon discovery of a suspected violation the alleged violator shall be issued, either
personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the alleged violation and which shall inform the alleged
violator of his or her right to be heard on the accusation.
(B) Hearings. If the person accused of violating this chapter so requests, a hearing shall be
scheduled, the time and place of which shall be provided to the accused violator.
(C) Hearing Officer. The City Attorney shall serve as the Hearing Officer.
(D) Decision. If the Hearing Officer determines that a violation of this chapter did occur, that
decision, along with the Hearing Officer=s reasons for finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed
under a schedule of fines determined annually by the City Council, shall be recorded in writing, a copy of
which shall be provided to the accused violator. Likewise, if the Hearing Officer finds that no violation
occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any penalty, the findings shall be recorded and a copy
provided to the acquitted accused violator.
(E) Appeals. Appeals of any decision made by the Hearing Officer shall be filed in the district court
for the city in which the alleged violation occurred.
(F) Misdemeanor prosecution. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from seeking
prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged violation of this chapter. If the city elects to seek
misdemeanor prosecution, no administrative penalty shall be imposed.
(G) Continued violation. Each violation, and every day in which a violation occurs or continues,
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 93, passed 12-23-1997)
Chisholm - Business Regulations
42
' 113.13 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE.
It shall be an affirmative defense to the violation of this chapter to have reasonably relied on proof of
age as described by state law.
(Ord. 93, passed 12-23-1997)
Tobacco and Tobacco Products
43
44
CHAPTER 114: LIQUOR REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
114.01 Adoption of state law by reference
114.02 City may be more restrictive than state law
114.03 Definitions
114.04 Nudity on the premises of licensed establishments prohibited
114.05 Consumption in public places
Licensing
114.20 Number of licenses which may be issued
114.21 Term and expiration of licenses
114.22 Kinds of liquor licenses
114.23 License fees; pro rata
114.24 Council discretion to grant or deny a license
114.25 Application for license
114.26 Description of premises
114.27 Applications for renewal
114.28 Transfer of license
114.29 Investigation
114.30 Hearing and issuance
114.31 Restrictions on issuance
114.32 Conditions of license
114.33 Hours and days of sale
114.34 Minors on premises
114.35 Restrictions on purchase and consumption
114.36 Suspension and revocation
Municipal Liquor Stores
114.50 Application of this subchapter
114.51 Existing municipal stores continued
114.52 Location
114.53 Operation
114.54 Proof of financial responsibility
114.55 Issuance of other licenses
114.99 Penalties
Liquor Regulations
45
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 114.01 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.
The provisions of M.S. Ch. 340A, as they may be amended from time to time, with reference to the
definition of terms, conditions of operation, restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales,
hours of sale, and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and consumption of
intoxicating liquor and 3.2 percent malt liquor are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this
chapter as if set out in full. It is the intention of the City Council that all future amendments to M.S. Ch.
340A are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this
chapter is adopted.
' 114.02 CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW.
The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. ' 340A.509, as it may be amended from time to
time, to impose, and has imposed in this chapter, additional restrictions on the sale and possession of
alcoholic beverages within its limits beyond those contained in M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended
from time to time.
' 114.03 DEFINITIONS.
In addition to the definitions contained in M.S. ' 340A.101, as it may be amended from time to time,
the following terms are defined for purposes of this chapter:
LIQUOR. As used in this chapter, without modification by the words Aintoxicating@ or A3.2
percent malt,@ includes both intoxicating liquor and 3.2 percent malt liquor.
RESTAURANT. An eating facility, other than a hotel, under the control of a single proprietor or
manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the premises, where full waitress/waiter table service is
provided, where a customer orders food from printed menus and where the main food course is served
and consumed while seated at a single location. To be a Arestaurant@ as defined by this section, an
establishment shall have a license from the state as required by M.S. ' 157.16, as it may be amended
from time to time, and meet the definition of either a Asmall establishment,@ Amedium establishment@ or
Alarge establishment@ as defined in M.S. ' 157.16, Subd. 3d, as it may be amended from time to time.
An establishment which serves prepackaged food that receives heat treatment and is served in the
package or frozen pizza that is heated and served, shall not be considered to be a restaurant for purposes
of this chapter unless it meets the definitions of Asmall establishment@, Amedium establishment@ or
Chisholm - Business Regulations
46
Alarge establishment.@
' 114.04 NUDITY ON THE PREMISES OF LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.
(A) The City Council finds that it is in the best interests of the public health, safety, and general
welfare of the people of the city that nudity is prohibited as provided in this section on the premises of
any establishment licensed under this chapter. This is to protect and assist the owners, operators, and
employees of the establishment, as well as patrons and the public in general, from harm stemming from
the physical immediacy and combination of alcohol, nudity, and sex. The Council especially intends to
prevent any subliminal endorsement of sexual harassment or activities likely to lead to the possibility of
various criminal conduct, including prostitution, sexual assault, and disorderly conduct. The Council also
finds that the prohibition of nudity on the premises of any establishment licensed under this chapter, as
set forth in this section, reflects the prevailing community standards of the city.
(B) It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person or persons on the licensed premises
when the person does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a
non-transparent material. It is unlawful for any person to be on the licensed premises when the person
does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a non-transparent material.
(C) A violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable as provided by law, and is justification
for revocation or suspension of any liquor, wine, or 3.2 percent malt liquor license or the imposition of a
civil penalty under the provisions of ' 114.99(B).
Penalty, see ' 114.99
' 114.05 CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES.
No person shall consume intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor in a public park, on any
public street, sidewalk, parking lot or alley, or in any public place other than on the premises of an
establishment licensed under this chapter, in a municipal liquor dispensary if one exists in the city, or
where the consumption and display of liquor is lawfully permitted.
Penalty, see ' 114.99
LICENSING
' 114.20 NUMBER OF LICENSES WHICH MAY BE ISSUED.
State law establishes the number of liquor licenses that a city may issue. However, the number of
licenses which may be granted under this chapter is limited to the number of license which were issued as
of the effective date of this chapter, even if a larger number of licenses are authorized by law or election.
The Council in its sound discretion may provide by ordinance that a larger number of licenses may be
issued up to the number of licenses authorized by M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended
from time to time. If a larger number of licenses in a particular category has been authorized by a
Liquor Regulations
47
referendum held under the provisions of M.S. ' 340A.413, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to
time, but not all of them have been issued, the larger number of licenses is no longer in effect until the
Council by ordinance determines that any or all of the licenses may be issued. The Council is not required
to issue the full number of licenses that it has available.
' 114.21 TERM AND EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.
Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of one year. All licenses, except temporary
licenses, shall expire on December 31 of each year unless another date is provided by ordinance. All
licenses shall expire on the same date. Temporary licenses expire according to their terms. Consumption
and display permits issued by the Commissioner of Public Safety, and the accompanying city consent to
the permit, shall expire on March 31 of each year.
' 114.22 KINDS OF LIQUOR LICENSES.
The Council of a city that does not have a municipal liquor store is authorized to issue the following
licenses and permits, up to the number specified in ' 114.20. The Council of a city which has a
municipal liquor store is authorized to issue only those licenses specified in ' 114.55.
(A) 3.2 percent malt liquor on-sale licenses, which may be issued only to golf courses, restaurants,
hotels, clubs, bowling centers, and establishments used exclusively for the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor
with the incidental sale of tobacco and soft drinks.
(B) 3.2 percent malt liquor off-sale license.
(C) Temporary 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses which may be issued only to a club, charitable,
religious, or nonprofit organization.
(D) Off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued only to exclusive liquor stores or
drug stores that have an off-sale license which was first issued on or before May 1, 1994. The fee for an
off-sale intoxicating liquor license established by the Council under ' 114.23 shall not exceed $100 or a
greater amount which may be permitted by M.S. ' 340A.408, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time
to time.
(E) On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued to the following establishments as
defined by M.S. ' 340A.101, as it may be amended from time to time, and this chapter: hotels,
restaurants, bowling centers, theaters, clubs or congressionally chartered veterans organizations, and
exclusive liquor stores. Club licenses may be issued only with the approval of the Commissioner of
Public Safety. The fee for club licenses established by the Council under ' 114.23 shall not exceed the
amounts provided for in M.S. ' 340A.408, Subd. 2b, as it may be amended from time to time. The
Council may in its sound discretion authorize a retail on-sale licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor off
the licensed premises at a community festival held within the city under the provisions of M.S.
Chisholm - Business Regulations
48
' 340A.404, Subd. 4b, as it may be amended from time to time. The Council may in its sound discretion
authorize a retail on-sale licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor off the licensed premises at any
convention, banquet, conference, meeting, or social affair conducted on the premises of a sports,
convention, or cultural facility owned by the city, under the provisions of M.S. ' 340A.404, Subd. 4a, as
it may be amended from time to time; however, the licensee is prohibited from dispensing intoxicating
liquor to any person attending or participating in an amateur athletic event being held on the premises.
(F) Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, only after authorization to do so by voter approval
at a general or special election as provided by M.S. ' 340A.504, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from
time to time. Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued only to a restaurant as defined in
' 114.03, club, bowling center, or hotel which has a seating capacity of at least 30 persons, which holds
an on-sale intoxicating liquor license, and which serves liquor only in conjunction with the service of
food. The maximum fee for this license, which shall be established by the Council under the provisions
of ' 114.23, shall not exceed $200, or the maximum amount provided by M.S. ' 340A.504, Subd. 3c, as
it may be amended from time to time.
(G) Combination on-sale/off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses if the city has a population less than
10,000.
(H) Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner of
Public Safety, which may be issued only in connection with a social event sponsored by a club,
charitable, religious, or other nonprofit corporation that has existed for at least three years. No license
shall be for longer than four consecutive days, and the city shall issue no more than 12 days worth of
temporary licenses to any one organization in one calendar year.
(I) On-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety to: theaters,
restaurants that have facilities for seating at least 25 guests at one time and meet the criteria of M.S.
' 340A.404, Subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time, and which meet the definition of
restaurant in ' 114.03; and to licensed bed and breakfast facilities which meet the criteria in M.S.
' 340A.401, Subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time. The fee for an on-sale wine license
established by the Council under the provisions of ' 114.23 shall not exceed one-half of the license fee
charged for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license. The holder of an on-sale wine license who also holds
an on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor license is authorized to sell malt liquor with a content over 3.2 percent
(strong beer) without an additional license.
(J) One day consumption and display permits with the approval of the Commissioner of Public
Safety to a nonprofit organization in conjunction with a social activity in the city sponsored by the
organization.
(K) Approval of the issuance of a consumption and display permit by the Commissioner of Public
Safety. The maximum amount of the additional fee which may be imposed by the Council on a person
who has been issued a consumption and display permit under the provisions of ' 114.23 shall not exceed
$300, or the maximum amount permitted by M.S. ' 340A.14, Subd. 6, as it may be amended from time
to time. Consumption and display permits shall expire on March 31 of each year.
Liquor Regulations
49
(L) Culinary class limited on-sale licenses may be issued to a business establishment not otherwise
eligible for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license that, as part of its business, conducts culinary or
cooking classes for which payment is made by each participant or advance reservation required. The
license authorizes the licensee to furnish to each participant in each class, at no additional cost to the
participant, up to a maximum of six ounces of wine or 12 ounces of intoxicating malt liquor, during and
as part of the class, for consumption on the licensed premises only.
(M) Temporary off-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the Commission of Public Safety, may
be issued for the off-sale of wine at an auction. A license issued under this subdivision authorizes the sale
of only vintage wine of a brand and vintage that is not commonly being offered for sale by any
wholesaler in Minnesota. The license may authorize the off-sale of wine for not more than three
consecutive days provided not more than 600 cases of wine are sold at any auction. The licenses are
subject to the terms, including license fee, imposed by ' 114.23.
(N) Brew pub on-sale intoxicating liquor or on-sale 3.2% malt liquor licenses, with the approval of
the Commissioner of Public Safety, may be issued to brewers who operate a restaurant in their place of
manufacture and who meet the criteria established at M.S. ' 340A.301, Subd. 6(d) and 7(b), as it may be
amended from time to time. Sales under this license at on-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels per year. If
a brew pub licensed under this section possesses a license for off-sale under division (O) below, the brew
pub=s total combined retail sales at on-sale or off-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels per year, provided
that off-sales may not total more than 500 barrels.
(O) Brewer off-sale intoxicating liquor license, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public
Safety, may be issued to a brewer that is a licensee under division (N) above or that produces fewer than
3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year and otherwise meets the criteria established as M.S. ' 340A.301,
Subd. 6(d) and 7(b), as it may be amended from time to time. Off-sale of malt liquor shall be limited to
the legal hours for off-sale at exclusive liquor stores in the city. Malt liquor sold off-sale must be
removed from the premises before the applicable off-sale closing time at exclusive liquor stores. All
malt liquor sold under this license shall be packaged in the manner required by M.S. ' 340A.301, Subd.
7 as it may be amended from time to time. Sales under this license may not exceed 500 barrels per year.
If a brewer licensed under this section possesses a license under division (N) above, the brewer=s total
retail sales at on-sale or off-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels per year, provided that off-sales may not
total more than 500 barrels.
(P) Brewer temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued, with the approval of the
Commissioner of Public Safety, to brewers who manufacture fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a
year for the on-sale of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the municipality
sponsored by the brewer.
' 114.23 LICENSE FEES; PRO RATA.
(A) No license or other fee established by the city shall exceed any limit established by M.S. Ch.
340A, as it may be amended from time to time, for a liquor license.
Chisholm - Business Regulations
50
(B) The Council may establish from time to time in the Ordinance Establishing Fees and Charges
the fee for any of the liquor licenses it is authorized to issue. The license fee may not exceed the cost of
issuing the license and other costs directly related to the enforcement of the liquor laws and this chapter.
No liquor license fee shall be increased without providing mailed notice of a hearing on the proposed
increase to all affected licensees at least 30 days before the hearing.
(C) The fee for all licenses, except temporary licenses, granted after the commencement of the
license year shall be prorated on a quarterly basis.
(D) All license fees shall be paid in full at the time the application is filed with the city. If the
application is denied, the license fee shall be returned to the applicant.
(E) A refund of a pro rata share of an annual license fee may occur only if authorized by M.S.
' 340A.408, Subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time.
(F) Off-sale intoxicating liquor licensees may request a reduction in their annual license fee by the
amount specified in M.S. ' 340A.408 if at the time of initial application or renewal they:
(1) Agree to have a private vendor approved by the city train all employees within 60 days of
hire and annually thereafter in laws pertaining to the sale alcohol, the rules for identification checks, and
the responsibilities of establishments serving intoxicating liquors;
(2) Post a policy requiring identification checks for all persons appearing to be 30 years old or
less;
(3) Establish a written cash award and incentive program to award employees who catch
underage drinkers and a written penalty program to punish employees in the event of a failed compliance
check;
(4) Failure to abide by the provisions of this division may result in suspension of the license
until the conditions of the fee reduction are met and may result in suspension and/or revocation of the
license pursuant to ' 114.36 of this chapter.
' 114.24 COUNCIL DISCRETION TO GRANT OR DENY A LICENSE.
The Council in its sound discretion may either grant or deny the application for any license or for the
transfer or renewal of any license. No applicant has a right to a license under this chapter.
' 114.25 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
(A) Form. Every application for a license issued under this chapter shall be on a form provided by
the city. Every application shall state the name of the applicant, the applicant's age, representations as
Liquor Regulations
51
to the applicant's character, with references as the Council may require, the type of license applied for,
the business in connection with which the proposed license will operate and its location, a description of
the premises, whether the applicant is owner and operator of the business, how long the applicant has
been in that business at that place, and other information as the Council may require from time to time.
An application for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license shall be in the form prescribed by the
Commissioner of Public Safety and shall also contain the information required in this section. The form
shall be verified and filed with the city. No person shall make a false statement in an application.
(B) Financial responsibility. Prior to the issuance of any license under this chapter, the applicant
shall demonstrate proof of financial responsibility as defined in M.S. ' 340A.409, as it may be amended
from time to time, with regard to liability under M.S. ' 340A.801, as it may be amended from time to
time. This proof will be filed with the city and the Commissioner of Public Safety. Any liability
insurance policy filed as proof of financial responsibility under this section shall conform to M.S.
' 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time. Operation of a business which is required to be
licensed by this chapter without having on file with the city at all times effective proof of financial
responsibility is a cause for revocation of the license.
Penalty, see ' 114.99
' 114.26 DESCRIPTION OF PREMISES.
The application shall specifically describe the compact and contiguous premises within which liquor
may be dispensed and consumed. The description may not include any parking lot or sidewalk.
' 114.27 APPLICATIONS FOR RENEWAL.
At least 90 days before a license issued under this chapter is to be renewed, an application for
renewal shall be filed with the city. The decision whether or not to renew a license rests within the sound
discretion of the Council. No licensee has a right to have the license renewed.
' 114.28 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
No license issued under this chapter may be transferred without the approval of the Council. Any
transfer of stock of a corporate licensee is deemed to be a transfer of the license, and a transfer of stock
without prior Council approval is a ground for revocation of the license. An application to transfer a
license shall be treated the same as an application for a new license, and all of the provisions of this code
applying to applications for a license shall apply.
Penalty, see ' 114.99
' 114.29 INVESTIGATION.
Chisholm - Business Regulations
52
(A) Preliminary background and financial investigation. On an initial application for a license, on
an application for transfer of a license and, in the sound discretion of the Council that it is in the public
interest to do so, on an application for renewal of a license, the city shall conduct a preliminary
background and financial investigation of the applicant or it may contract with the Commissioner of
Public Safety for the investigation. The applicant shall pay with the application an investigation fee of
$500 which shall be in addition to any license fee. If the cost of the preliminary investigation is less than
$500, the unused balance shall be returned to the applicant. The results of the preliminary investigation
shall be sent to the Commissioner of Public Safety if the application is for an on-sale intoxicating liquor
license or an on-sale wine license.
(B) Comprehensive background and financial investigation. If the results of a preliminary
investigation warrant, in the sound discretion of the Council, a comprehensive background and financial
investigation, the Council may either conduct the investigation itself or contract with the Commissioner
of Public Safety for the investigation. The investigation fee for this comprehensive background and
financial investigation to be paid by the applicant shall be $500, less any amount paid for the initial
investigation if the investigation is to be conducted within the state, and $10,000, less any amount paid
for the initial investigation, if the investigation is required outside the state. The unused balance of the fee
shall be returned to the applicant whether or not the application is denied. The fee shall be paid in
advance of any investigation and the amount actually expended on the investigation shall not be
refundable in the event the application is denied. The results of the comprehensive investigation shall be
sent to the Commissioner of Public Safety if the application is for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license or
an on-sale wine license.
' 114.30 HEARING AND ISSUANCE.
The Council shall investigate all facts set out in the application and not investigated in the
preliminary or comprehensive background and financial investigations. Opportunity shall be given to
any person to be heard for or against the granting of the license. After the investigation and hearing, the
Council shall in its sound discretion grant or deny the application. No license shall become effective until
the proof of financial security has been approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
' 114.31 RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE.
(A) Each license shall be issued only to the applicant for the premises described in the application.
(B) Not more than one license shall be directly or indirectly issued within the city to any one person.
(C) No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises on which taxes,
assessments, utility charges, service charges, or other financial claims of the city are delinquent and
unpaid.
(D) No license shall be issued for any place or any business ineligible for a license under state law.
Liquor Regulations
53
(E) No license shall be issued to any person who is not a resident of the state. If the applicant is a
corporation, all of the shareholders shall be residents of the state. The provisions of this division (E) shall
not apply to any license existing on the effective date of this chapter or to the renewal of an existing
license.
(F) No license shall be granted within 500 feet of any school or church. The distance is to be
measured from the closest side of the church to the closest side of the structure on the premises within
which liquor is to be sold.
Penalty, see ' 114.99
' 114.32 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
The failure of a licensee to meet any one of the conditions of the license specified below shall result
in a suspension of the license until the condition is met.
(A) Within 90 days after employment, every person selling or serving liquor in an establishment
which has an Aon-sale@ license shall receive training regarding the selling or serving of liquor to
customers. The training shall be provided by an organization approved by the Council. Proof of training
shall be provided by the licensee.
(B) Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of the place of business and the conditions of
sobriety and order in it. The act of any employee on the licensed premises is deemed the act of the
licensee as well, and the licensee shall be liable to all penalties provided by this chapter and the law
equally with the employee.
(C) Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer, city employee, or any other person
designated by the Council to conduct compliance checks and to otherwise enter, inspect, and search the
premises of the licensee during business hours and after business hours during the time when customers
remain on the premises without a warrant.
(D) No on-sale establishment shall display liquor to the public during hours when the sale of liquor
is prohibited.
(E) Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of state law and of this chapter is a
continuing condition of any license.
(F) Failure by an off-sale intoxicating liquor licensee who has received a fee reduction pursuant to
' 114.23(F) of this chapter to abide with the provisions of ' 114.23(F).
Penalty, see ' 114.99
' 114.33 HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE.
Chisholm - Business Regulations
54
No sale of liquor shall be made except in accordance with M.S. ' 340A.504, Subdivisions
(1),(2),(3),(4),(5),(6) and (7), as it may be amended from time to time, which is adopted herein and
incorporated by reference as though set forth in full. Except that no on sale of intoxication liquors may
be made after 5:00 p.m. on Christmas Eve, December 24.
(Ord. 161, passed 1-22-2013) Penalty, see ' 114.99
' 114.34 MINORS ON PREMISES.
(A) No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed in any rooms constituting the place in
which intoxicating liquors or 3.2 percent malt liquor are sold at retail on sale, except that persons under
the age of 18 may be employed as musicians or to perform the duties of a bus person or dishwashing
services in places defined as a restaurant, hotel, motel or other multi-purpose building serving food in
rooms in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2 percent malt liquor are sold at retail on sale.
(B) No person under the age of 21 years may enter a licensed establishment except to work,
consume meals on premises that qualify as a restaurant, or attend social functions that are held in a
portion of the premises where liquor is not sold.
Penalty, see ' 114.99
' 114.35 RESTRICTIONS ON PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION.
No person shall mix or prepare liquor for consumption in any public place of business unless it has a
license to sell on-sale, or a permit from the Commissioner of Public Safety under the provisions of M.S.
' 340A.414, as it may be amended from time to time, which has been approved by the Council, and no
person shall consume liquor in any such place.
Penalty, see ' 114.99
' 114.36 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
The Council shall revoke or suspend a license granted under the provisions of this chapter, or impose
a civil fine and mandatory training of staff for each violation within any three-year period a finding that
the licensee has failed to comply with a statute, regulation or provision of the city code relating to
alcoholic beverages. The first offense shall be a $500 fine; the second offense shall be a $100 fine and
three-day license suspension; the third offense shall be a $2,000 fine and a ten-day suspension of their
license; and a fourth offense shall be a revocation of license. The Council shall revoke the license upon
conviction of any licensee or agent or employee of a licensee for violating any law relating to the sale or
possession of beer, wine or liquor upon the premises of the licensee, or if such revocation is mandatory
by state statute.
(Ord. 49A, passed 8-9-2011) Penalty, see ' 114.99
Liquor Regulations
55
MUNICIPAL LIQUOR STORES
' 114.50 APPLICATION OF THIS SUBCHAPTER.
This subchapter, consisting of '' 114.50 through 114.55, applies only to a city that has in existence
on the effective date of this chapter a municipal liquor store.
' 114.51 EXISTING MUNICIPAL STORES CONTINUED.
If the city has in existence on the effective date of this chapter a municipal liquor store for the sale of
intoxicating liquor, the store is continued. Except as provided in ' 114.55, no intoxicating liquor may be
sold at retail elsewhere in the city.
Penalty, see ' 114.99
' 114.52 LOCATION.
The municipal liquor store shall be located at a suitable place in the city as the Council determines by
motion. However, no premises upon which taxes, assessments, or other public charges are delinquent
shall be leased for municipal liquor store purposes. The Council shall have the right to establish
additional off-sale and on-sale stores at other locations as it may, from time to time, by motion,
determine.
' 114.53 OPERATION.
(A) Manager. The municipal liquor store shall be in the immediate charge of a Liquor Store
Manager selected by the Council and paid compensation as is fixed by the Council. The Manager shall
not be a person who would be prohibited by law or any provision of this chapter from being eligible for
an intoxicating liquor license. The Manager shall furnish a surety bond to the city, conditioned upon the
faithful discharge of the duties of the office, in a sum as specified by the Council. The bond premium may
be paid by the city or the Manager, in the discretion of the Council. The Manager shall operate the
municipal liquor store under the Council's direction and shall perform those duties in connection with the
store as may be established by the Council. The Manager shall be responsible to the Council for the
conduct of the store in full compliance with this chapter and with the laws relating to the sale of
intoxicating liquor and 3.2 percent malt liquor.
(B) Other employees. The Council may also appoint additional employees as may be required and
shall fix their compensation. All employees, including the Manager, shall hold their positions at the
pleasure of the Council. No person under the age of 18 shall be employed in the store. The Council
may require the employees to furnish surety bonds conditioned for the faithful discharge of their duties in
a sum as specified by the Council. The premium on the bond may be paid by the city or the employees,
Chisholm - Business Regulations
56
as the Council determines.
(C) Municipal liquor store fund. All of the revenues received from the operation of a municipal
liquor store shall be deposited in a municipal liquor store fund from which all ordinary operating
expenses, including compensation of the Manager and employees, shall be paid. Surpluses
accumulating in the fund may be transferred to the general fund of the city or to any other appropriate
fund of the city by resolution of the Council, and may be expended for any municipal purpose. The
handling of municipal liquor store receipts and disbursements shall comply with the procedure
prescribed by law and charter for the receipts and disbursements of city funds generally.
(D) Financial statement. The Council shall provide within 90 days following the end of the
calendar year for publication a balance sheet using generally accepted accounting procedures and a
statement of operations of the municipal liquor store for that year. The balance sheet and statement shall
be published in accordance with the provisions of M.S. ' 471.6985, as it may be amended from time to
time.
(E) Hours of operation. The hours during which the sale of intoxicating liquor may be sold shall
be as provided in ' 114.33. No person, other than the Manager or a store employee, may remain in the
municipal liquor store longer than one-half hour after the time when the sale of intoxicating liquor must
cease.
Penalty, see ' 114.99
' 114.54 PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
The city shall demonstrate proof of financial responsibility required by licensees of retail
intoxicating liquor establishments under the provisions of M.S. ' 340A.409, as it may be amended from
time to time.
' 114.55 ISSUANCE OF OTHER LICENSES.
(A) On-sale licenses for the sale of intoxicating liquor. The Council may issue in its sound
discretion on-sale licenses to a club under M.S. ' 340A.404, Subd. 1(4), as it may be amended from time
to time. If the voters have authorized their issuance at a special election called for that purpose, the
Council may issue on its sound discretion on-sale liquor licenses to hotels and restaurants. The number of
on-sale licenses issued under this section is governed by M.S. ' 340A.413, as it may be amended from
time to time, as limited by the provisions of this chapter. The issuance of these licenses is governed by the
provisions of this chapter.
(B) Off-sale licenses for the sale of intoxicating liquor. State law does not authorize the issuance
of off-sale licenses for the sale of intoxicating liquor by cities which operate a municipal liquor
dispensary.
(C) On- and off-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses. The Council may issue 3.2 percent malt
Liquor Regulations
57
liquor licenses in its sound discretion as provided in this chapter.
' 114.99 PENALTIES.
(A) Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or M.S. Ch. 340A as it may be amended
from time to time or any rules promulgated under that chapter as they may be amended from time to time
is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided by law.
(B) The Council shall impose a civil penalty of up to $2,000 for each violation of M.S. Ch. 340A, as
it may be amended from time to time, and of this chapter. Conviction of a violation in a court of law is
not required in order for the Council to impose the civil penalty. A hearing under the Administrative
Procedures Act, M.S. '' 14.57 to 14.70, as it may be amended from time to time, is not required before
the penalty is imposed, but the Council shall hold a hearing on the proposed violation and the proposed
penalty and hear any person who wishes to speak. Non-payment of the penalty is grounds for
suspension or revocation of the license. The following is the minimum schedule of presumptive civil
penalties which must be imposed in addition to any suspension unless the licenses is revoked:
(1) For the first violation within any three-year period, $500.
(2) For the second violation within any three-year period, $1,000.
(3) For the third and subsequent violations within any three-year period, $2,000.
(C) The term Aviolation@ as used in this section includes any and all violations of the provisions of
this chapter, or of M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated
under that chapter as they may be amended from time to time. The number of violations shall be
determined on the basis of the history of violations for the preceding three-year period. Revocation shall
occur within 60 days following a violation for which revocation is imposed.
1
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter
130. OBSCENITIES; OBSCENE MATERIAL
131. OFFENSES TO PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
132. CURFEW; MINORS
133. WEAPONS AND FIREARMS
Chisholm - General Offenses
2
3
CHAPTER 130: OBSCENITIES; OBSCENE MATERIAL
Section
130.01 Furnishing obscene material
130.02 Obscenity prohibited
' 130.01 FURNISHING OBSCENE MATERIAL.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
FURNISH. To sell, give, rent, loan or otherwise provide.
MATERIAL. Any printed matter, visual representation or sound recording, and includes, but
is not limited to, books, magazines, motion picture films, pamphlets, newspapers, pictures, photographs,
drawings, sculptures and tape or wire recordings.
NUDITY. Uncovered, or less than opaquely covered, post-pubertal human genitals, pubic
areas, the post-pubertal human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or
the covered human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. For the purposes of this definition, the
female breast is considered UNCOVERED if the nipple only or the nipple and the areola only are
covered.
OBSCENE MATERIALS. Material which in whole or in part depicts or reveals nudity,
sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sado-masochistic abuse, or which includes obscenities or explicit
descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual conduct, and if all of the following elements are also present:
(a) Considered as a whole, by the average person, applying the contemporary community
standards of the city, it appeals to the prurient interest;
(b) It depicts, describes or represents any of the above mentioned sexual activities in a
patently offensive way; and
(c) It lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
OBSCENITIES. Those slang words currently generally rejected for regular use in mixed
society, that are used to refer to genitals, female breasts, sexual conduct or excretory functions or
products, either that have no other meaning or that in context are clearly used for their bodily, sexual or
excretory meaning.
Chisholm - General Offenses
4
SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is nude or
clad in undergarments or in a sexually revealing or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered,
bound or otherwise physically restrained, in an apparent act of sexual stimulation or gratification.
SEXUAL CONDUCT. Human masturbation, sexual intercourse or any touching of the
genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or female, or the breasts of the female, whether alone
or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent
sexual stimulation or gratification.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals or the breasts of
the female when in a state of sexual stimulation, or the sensual experiences of humans engaging in or
witnessing sexual conduct or nudity.
(B) Unlawful act. It is unlawful for any person to furnish another person obscene material.
(C) Defense. In any prosecution under this section, it is an affirmative defense and the burden of so
proving shall rest upon the defendant to prove:
(1) That the defendant was a bona fide school, museum or public library, or was acting in the
course of his or her employment as an employee of the organization or of a retail outlet affiliated with and
serving the educational purpose of the organization;
(2) That the defendant was a licensed medical practitioner or psychologist in the treatment of a
patient;
(3) That the defendant was a participant in the criminal justice system, such as a legislator,
judge, prosecutor, law enforcement official or other similar or related position; or
(4) That the defendant was a supplier to any person described in divisions (A), (B) or (C)
above.
(1994 Code, ' 10.62) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 130.02 OBSCENITY PROHIBITED.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
NUDITY. Uncovered, or less than opaquely covered, post-pubertal human genitals, pubic
areas, the post-pubertal human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or
the covered human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. For purposes of this definition, a female
breast is considered UNCOVERED if the nipple only or the nipple and the areola only are covered.
OBSCENE PERFORMANCE. A performance which in whole or in part depicts or reveals
nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sado-masochistic abuse, or which includes obscenities or
explicit verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual conduct, and if all of the following elements
Obscenities; Obscene Material
5
are also present:
(a) Considered as a whole, by the average person, applying the contemporary community
standards of the city it appeals to the prurient interest;
(b) The obscene performance depicts, describes or represents any of the above mentioned
sexual activities in a patently offensive way; and
(c) It lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
OBSCENITIES. Those slang words currently generally rejected for regular use in mixed
society, that are used to refer to genitals, female breasts, sexual conduct or excretory functions or
products, either that have no other meaning or that in context are clearly used for their bodily, sexual or
excretory meaning.
PERFORMANCE. Any play, motion picture film, dance or other exhibition pictured,
animated or live, performed before an audience.
SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is nude or
clad in undergarments or in a sexually revealing or bizarre costume, or the condition of the person being
fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained, in an apparent act of sexual stimulation or
gratification.
SEXUAL CONDUCT. Human masturbation, sexual intercourse or any touching of the
genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or female, or the breasts of the female, whether alone
or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent
sexual stimulation or gratification.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals or the breasts of
the female when in a state of sexual stimulation, or the sensual experiences of humans engaging in or
witnessing sexual conduct or nudity.
(B) It is unlawful for any licensee, for a monetary consideration or other valuable commodity or
service, to:
(1) Exhibit an obscene performance;
(2) Directly or indirectly sell an admission ticket or other means to gain entrance to an obscene
performance; or
(3) Directly or indirectly permit admission of a person to premises whereon there is exhibited
an obscene performance.
(C) In any prosecution under this section it is an affirmative defense and the burden of so proving
shall rest with the defendant to prove:
(1) That the defendant was a bona fide school, museum or public library, or was acting in the
Chisholm - General Offenses
6
course of his or her employment as an employee of the organization or of a retail outlet affiliated with and
serving the educational purpose of the organization;
(2) That the defendant was a licensed medical practitioner or psychologist in the treatment of a
patient;
(3) That the defendant was a participant in the criminal justice system, such as a legislator,
judge, prosecutor, law enforcement official or other similar or related position; or
(4) That the defendant was a supplier to any person described in divisions (A), (B) or (C)
above.
(1994 Code, ' 10.63)
7
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES TO PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
Section
131.01 Unlawful use and furnishing of tobacco
131.02 Dangerous trespasses and other acts
131.03 Noisy parties; disorderly conduct
131.04 Disorderly conduct
131.05 Air pollution control
' 131.01 UNLAWFUL USE AND FURNISHING OF TOBACCO.
(A) It is unlawful for any person, under the age of 18 years, to use tobacco in any form.
(B) It is unlawful for any person to furnish tobacco, by any manner or means and in any form, to any
person under the age of 18 years.
(1994 Code, ' 10.03) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Cross-reference:
Tobacco and tobacco users, see Chapter 113
' 131.02 DANGEROUS TRESPASSES AND OTHER ACTS.
It is unlawful for any person to:
(A) Smoke in the presence of explosives, or inflammable materials, or in a building, or area, in
which ANo Smoking@ notices have been prominently posted;
(B) Interfere with or obstruct the prevention or extinguishing of any fire, or destroy the lawful
orders of a law enforcement officer or firefighter present at the fire;
(C) Show a false light or signal or interfere with any light, signal or sign controlling or guiding
traffic upon a highway, railway track, navigable water or in the air;
(D) Place an obstruction upon a railroad track;
(E) Expose another or his or her property to an obnoxious or harmful gas, fluid or substance, with
intent to injure, molest or coerce;
Chisholm - General Offenses
8
(F) Trespass or permit animals under his or her control to trespass upon a railroad track;
(G) Permit domestic animals or fowls under his or her control to go upon the lands of another within
the city;
(H) Interfere unlawfully with any monument, sign or pointer erected or marked to designate a point
of a boundary line or a political subdivision, or a tract of land;
(I) Trespass upon the premises of another without claim of right;
(J) Enter the premises of another with intent to take or injure any fruit, fruit trees or vegetables
growing thereon without the permission of the owner or occupant; or
(K) Without the permission of the owner tamper with or get into or upon a motor vehicle, or ride in
or upon the motor vehicle knowing it was taken and is being driven by another without the permission of
the owner.
(1994 Code, ' 10.23) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 131.03 NOISY PARTIES; DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
(A) It is unlawful for any person or persons to congregate on any private lands because of, or
participate in, any party or gathering of people from which noise emanates of a sufficient volume or of a
nature so as to disturb the peace, quiet or repose of other persons. Any owner or person in lawful
possession or control of the private lands who has knowledge of the disturbance and fails to immediately
abate the disturbance shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
(B) It is unlawful for any person or persons to congregate on any private lands of another because
of, or participate in, any party or gathering of people in the absence of the owner of the private lands
being present, without first having obtained written permission from the landowner or other person in
lawful possession of the private lands. The written permission shall at all times be in the possession of
one or more persons at the site of the congregation. The document containing the written permission
must bear the signature of the landowner and date of the permitted use. Failure to display written
permission upon request shall be considered prima facie evidence of an absence of permission from the
owner.
(C) A violation of division (A) or (B) above shall give a peace officer the authority to order all
persons present, other than persons identifying themselves as the owner or person in lawful possession or
control of the land, to immediately disperse. Any person who shall refuse to leave after being ordered to
do so by a peace officer shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
(1994 Code, ' 10.26) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Offenses to Public Peace and Safety
9
' 131.04 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
It is unlawful for any person, in a public or private place, knowing or having reasonable grounds to
know that it will, or will tend to, alarm, anger or disturb others or provoke an assault or breach of the
peace to: engage in brawling or fighting; or disturb an assembly or meeting, not unlawful in its character;
or engage in offensive, obscene or abusive language or in boisterous and noisy conduct tending
reasonably to arouse alarm, anger or resentment in others.
(1994 Code, ' 10.27) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 131.05 AIR POLLUTION CONTROL.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to burn or permit burning of any grass, weeds, leaves, rubbish or
other substance upon premises owned or occupied by him or her, except as otherwise provided by this
code.
(B) The Air Pollution Control Rules, 1976, APC 1 through 32, 6 MCAR 4.0033, 6 MCAR 4.0039
and 6 MCAR 4.0041, updated through 1983, promulgated by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency,
are hereby adopted by reference as though set forth verbatim herein. One copy of the rules shall be
marked ACITY OF CHISHOLM - OFFICIAL COPY@ and kept on file in the office of the City Clerk and
open to inspection and use by the public. It is unlawful to violate a provision of this section or of the Air
Pollution Control Rules hereby adopted by reference.
(1994 Code, ' 10.30) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Chisholm - General Offenses
10
11
CHAPTER 132: CURFEW; MINORS
Section
132.01 Curfew for minors
' 132.01 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
(A) Purpose. The curfew for minors established by this section is maintained for four primary
reasons:
(1) To protect the public from illegal acts of minors committed during the curfew hours;
(2) To protect minors from improper influences that prevail during the curfew hours, including
involvement with gangs;
(3) To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs during the curfew hours; and
(4) To help parents control their minor children.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
EMERGENCY ERRAND. A task that if not completed promptly threatens the health, safety
or comfort of the minor or a member of the minor=s household. The term shall include, but shall not be
limited to, seeking urgent medical treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law enforcement or Fire
Department personnel, and seeking shelter from the elements or urgent assistance from a utility company
due to a natural or human-made calamity.
OFFICIAL CITY TIME. The time of day as determined by reference to the master clock used
by the Police Department.
PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT OR REFRESHMENT. Those places
that include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades, shopping malls, nightclubs catering to
minors, restaurants and pool halls.
PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY. The person who is responsible for providing
food, clothing, shelter and other basic necessities to the minor. The person providing PRIMARY CARE
OR CUSTODY to the minor shall not be another minor.
Chisholm - General Offenses
12
SCHOOL ACTIVITY. An event which has been placed on a school calendar by public or
parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned event.
(C) Hours.
(1) Minors under the age of 16 years. No minor under the age of 16 years shall be in or upon
the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor
in or upon places of amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant lot, between the
hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following day, official city time.
(2) Minors ages 16 years to 18 years. No minor of the ages of 16 or 17 years shall be in or upon
the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor
in or upon places of amusement, entertainment or refreshment; nor in or upon any vacant lot, between the
hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. the following day, official city time.
(D) Effect on control by adult responsible for minor. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
give a minor the right to stay out until the curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed by
a parent, guardian or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor; nor shall this
section be construed to diminish or impair the control of the adult person having the primary care or
custody of the minor.
(E) Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply in the following situations:
(1) To a minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or other adult person having the
primary care and custody of the minor;
(2) To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the direction of his or her parent, guardian
or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor;
(3) To a minor who is in any of the places described in this section if in connection with or as
required by an employer engaged in a lawful business, trade, profession or occupation; or to a minor
traveling directly to or from the location of the business, trade, profession or occupation and the minor=s
residence. Minors who fall within the scope of this exception shall carry written proof of employment
and proof of the hours the employer requires the minor=s presence at work;
(4) To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly to or from an event which has been
officially designated as a school activity by public or parochial school authorities; or who is participating
in or traveling directly to or from an official activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a
civic organization, school, religious institution or similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor and
with the permission of the minor=s parent, guardian or other adult person having the primary care and
custody of the minor;
(5) To a minor who is passing through the city in the course of interstate travel during the hours
of curfew;
Curfew; Minors
13
(6) To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the
exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly or freedom of religion;
(7) To minors on the sidewalk abutting his or her residence or abutting the residence of a
next-door neighbor if the neighbor does not complain to the city=s designated law enforcement provider
about the minor=s presence; or
(8) To a minor who is married or has been married, or is otherwise legally emancipated.
(F) Duties of person legally responsible for minor. No parent, guardian or other adult having the
primary care or custody of any minor shall permit any violation of the requirements of this section by the
minor.
(G) Duties of other persons. No person operating or in charge of any place of amusement,
entertainment or refreshment shall permit any minor to enter or remain in his or her place of business
during the hours prohibited by this section unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian
or other adult person having primary care or custody of the minor, or unless one of the exceptions to this
section applies.
(H) Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that the owner, operator or
employee of an establishment promptly notified the city=s designated law enforcement provider that a
minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
(I) Affirmative defense. A law enforcement officer must look into whether a minor has an
affirmative defense before making an arrest.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
Chisholm - General Offenses
14
15
CHAPTER 133: WEAPONS AND FIREARMS
Section
133.01 Acts prohibited
133.02 Exception
133.03 Discharge of firearms and explosives
133.04 Exception
133.05 Possession and sale of fireworks
133.06 Use of bow and arrow
133.07 Concealed hand gun and modified firearms
' 133.01 ACTS PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for any person to:
(A) Recklessly handle or use a gun or other dangerous weapon or explosive so as to endanger the
safety of another;
(B) Intentionally point a gun of any kind, capable of injuring or killing a human being and whether
loaded or unloaded, at or toward another;
(C) Use any weapon known as a slung-shot or sand club;
(D) Manufacture, transfer or possess metal knuckles or a switch blade knife opening automatically;
(E) Possess any other dangerous article or substance for the purpose of being used unlawfully as a
weapon against another;
(F) Sell or have in his or her possession any device designed to silence or muffle the discharge of a
firearm;
(G) Permit, as a parent or guardian, any child under 14 years of age to handle or use, outside of the
parent=s or guardian=s presence, a firearm or air gun of any kind, or any ammunition or explosive; or
(H) Furnish a minor under 18 years of age with a firearm, air gun, CO2 gas operated dart gun,
ammunition or explosive without the written consent of his or her parent or guardian or of the Police
Department; or
Chisholm - General Offenses
16
(I) Have in his or her possession, if under the age of 18 years, any firearm or air gun of any kind for
any purpose except while accompanied by, or under the immediate supervision of, his or her parent or
guardian, and then only if the firearm is encased.
(Ord. 97, passed 9-8-1998) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 133.02 EXCEPTION.
Nothing in ' 133.01 shall prohibit the possession of the articles therein mentioned if the purpose of
the possession is for public exhibition by museums or collectors of art.
(Ord. 97, passed 9-8-1998)
' 133.03 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES.
It is unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any bow and arrow, cannon, gun, pistol or other
firearm, firecracker, sky rocket or other fireworks, air gun, air rifle, CO2 gas operated dart gun or other
similar device commonly referred to as a B-B gun.
(Ord. 97, passed 9-8-1998) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 133.04 EXCEPTION.
Nothing in ' 133.03 shall apply to a display of fireworks by an organization or group of
organizations authorized in writing by the City Council, or to a peace officer in the discharge of his or her
duty, or to a person in the lawful defense of his or her person or family.
(Ord. 97, passed 9-8-1998)
' 133.05 POSSESSION AND SALE OF FIREWORKS.
It is unlawful for any person to sell or have in possession for the purpose of sale, except as allowed in
' 133.04, any firecrackers, sky rockets or other fireworks.
(Ord. 97, passed 9-8-1998) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 133.06 USE OF BOW AND ARROW.
It is unlawful for any person to shoot a bow and arrow, except a community-wide supervised class or
event specifically authorized by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 97, passed 9-8-1998) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Weapons and Firearms
17
' 133.07 CONCEALED HAND GUN AND MODIFIED FIREARMS.
It is unlawful for any person to carry upon his or her person or in a motor vehicle a concealed hand
gun, or firearm which has been changed or modified from the original manufacture thereof so as to
materially reduce its length; provided, however, that the Chief of Police may issue a permit to a person to
carry upon his or her person or in a motor vehicle, a concealed hand gun after an investigation by him or
her to an extent that he or she shall deem necessary and proper, and keep a permanent record of all
permits issued which shall be non-transferable.
(Ord. 97, passed 9-8-1998) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Chisholm - General Offenses
18
1
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
Chapter
150. BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
151. TRAILER COACH PARKS
152. SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS (PLATTING)
153. ZONING CODE/LAND USE REGULATIONS
Chisholm - Land Usage
2
3
CHAPTER 150: BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Section
General Provisions
150.01 Permits and special requirements for moving buildings
150.02 Powers and duties of the Building Inspector
150.03 Private sewer construction
Adoption of State Building Code
150.15 Codes adopted by reference
150.16 Application, administration and enforcement
150.17 Permits and fees
150.18 Violations
150.19 Building Code; optional chapters
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 150.01 PERMITS AND SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MOVING BUILDINGS.
(A) Definition. STREET or STREETS as used in this section means all streets and highways in the
city which are not state trunk highways, county state-aid highways or county roads.
(B) Moving permit required and application.
(1) It is unlawful for any person to move a building on any street without a moving permit from
the city.
(2) The application for a moving permit shall state the approximate size and weight of the
structure or building proposed to be moved, together with the places from and to which it is proposed to
move the same, and proposed route to be followed, proposed dates and times of moving and parking, and
the name and address of the proposed mover. The application shall also state any municipal utility, street,
and public property repairs or alterations that will be required by reason of the movement.
Chisholm - Land Usage
4
(C) Permit and fee. The moving permit shall state date or dates of moving, hours, routing,
movement and parking. Permits shall be issued only for moving buildings by building movers licensed
by the state, except that a permit may be issued to a person moving his or her own building, or a person
moving a building which does not exceed 12 feet in width, 25 feet in length or 16 feet in loaded height.
Fees to be charged shall be separate for each of the following: a moving permit fee to cover use of streets
and route approval; and a fee equal to the anticipated amount required to compensate the city for any
municipal utility and public property (other than streets) repairs or alterations occasioned by the
movement. The latter shall be paid in advance.
(D) Building permit and code compliance. Before any building is moved from one location to
another within the city, or from a point of origin without the city to a destination within the city,
regardless of the route of movement, it shall be inspected and a building permit shall have been issued for
at least the work necessary to bring it into full compliance with the State Building Code.
(E) Proof of tax payment. It is unlawful to move any building (including a manufactured home) if
the point of origin or destination (or both) is within the city, and regardless of the route of movement,
without having paid in full all real and personal property taxes and special assessments due thereon, and
filing written proof of the payment with the city.
(1994 Code, ' 4.04) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 150.02 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BUILDING INSPECTOR.
In addition to those enumerated in the administrative chapter of the city code, the Building Inspector
shall have the following powers and duties:
(A) Right of entry. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Building Inspector or his or her duly
authorized representative, may enter at reasonable times any building, structure or premises in the city to
perform any duty imposed upon him or her by this chapter;
(B) Stop orders. Whenever any building work is being done contrary to the provisions of this
chapter the Building Inspector may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons
engaged in doing or causing the work to be done, and any like person shall forthwith stop the work until
authorized by the Building Inspector to proceed with the work;
(C) Occupancy violations. Whenever any structure is being used contrary to the provisions of this
chapter, the Building Inspector may order the use discontinued and the structure or portion thereof
vacated by notice served on any person causing the use to be continued. The person shall discontinue the
use within ten days after receipt of the notice or make the structure or portion thereof, comply with the
requirements of this chapter; and
(D) Liability. The Building Inspector, or any employee charged with the enforcement of this
chapter, acting in good faith and without malice for the city in the discharge of his or her duties, shall not
thereby render himself or herself liable personally and he or she is hereby relieved from all personal
liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or by reason
of any act or omission in the discharge of his or her duties. Any suit brought against the Building
Buildings and Construction
5
Inspector or employee because of that act or omission performed by him or her in the enforcement of any
provisions of this chapter, shall be defended by the City Attorney until final determination thereof.
(1994 Code, ' 4.08)
' 150.03 PRIVATE SEWER CONSTRUCTION.
If no statute or other provision of the city code prohibits the construction of a private sewer, the same
may be installed provided the lot upon which the private sewer is designed has an area of at least 12,500
square feet, and then only for residential purposes.
(1994 Code, ' 4.20)
ADOPTION OF STATE BUILDING CODE
' 150.15 CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
The State Building Code, pursuant to M.S. '' 326B.101 to 326B.194, as it may be amended from
time to time, includes all of the referenced amendments, rules and regulations and is hereby adopted by
reference with the exception of the optional chapters, unless specifically adopted in this subchapter. The
State Building Code is hereby incorporated in this subchapter as if fully set out herein.
(Ord. 119, passed 12-26-2006)
' 150.16 APPLICATION, ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
The application, administration and enforcement of the code shall be in accordance with State
Building Code. The code shall be enforced within the extraterritorial limits permitted by M.S.
' 326B.121, as it may be amended from time to time, when so established by this subchapter. The code
enforcement agency of this municipality is called the Building Safety Department. This code shall be
enforced by the State Certified Building Official designated by this city to administer the code (M.S.
' 326B.133(1)).
(Ord. 119, passed 12-26-2006)
' 150.17 PERMITS AND FEES.
Chisholm - Land Usage
6
The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as authorized in M.S. ' 326B.121(1), as it
may be amended from time to time. Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by this code in
accordance with the fee schedule. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued for
work governed by this code in accordance with M.S. ' 326B.148, as it may be amended from time to
time.
(Ord. 119, passed 12-26-2006)
' 150.18 VIOLATIONS.
A violation of the code is a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 119, passed 12-26-2006)
' 150.19 BUILDING CODE; OPTIONAL CHAPTERS.
The State Building Code, established pursuant to M.S. '' 326B.101 to 326B.194, as they may be
amended from time to time, allows the city to adopt by reference and enforce certain optional chapters of
the most current edition of the State Building Code. The following optional provisions identified in the
most current edition of the State Building Code are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the
building code for this municipality.
(Ord. 119, passed 12-26-2006)
7
CHAPTER 151: TRAILER COACH PARKS
Section
151.01 Definitions
151.02 Exception
151.03 Prohibition; permit
151.04 Conflict
151.05 Temporary special use
' 151.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
TRAILER COACH. Any vehicle used or so constructed as to permit its being used as a
conveyance upon the public streets or highways and subject to tax or registration as such, and shall
include self-propelled or non-self-propelled vehicles as designed, constructed, reconstructed or added to
by means of an enclosed addition or room in a manner as will permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling
or sleeping place for one or more persons, having no foundation other than wheels, jacks or skirtings.
TRAILER COACH PARK. Any site, lot, field or tract of land upon which one or more occupied
trailer coaches are harbored, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and shall include any building,
structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the equipment of the trailer coach
park.
(1994 Code, ' 4.40.1)
' 151.02 EXCEPTION.
Trailer coach parks may be established in any district except a Residential District, provided,
however, that the proposed site is approved by the Council and a special use permit granted by the
Planning Commission.
(1994 Code, ' 4.40.2)
Chisholm - Land Usage
8
' 151.03 PROHIBITION; PERMIT.
It is unlawful for any person to occupy or allow to be occupied a trailer coach on any premises in the
city other than a trailer coach park licensed pursuant to the provisions of M.S. Chapter 327, as it may be
amended from time to time; provided, however, that any trailer coach now situated in the city and
occupied upon premises other than an approved trailer coach park shall be permitted to remain thereon as
a special use. If the occupancy shall cease for a period of one year, the special use permit shall expire and
the trailer coach cannot thereafter be occupied upon the premises.
(1994 Code, ' 4.40.3) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 151.04 CONFLICT.
Any conflict or overlapping between this section and state statutes shall be resolved in favor of that
which is the more stringent regulation.
(1994 Code, ' 4.40.4)
' 151.05 TEMPORARY SPECIAL USE.
The Council from time to time in its sole discretion may designate areas within the city where it is
lawful for the temporary special use as a trailer coach park, the site to be selected by the Council and
designated by Council resolution as a temporary trailer coach park for temporary use during special
events taking place in the city.
(1994 Code, ' 4.40.5)
9
CHAPTER 152: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS (PLATTING)
Section
152.01 General provisions
152.02 Definitions
152.03 Preliminary plan
152.04 Final plat
152.05 Design standards
152.06 Public land
152.07 Required improvements
152.08 Other provisions
152.09 Violations
' 152.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(A) Purpose.
(1) Each new subdivision becomes a permanent unit in the basic physical structure of the
future community, a unit to which the future community will, of necessity, be forced to adhere.
(2) Piecemeal planning of subdivisions, without correlation to the community=s plans and
planning standards, will bring a disastrous, disconnected patchwork of plats and poor circulation of
traffic.
(3) In order that new subdivisions will contribute toward an attractive, orderly, stable and
wholesome community environment, adequate municipal services and safe streets, all subdivisions
thereafter platted within the city shall fully comply with the regulations hereinafter set forth in this
chapter.
(B) Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be the
minimum requirements adopted for the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare.
Chisholm - Land Usage
10
(C) Scope. This chapter shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of a subdivision recorded in
the office of the Register of Deeds prior to the effective date of this chapter, nor is it intended by this
chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provision or other laws
or ordinances except those specifically repealed by, or in conflict with, this chapter, or with private
restrictions placed upon property by deed, covenant or other private agreement, or with restrictive
covenants running with the land to which the city is a party. Where this chapter imposes a greater
restriction upon land than is imposed or required by the existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract or
deed, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
(1994 Code, ' 12.01)
' 152.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
COLLECTOR STREET. A street that carries traffic from minor streets to thoroughfares. It
includes the principal entrance streets of a residential development and principal streets for circulation
within that development.
EASEMENT. A grant by an owner of land for the specific use of the land by the public generally
or to a person or persons.
FINAL PLAT. The final map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider=s plan of subdivision is
presented to the Council for approval and which, if approved, will be submitted to the County Register of
Deeds.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET. A service drive or minor street that is parallel and adjacent to a
thoroughfare and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
MINOR STREET. A street of limited continuity used primarily for access to the abutting
properties and the local needs of a neighborhood.
OWNER. Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership corporation, trust or any
other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence
and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under this chapter.
PRELIMINARY PLAN. The preliminary map, drawing or chart indicating the proposed layout of
the subdivision.
STREET WIDTH. The shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of-way of a street.
SUBDIVIDER. Any person commencing proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision of
land hereunder for himself or herself or for another.
Subdivision Regulations (Platting)
11
SUBDIVISION. The division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels, for the purpose of
transfer of ownership or building development. The term includes RESUBDIVISION and, when
appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
THOROUGHFARE. A fast or heavy traffic street of considerable continuity, and used primarily
as a traffic artery for intercommunication among large areas, including highways and arterial streets.
(1994 Code, ' 12.02)
' 152.03 PRELIMINARY PLAN.
(A) Procedure for preliminary plan.
(1) Prior to preparation of a preliminary plan, it is suggested that the subdivider have a
preliminary discussion with the Planning Commission, the City Engineer and the Superintendent of the
school district in which the area to be subdivided is located.
(2) The subdivider shall submit to the City Clerk;
(a) Four copies of the preliminary plan; and
(b) A cash fee of $150 plus $10 for each lot up to a maximum total of $1,000. This fee will
be used for the expenses of the city in connection with approval or disapproval of the preliminary plan.
(3) The City Clerk shall upon receipt of preliminary plan:
(a) Refer one copy of the same to the City Engineer to ascertain whether the preliminary
plan includes the data required by this chapter;
(b) If the Engineer determines that all the necessary data is included, he or she shall notify
the Clerk who shall then refer one copy to the Planning Commission and one copy to the school district
Superintendent; and
(c) If the Engineer determines that all the necessary data is not included, he or she shall
notify the subdivider, who shall then supply the required data before further action can be taken.
(4) The City Engineer shall within 30 days submit his or her report to the Planning
Commission. This report shall be on the feasibility of street location and construction, and on any
drainage problems that might be encountered.
(5) The Planning Commission shall study the preliminary plan.
(a) The primary function of the Planning Commission in reviewing a preliminary plan is
to determine whether the plan conforms to the design standards set forth in this chapter.
(b) The Planning Commission may recommend approval of a preliminary plan subject to
Chisholm - Land Usage
12
certain revisions, and may delegate its staff or one of its members to see that the further revisions
conform to the intent of the Planning Commission.
(6) The Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed preliminary plan, and shall have
notice of the hearing published in the official paper at least ten days prior to the hearing.
(a) The subdivider shall certify that owners of unsubdivided property adjacent to the area
being subdivided have been notified of the hearing by mail. The Council shall act on the preliminary plan
within 60 days of the date on which it was filed with the City Clerk.
(b) If the report of the Planning Commission has not been received in time to meet this
requirement, the Council may act without the report.
(c) Approval of a preliminary plan by the Council is tentative only, involving merely the
general acceptability of the layout.
(d) Subsequent approval will be required of the engineering proposals, pertaining to water
supply, storm drainage, sewerage and sewage disposal, gas and electric service, grading, gradients and
roadway widths, and the surfacing of streets.
(e) If the preliminary plan is not approved by the Council, the reasons for that action shall
be recorded in the proceedings of the Council and transmitted to the applicant.
(B) Data required for preliminary plan.
(1) Scale of map. One inch to 100 feet, if possible; otherwise, one inch to 50 feet or 200 feet.
(2) Identification and description.
(a) Proposed name of subdivision, which name shall not duplicate or be alike in
pronunciation of the name of any plat theretofore recorded in the county;
(b) Location by section, town, range or by other legal description;
(c) Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider, surveyor and designer of the plan. The
subdivider shall submit a statement that he or she has the area being subdivided under ownership or
control;
(d) Graphic scale;
(e) North-point; and
(f) Date of preparation.
(3) Existing conditions in tract and in surrounding area to a distance of 100 feet.
Subdivision Regulations (Platting)
13
(a) Boundary line of proposed subdivision, clearly indicated;
(b) Any nonresidential zoning districts;
(c) Total approximate acreage;
(d) Platted streets, railroad right-of-way and utility easements;
(e) Boundary lines and ownership of adjoining unsubdivided land;
(f) Permanent buildings and structures;
(g) Sewers, water mains, culverts or other underground facilities;
(h) Topography, showing lakes, watercourses, marsh areas and contours at vertical
intervals of not more than two feet, except that contour lines shall be no more than 100 feet apart.
Contour lines shall be shown by means of dashed lines on the preliminary plan;
(i) Wooded areas; and
(j) Other information, such as soil tests, if requested by the City Engineer.
(4) Subdivision design features.
(a) Layout of proposed streets, showing approximate grades and gradients, right-of-way
widths and names of streets. The name of any street heretofore used in the municipality, or its environs,
shall not be used unless the proposed street is an extension of an already named street, in which event, the
name shall be used. The street layout shall include all contiguous land owned or controlled by the
subdivider;
(b) Location and widths of proposed pedestrian ways and utility easements;
(c) Layout, numbers and minimum dimensions of lots;
(d) Areas, other than streets, pedestrian ways and utility easements, intended to be
dedicated or reserved for public use, including the size of the area or areas in acres; and
(e) Proposed use of all parcels, and if zoning change is contemplated, proposed rezoning.
(1994 Code, ' 12.03)
' 152.04 FINAL PLAT.
(A) Procedure for final flat.
(1) Unless an extension of time is requested by the subdivider and granted by the Council, the
Chisholm - Land Usage
14
subdivider shall within six months following approval of the preliminary plan, submit to the City Clerk:
(a) Five copies of the final plat. This final plat shall incorporate all changes required by the
Council. Otherwise, it shall conform to the preliminary plan. The final plat may constitute only that
portion of the preliminary plan which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at the time. If the
final plat is not submitted within six months, the approval of the preliminary plan shall be considered
void; and
(b) An up-to-date certified abstract of title or registered property report, and other
evidence as the City Attorney may require showing title or control in the applicant.
(2) The City Clerk shall refer one copy of the final plat to the City Engineer, and one copy each
to the telephone and power companies. The Clerk shall refer the abstract of title or registered property
report to the City Attorney for his or her examination and report.
(3) The reports of the City Attorney and City Engineer shall be submitted to the Council within
15 days after filing of the final plat. The Engineer shall state whether the final plat and the proposed
improvements conform to the engineering standards and specifications established in this chapter. He or
she shall also state whether the final plat conforms to the preliminary plan.
(4) The Council shall act on the final plat within 60 days of the date on which it was filed with
the City Clerk. It shall not approve a final plat unless it:
(a) Conforms to the preliminary plan; and
(b) Meets the design standards and engineering specifications set forth in this chapter.
(5) If the final plat is approved by the Council, the subdivider shall record it with the County
Register of Deeds within 30 days after the date of approval otherwise, the approval shall be considered
void.
(6) The subdivider shall immediately, upon recording, furnish the City Clerk with one
completed cloth print of the final plat, showing evidence of the recording, and shall furnish to the City
Engineer a form of permanent tracing acceptable to the City Engineer.
(B) Data required for final plat.
(1) Plans for water supply, sewage disposal, drainage and flood control;
(2) Soil borings, as required by the City Engineer;
(3) Evidence that ground water control is at least ten feet below level of finished graded or plan
for solving ground water problems;
(4) Any supplementary engineering data required by the City Engineer;
Subdivision Regulations (Platting)
15
(5) Data required under regulation of County Surveyor; accurate, angular and lineal
dimensions for all lines, angles and curvatures used to describe boundaries, streets, easements, areas to
be reserved for public use and other important features;
(6) When lots are located on a curve, or when side lot lines are at angles other than 90 degrees,
the width of the building setback line shall be shown;
(7) An identification system for all lots and blocks;
(8) The size (in square feet) and dimensions of all lots;
(9) True angles and distances tied to the nearest established street lines or official monuments
(not less than three), which shall be accurately described in the plat;
(10) Municipal, township, county or section lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision
by distances and angles;
(11) Complete curve data, including radii, internal angles, points and curvatures, tangent
bearings and lengths of all arcs;
(12) Accurate location of all monuments;
(13) Certification by a registered land surveyor to the effect that the plat represents a survey
made by him or her, and that monuments and markers shown thereon exist as located and that all
dimensional and geodetic details are correct;
(14) Notarized certification by owner, and by any mortgage holder of record, of the adoption of
the plat and the dedication of streets and other public areas;
(15) Certifications showing that all taxes currently due on the property to be subdivided have
been paid in full; and
(16) Form for approval. Approved by the City of Chisholm, Minnesota, this ________ day of
______________, 20___.
(1994 Code, ' 12.04)
' 152.05 DESIGN STANDARDS.
(A) Streets.
(1) General design.
(a) The design of all streets shall be considered in their relation to: public safety; existing
and planned streets, efficient circulation of traffic; topographical conditions; runoff of storm water; and
proposed use of the land to be served by the streets.
Chisholm - Land Usage
16
(b) The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provisions for the
appropriate continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas.
(c) Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in new
subdivisions shall make provision for the proper projection of streets.
(d) When a new subdivision adjoins unsubdivided land susceptible to being divided, then
the new streets shall be carried to the boundaries of the unsubdivided land.
(2) Width. All right-of-way widths shall conform to the following minimum dimensions:
Arterial streets
66 feet
Collector streets
60 feet
Marginal access streets
50 feet
(3) Reverse curves. Tangents of at least 50 feet in length shall be introduced between reverse
curves on collector streets.
(4) Street grades. All centerline gradients shall be at least 0.5%, and shall not exceed the
following:
Collector streets
6%
Minor streets
8%
(5) Minor streets. Minor streets shall be so aligned that their use by through traffic will be
discouraged.
(6) Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided.
(7) Safe intersections. It must be evidenced that all street intersections encourage safe and
efficient traffic flow.
(8) Alleys. Alleys are not permitted in residential areas.
(9) Half-streets. Half-streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable
development of the subdivision and adjoining unsubdivided areas.
(10) Reserve strips. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except under
conditions approved by the Council.
(11) Private streets. Private streets shall not be approved, nor shall public improvements be
approved for any previously existing private street.
Subdivision Regulations (Platting)
17
(12) Hardship to owners of adjoining property. The street arrangements shall not be such as to
cause hardship to owners of adjoining property in platting their own land, and providing convenient
access to it.
(13) Street interval. In general, provisions shall be made at intervals not exceeding one-half mile
for through streets (streets running through the subdivision in a fairly direct manner).
(14) Intersections. In general, streets shall intersect at right angles.
(15) Corners. Property lines at residential street corners shall be rounded on a radius of not less
than ten feet, and curb lines on a radius of not less than 20 feet.
(B) Easements.
(1) Utilities. Easements at least 15 feet wide, centered on rear and other lot lines, shall be
provided for utilities, where necessary. They shall have continuity of alignment from block to block. At
deflection points, easements for pole-line anchors shall be provided, where necessary. Where the utilities
are to be developed on a radius, the easement shall be sufficiently wider.
(2) Drainage. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or
stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially
with the lines of the watercourse, together with further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate
for stormwater run-off. The easement shall include not only the stream channel, but also, adjoining areas
that have been subject to flooding in years of heavy run-off.
(3) Structures. No structure shall be erected on assigned easements without written approval
from the City Engineering Department.
(C) Blocks.
(1) Length. Block lengths shall not exceed 1,500 feet, and, if possible, should not be less than
400 feet in length.
(2) Arrangement. A block shall be so designed as to provide two tiers of lots, unless it adjoins a
railroad or limited access highway, and unless topographic conditions necessitate a single tier of lots.
(3) Pedestrian ways. In blocks over 1,200 feet long, a pedestrian way or easement may be
required in locations deemed necessary to public health, convenience and necessity. Such an easement
shall not be less than 15 feet in width.
(D) Lots.
(1) Location. All lots shall abut by their full frontage on a publicly dedicated street.
(2) Corner lots. Corner lots shall be platted at least 15 feet wider than the minimum lot size
Chisholm - Land Usage
18
required.
(3) Side lot lines. Side lines of lots shall be substantially at right angles or radial to the street
line.
(4) Watercourse. Lots abutting upon a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream shall have
an additional depth or width, as required, to assure house sites that are not subject to flooding.
(5) Features. In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be shown for all natural features,
such as tree growth, watercourses, historic spots or similar conditions, which, if preserved, will add
attractiveness and stability to the proposed development.
(6) Lot remnants. All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after subdividing of a
larger tract must be added to adjacent lots, rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels. However,
outlots may be used if there is a reasonable likelihood that future subdivision of adjoining land will
absorb these outlots into standard lots.
(7) Lots along thoroughfares. There shall be no direct vehicular access from residential lots to
a major thoroughfare, and residential lots shall be separated from major thoroughfares and railroad
rights-of-way by a 25-foot buffer strip, which may be in the form of added depth or width of lots backing
on or siding on the thoroughfare or railroad right-of-way. A screen-planting easement shall be granted to
the city for the 25-foot buffer strip if it adjoins a major thoroughfare.
(E) General. The proposed subdivision shall, in all respects, conform to the city plans.
(1994 Code, ' 12.05)
' 152.06 PUBLIC LAND.
(A) Because a new subdivision creates a need for recreation areas, as well as for streets, the Council
may require the dedication of a part of the subdivision for recreation area.
(B) In addition, wherever the city plan shows a proposed public site larger than the area to be
dedicated, the preliminary plan and final plat shall show the projected site, and the city shall have one
year in which to purchase the additional area.
(C) If the purchase has not been made within the year, the subdivider may proceed to subdivide the
additional area.
(1994 Code, ' 12.06)
' 152.07 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
Before the Council approves a final plat, the subdivider shall give satisfactory assurance of the
installation of the following improvements.
Subdivision Regulations (Platting)
19
(A) Monuments. Monuments shall be placed at all intersections of street centerlines, angle points,
points of curves and streets and at intermediate points, as shown on the final plat, and as required by the
City Engineer. These monuments shall be of materials, size and length as may be determined and
approved by the City Engineer. All U.S., state, county or other official benchmarks, monuments, or
triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property shall be preserved in precise positions.
(B) Streets. All the streets shall be improved in accordance with the engineering specifications
established by the city.
(C) Curb and gutter. These shall be provided along all streets.
(D) Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be installed in at the discretion of the City Engineer, Administrator
or Council.
(E) Water mains. Where connection with the municipal water system is feasible, the public water
facilities shall be used.
(F) Sanitary sewer. In all cases where trunk-line sanitary sewer facilities are available, the
subdivider shall be required to install sanitary sewers, and connect the same to the trunk-line sewers.
(G) Drainage facilities. The facilities and easements shall be installed as will adequately provide for
the drainage of surface waters.
(H) Tree planting. Trees having a trunk diameter (measured 12 inches above the ground), of not less
than one and three-quarter inches, shall be planted along all streets where trees do not exist, and not less
than one per lot. This requirement will be satisfied, and it is preferable if an equivalent number of the
same size exist or are planted in a naturalistic way in the front yards of the lots. The trees shall be planted
in at least one cubic yard of growing soil, and shall survive one growing season or be replaced and shall
be of a type specified by the city.
(I) Street name signs. These shall be placed at all street intersections within or abutting the
subdivision.
(J) Stop signs. Stop signs shall be placed on all streets intersecting a thoroughfare or collector
streets.
(K) Trunk facilities. Where a water main, sanitary sewer or storm drain facility should, according to
utility plans, be constructed at a larger size to serve areas outside the subdivision, the larger facility
should be constructed, the additional cost to be borne by the city.
(L) Specifications. All of the required improvements shall conform to engineering standards and
specifications, as required by the City Engineer.
(M) Financing. Before a final plat is approved by the Council, the subdivider shall submit an
agreement and performance bond or cash escrow agreement to assure the following:
Chisholm - Land Usage
20
(1) The Council shall determine what portion of the cost of all improvements required herein
which shall be borne by the subdivider; provided, however, that, in no case, shall the subdivider=s share
be less than 40%. This agreement shall provide for the payment of the costs of the improvements by the
subdivider. In addition to the costs, the agreement shall also provide for the payment of the subdivider=s
share of the costs of trunk facilities which must be extended to the subdivision. The costs to be
determined under provisions of division (K) above;
(2) Guaranteed completion of the required improvements within a two-year period;
(3) Payment by the subdivider for all cost incurred by the city for review and inspection. This
shall include the review of plans and specifications by the City Engineer, costs incurred by the City
Attorney, as well as other costs of similar nature. These payments shall be in addition to the subdivision
fee paid with the submission of the preliminary plan;
(4) The city may elect to install any of the required improvements under the terms of a cash
escrow agreement, or on an assessment basis. If the city should decide to so proceed, the improvements
shall be installed on the basis of public competitive bidding, and the subdivider shall be a qualified
contractor, and entitled to submitting bids for the installation of the improvements;
(5) The performance bond or cash escrow agreement shall be equal to one and one-half times
the subdivider=s share of the total cost of the required improvements, as estimated by the City Engineer;
and
(6) If the required improvements are not completed within the two-year period, all amounts
held under the escrow agreement or performance bond shall be turned over and delivered to the city and
applied to the cost of the required improvements. Any balance remaining after these improvements have
been made, shall be returned to the owner or subdivider.
(1994 Code, ' 12.07)
' 152.08 OTHER PROVISIONS.
(A) Variances and exceptions. Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the
way of carrying out the strict letter of the provisions of this chapter, the Council upon the
recommendation of the Planning Commission, shall have the power to vary the requirements of this
chapter in harmony with the general purpose and intent thereof, so that the public health, safety and
general welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. In particular, small subdivisions, where one
lot is divided into two or three lots, the submission of topographic maps, soil tests, other data and fee may
not be necessary if the Council, upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission, so determines.
Minor subdivision of larger areas, where a tract of land over five acres is divided into two parcels, shall
be exempted from all the provisions of this chapter; however, a dimensioned map of such a subdivision
shall be filed with the City Clerk within 30 days after the subdivision has been made.
(B) Building permits. No building permit shall be issued by any governing official for the
construction of any building, structure or improvement on any land henceforth subdivided until all
Subdivision Regulations (Platting)
21
requirements of this chapter have been fully complied with.
(1994 Code, ' 12.08)
' 152.09 VIOLATIONS.
Every person violates a section, division, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he or she
performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when the failure is thereby
prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor
except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
(1994 Code, ' 12.99) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Chisholm - Land Usage
22
23
CHAPTER 153: ZONING CODE/LAND USE REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
153.01 Purpose
153.02 General provisions
153.03 Rule
153.04 Definitions
153.05 Performance standards
153.06 Administration
153.07 Miscellaneous
153.08 Zoning district boundaries
153.09 Enforcement
153.10 Tree Board; provisions
153.11 Violations
District Provisions
153.25 Districts
153.26 Zoning map
153.27 Minimum requirements
153.28 Exceptions and additions to above minimum requirements
153.29 Permitted uses
153.30 Accessory and special uses in Residence Districts
153.31 Accessory and special uses in Business and Industrial Districts
153.32 Agriculture uses
153.33 Automobile service uses
153.34 Equipment sales and service uses
153.35 Health/medical uses
153.36 Home occupations
153.37 Manufacturing uses
153.38 Miscellaneous business uses
153.39 Office/financial uses
153.40 Public utility uses
153.41 Retail shopping uses
153.42 Special uses in mining districts
Chisholm - Land Usage
24
Wetlands Regulations
153.55 Purpose
153.56 Wetland Overlay Map
153.57 Wetland Overlay District
153.58 Wetland alterations
153.59 Roads, parking areas and other impervious surfaces
153.60 Sewage disposal, county permit required; nonconforming uses
153.61 Definitions
153.62 Administration
153.63 Property exempt
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 153.01 PURPOSE.
(A) This chapter is being enacted in order to protect and promote the public health, safety and
general welfare of the people of the city.
(B) Specifically, the provisions are designed to achieve, among others, the following objectives:
(1) Civic beauty;
(2) Adequate light, air and safety from fire for occupants of structures;
(3) Conservation of the value of land and buildings;
(4) A balanced tax base as between residential and business uses;
(5) Stability of residential neighborhoods;
(6) A minimum of congestion in the public streets;
(7) Compatibility between different land uses; and
(8) Reasonable standards to which structures and uses shall conform.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
Zoning Code/Land Use Regulations
25
' 153.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(A) Lots and buildings.
(1) Compliance with this chapter. No building or premises may hereafter be used or occupied,
and no building permits shall be granted that do not conform to the requirements of this chapter.
(2) Street frontage required. No lot shall contain any building used as a dwelling unless it has a
minimum lot size of 6,000 square feet, abuts at least 50 feet on a street, or has a permanent exclusive
non-obstructed easement of access not less than 50 feet to a street.
(3) Accessory buildings. No accessory building or structure, unless an integral part of the
principal building, shall be erected, altered or moved within eight feet of the principal building in the R-1
and R-2 District.
(4) Relocated structures. Before any house or other structure is moved onto a vacant lot, the
Building Official shall determine whether the structure will be compatible with other development in the
area. If the Building Official determines that the structure, in its present condition, would depreciate the
area, and not meet building code, he or she shall so state in writing, and shall list the improvements and
code requirements necessary to make the structure acceptable for relocation.
(5) Required area not to be reduced. No lot, yard or parking area shall be so reduced in area or
dimension as to make any such area or dimension less than the minimum required by this chapter and if
already less than the minimum required, it shall not be further reduced.
(6) Annexations. Future annexations of territory to the city will be automatically zoned as R-2
Residential Districts, until a time as it is deemed desirable to change the zoning assignment.
(7) Foundation requirements. Dwellings shall be placed on a building code compliant,
permanent foundation. No dwelling shall be mounted on a wheel and axle undercarriage.
(B) Permitted encroachments. The following shall not be considered as encroachments on setback
and height requirements:
(1) In any yards: off-street open parking spaces, terraces, awnings, canopies, steps, decks,
chimneys, flag poles;
(2) In front, side and rear yards: fences, walls and hedges be no higher than six feet in height. In
cases of a corner lot, no fence, wall or hedge shall be higher than three feet for a distance of 33 feet from
the intersection of property lines of the two streets. No fence, wall or hedge may be permitted to encroach
on adjoining property lines. Fences, walls, hedges and trees will be well maintained. Fences, walls and
hedges shall be set back two feet from property lines not having a registered survey with registered
survey stakes, and five feet from alley rights-of-way. In the case of where houses are less than ten feet
apart the fence shall not divide the two properties, but must be returned to the house in the front as well as
the back. A fence installed on the property owners= land within the two feet setback shall be determined
Chisholm - Land Usage
26
by a registered land surveyor to be obtained at the property owner=s expense and provided to the
Building Official prior to construction. ENCROACHMENT shall be defined as that part of any fence,
wall, driveway, tree, tree branch or hedge, on or across a neighbor=s property line. The use of trees as a
fence shall not be permitted;
(3) In rear yards: recreational and laundry drying equipment, arbors and trellises, balconies,
breezeways, open porches, decks, detached outdoor living rooms; or
(4) Height limitations shall not apply to barns, silos and other structures on farms; to church
spires, belfries, cupolas and domes; monuments; water towers; fire and hose towers; observation towers;
chimneys and smokestacks; flag poles; telephone poles; electric power transmission facilities; wireless
transmission towers; television antennas and parapet walls extending not more than four feet over the
limiting height of the building.
(C) Nonconforming uses. The lawful use of any land or building existing at the time of the adoption
of this chapter may be continued, even if the use does not conform to the regulations of this chapter;
provided:
(1) No such nonconforming use of land shall be enlarged or increased, or occupy a greater area
of land than that occupied by the use on the effective date of this chapter;
(2) The nonconforming use shall not be moved to any other part of the parcel of land upon
which the same was conducted on the effective date of this chapter;
(3) A nonconforming use of a building existing on the effective date of this chapter may be
extended throughout the building; provided, no structural alteration except those required by provisions
of the city code, ordinance, law or other regulations are made therein;
(4) If the nonconforming use consists of a substantial building and ceases for a continuous
period of one year, any subsequent use of the building shall be in conformity to the use regulations
specified by this chapter for the district in which the building is located;
(5) Any structure which represents a nonconforming use shall not be rebuilt or reconstructed to
its former use and physical dimensions if damaged 50% or more by fire, wind, earthquake or explosion
according to the estimate of the Building Official and approved by the Planning Commission;
(6) Any nonconforming use of land, with or without a structure, having an assessed value as of
the effective date of this chapter of $500 or less, may be continued for a period of three years after the
effective date of this chapter, whereupon the nonconforming use shall cease; and
(7) A nonconforming use may be changed to a different, nonconforming use in the same
zoning classification (e.g., a food store to a hardware store).
(D) Requirements as minimum. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements. Wherever this chapter imposes greater restrictions than are
imposed or required by other provisions of law or by other rules or regulations, the provisions of this
Zoning Code/Land Use Regulations
27
chapter shall govern.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
' 153.03 RULE.
All measured distances, as used in this chapter, shall be to the nearest integral foot. If a fraction is
one-half foot or less, the integral foot next below shall be taken.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
' 153.04 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. The use or structure subordinate to the principal use or
building on the same lot and serving a purpose customarily incidental thereto.
APARTMENT. A room or suite of rooms with cooking facilities available which is occupied as a
residence by a single family.
AUTO-WRECKING YARD. Any open space where three or more inoperative vehicles are stored
which are not registered, and which do not possess current state auto licenses.
BASEMENT. As defined in the Building Code.
BOARDING HOUSE (ROOMING OR LODGING HOUSE). A building containing lodging
rooms accommodating, for compensation, three or more persons, but not exceeding 12, who are not of
the keeper=s family. Lodging may be provided with or without meals.
BUILDING. Any structure which is built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals,
chattels or movable property of any kind which is permanently affixed to the land.
BUSINESS. Any occupation, employment or enterprise wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold,
or which occupies time, attention, labor and materials, or where services are offered for compensation.
CHURCH. A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons regularly
assemble for religious worship, and which building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is
maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship.
CLUB or LODGE. A club or lodge which is a non-profit association of persons, who are bona fide
members paying annual dues, use of premises being restricted to members and their guests. It shall be
permissible to serve food and meals on the premises, providing adequate dining room space and kitchen
facilities are available. Serving of alcoholic beverages to members and their guests shall be allowed,
Chisholm - Land Usage
28
providing the serving is secondary and incidental to the operation of the dining room for the purpose of
serving food and meals and, providing further, that the serving of alcoholic beverages is in compliance
with the applicable federal, state and municipal laws.
DOG KENNEL. Any place where four or more dogs over six months of age are boarded, bred
and/or offered for sale.
DWELLING. A residential building or portion thereof, but not including hotels, motels, boarding
or rooming houses, tourist homes or trailers.
FAMILY.
(1) An individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, living
together; or
(2) A group of not more than five persons who need not be related by blood, marriage or
adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, exclusive of usual servants.
FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, or
portion thereof, devoted to a particular use, including accessory storage areas located within selling or
working space, such as counters, racks or closets; and any basement floor area devoted to retailing
activities, to the production or processing of goods, or to business or professional offices; however, the
FLOOR AREA shall not include: basement floor area other than area devoted to retailing activities, the
production or processing of goods, or to business or professional offices. The FLOOR AREA of a
residence shall include 50% of the area of attached garages and enclosed breezeways or porches, but
shall not include basement area.
GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or accessory portion of the principal building which
is intended for and used to store the private passenger vehicles of the family or families resident upon the
premises, and in which no business service or industry is carried on; provided, that not more than
one-half of the space may be rented for the private vehicles of persons not resident on the premises,
except that all the space in a garage of one or two-car capacity may be so rented. Such a garage shall not
be used for more than one commercial vehicle. The load capacity of the commercial vehicle shall not
exceed one ton.
GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building or portion of a building, except any herein defined as a private
garage or as a repair garage, used for the storage of motor vehicles, or where any such vehicles are kept
for remuneration or hire, and in which any sale of gasoline, oil and accessories is only incidental to the
principal use.
GARAGE, REPAIR. A building or space for the repair or maintenance of motor vehicles, but not
including factory assembly of the vehicles, auto-wrecking establishments or junk yards.
HOME OCCUPATION. Any gainful occupation or profession engaged in by the occupant of a
dwelling at or from the dwelling when carried on within a dwelling unit, and not in an accessory building.
Zoning Code/Land Use Regulations
29
HOTEL. A building which provides a common entrance, lobby, halls and stairway, and in which
lodging is offered with or without meals to thirteen or more guests.
JUNK YARD. An open area where waste, used or second-hand materials are bought, sold,
exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap iron and
other metals, paper, rags, rubber, tires and bottles. A JUNK YARD includes an auto-wrecking yard, but
does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings.
LODGING ROOM. A room rented as sleeping and living quarters, but without cooking facilities,
and with or without an individual bathroom. In a suite of rooms without cooking facilities, each room,
which provides sleeping accommodation, shall be counted as one LODGING ROOM.
LOT (OF RECORD). A parcel of land, whether subdivided or otherwise legally described, as of
the effective date of this chapter, or approved by the city as a lot subsequent to the date, and which is
occupied by or intended for occupancy by one principal building or principal use, together with any
accessory buildings and the open spaces, as required by this chapter, and having its principal frontage
upon a street.
LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the junction of or abutting on two or more intersecting streets; or
a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a single street, the interior angle of which is 135 degrees or
less.
LOT, FRONT OF. The boundary abutting a public street right-of-way having the least width. The
owner of a corner lot may select either street lot line as the front lot line.
LOT, LINE. A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate ownership; except that
where any portion of the lot extends into the abutting street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the
street or alley line.
LOT, WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines at the front setback line.
MOTEL (TOURIST COURT). A building or group of detached, semi-detached or attached
buildings containing guest rooms or dwellings, each of which has a separate outside entrance leading
directly from the outside of the building, with garage or parking space conveniently located to each unit,
and which is designed, used or intended to be used primarily for the accommodation of automobile
transients.
NONCONFORMING USE. Any building, structure or land lawfully occupied by a use, or
lawfully established at the time of the effective date of this chapter, or amendments thereto, which does
not conform, after the effective date of this chapter, or amendments thereto, with the use regulations
therein.
OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE. A space accessible from a street, alley or driveway for the use
of trucks while loading or unloading merchandise or materials. The space shall be of a size so as to
accommodate one truck of the type typically used in the particular business.
Chisholm - Land Usage
30
OPEN SALES LOT. Any land used or occupied for the purpose of buying and selling second-hand
passenger cars and/or trucks, motor scooters, motorcycles, boats, trailers, aircraft construction equipment
and monuments, and for the storing of same prior to sale.
PARKING SPACE. A suitably surfaced and permanently maintained area on privately-owned
property, either within or outside of a building of sufficient size to store one standard automobile.
PUBLIC STABLES. A stable where horses are kept for remuneration, hire or sale.
REST HOME (NURSING HOME). A private home for the care of children or the aged, or infirm
or place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders. Such a home does not contain equipment for surgical
care or for the treatment of disease or injury, nor does it include maternity care or care for mental
illnesses or infirmities.
SERVICE STATION. A place where gasoline, kerosene or other motor fuel or lubricating oil or
grease for operating motor vehicles is offered for sale to the public, and deliveries are made directly into
motor vehicles. Includes greasing and oiling and the sale of automobile accessories on the premises. Also
includes minor repairs, incidental body and fender work, painting and upholstering, replacement of parts
and motor services to passenger automobiles and trucks not exceeding one and one-half tons capacity. It
shall not include general repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers;
collision service, including body, frame or fender straightening or repair overall painting or paint job:
vehicle steam cleaning.
SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between a building and street easement or lot line.
SIGN. A name, identification, description, display, illustration, structure or device which is affixed
to, or painted, or represented directly or indirectly upon a building or other outdoor surface or piece of
land, and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or
business, and may be a single-faced, double-faced or AV@-type structure.
SIGN, ADVERTISING. A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or
entertainment, not necessarily conducted, sold or offered upon the premises where the sign is located or
to which it is affixed.
SIGN, BUSINESS. A sign which directs attention to a business or profession or to the primary
commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where the sign is located or to
which it is attached.
SIGN, FLASHING. Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not maintained stationary,
and/or constant in intensity and color at all times when the sign is in use.
SIGN, GROSS SURFACE AREA. The entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing
the extreme limits of the sign, and, in no case, passing through or between any adjacent elements of same;
however, the perimeter shall not include any structural elements lying outside the limits of the sign, and
not forming any integral part of the display. In computing square foot area, only one side of a double-face
of AV@-type structure shall be considered.
Zoning Code/Land Use Regulations
31
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION. A sign identifying a resident, school, church or other non-business
use.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED. Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, design or outline
illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as a part of the sign proper.
SIGN, PEDESTAL. A sign erected upon a single post or shaft.
SIGN, TEMPORARY. A sign that is not solidly affixed to the ground or to a building.
STRUCTURE. Anything erected, the use of which required more or less permanent location on the
ground, or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground. This shall include signs.
TRAILER PARK. Any premises on which are parked one or more trailers, or any premises used or
held out for the purpose of supplying to the public a parking space for one or more of the trailers; does not
include sales lots, on which, automobiles or unoccupied trailers, new or used, are parked for purposes of
inspection or sale.
YARD. An open space on the lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level to the
sky. The YARD extends along the line at right angles to the lot line to a depth or width specified in the
setback regulations for the zoning district in which the lot is located.
YARD, FRONT. The portion of the yard extending from the front lot line to the setback line, and
extending for the full width of the lot.
YARD, REAR. The portion of the yard on the same lot with the principal building located between
the rear line of the building and the rear lot line, and extending for the full width of the lot.
YARD, SIDE. The yard extending along the side lot line between the front and rear yards.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
' 153.05 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
The performance standards established in this section are designed to encourage high quality
residential and business development by providing assurance that neighboring land uses will be
compatible. The performance standards are also designed to prevent and eliminate those conditions that
cause blight. All future development in the city shall be required to meet these standards. The standards
shall also apply to existing development where so stated. The Building Official shall be responsible for
enforcing these standards, and may require the submission of information showing compliance or
non-compliance with the standards. Before any building permit is approved, the Building Official shall
determine whether the proposed use is likely to conform to the performance standards. The developer
shall supply additional data about the proposed use (such as equipment to be used, hours of operation,
method of refuse disposal, type and location of exterior storage and the like), where required to do so by
the Building Official. It may occasionally be necessary for a developer or business to employ specialized
Chisholm - Land Usage
32
consultants to demonstrate that a given use will not exceed the performance standards.
(A) Exterior storage.
(1) In R Residential Districts, all materials and equipment shall be stored within a building
except materials currently being used on the premises, agricultural equipment and materials if these are
used or intended for use on the premises, off-street parking of passenger automobiles and children=s play
equipment.
(2) In all other districts, no materials or equipment may be stored outside except those directly
related to the principal use or those being used for construction on the premises.
(B) Refuse. In all areas, all waste material, debris, refuse or garbage shall be kept in an enclosed
building, or properly contained in a closed container designed for that purpose. The owner of vacant land
shall be responsible for keeping the land free of refuse. All owners of lands within the city shall keep the
boulevards adjacent to their lands free and clear of all refuse, debris and waste materials.
(C) Screening.
(1) Screening shall be required in all zones where:
(a) Any off-street parking area contains more than six parking spaces and is within 30 feet
of an adjoining residential zone; or
(b) Where the driveway to a parking area of more than six parking spaces is within 15 feet
of an adjoining residential zone.
(2) Where any business or industrial use (i.e., structure, parking or storage) is adjacent to
property zoned for residential use, that business or industry shall provide screening along the boundary of
the residential property.
(3) Screening shall also be provided where a business or industry is across the street from a
residential zone, but not on that side of a business or industry considered to be the front (as determined by
the Building Official).
(4) In all districts, all exterior storage shall be screened. The exceptions are:
(a) Retail merchandise being displayed in front of the structure;
(b) Materials and equipment being used for construction on the premises; and
(c) Merchandise located on service station pump islands.
(5) Where any business or industrial use (i.e., structure, parking or storage) is adjacent to
property zoned for residential use, that business or industry shall provide screening along the boundary of
the residential property. Screening shall also be provided where a business or industry is across the street
from a residential zone, but not on that side of a business or industry considered to be the front (as
Zoning Code/Land Use Regulations
33
determined by the Building Official).
(D) Landscaping.
(1) In all districts, except RB, all developed uses shall provide a landscaped yard along all
streets. This yard shall be kept clear of all structures, storage and vehicle parking. In the residential zones,
the owner shall provide a landscaped yard, which shall be at least equal to the setback regulations for any
building located upon the property. In Limited Business and Industrial Districts, the yard shall be at least
20 feet in depth along all streets, measured from the street right-of-way. Except for driveways, the yard
shall extend along the entire frontage of the lot, and along both streets in the case of a corner lot.
(2) In all districts, the owner shall install and maintain the boulevard immediately adjacent to
and in front of his or her property to the same extent and in the same manner as his or her own yard.
(E) Maintenance. In all districts, all structures requiring landscaping and fences, shall be
maintained so as not to be unsightly to the adjoining areas.
(F) Glare. In all districts, the source of any light shall not be visible in the adjoining public streets or
within any adjoining property used or zoned for residential purposes.
(G) Signs.
(1) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ABANDONED SIGN. Any sign and/or its supporting sign structure which remains
without a message or whose display surface remains blank for a period of one year or more, or any sign
which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been
abandoned. Signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended because of a change in ownership or
management of such business shall not be deemed abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a
period of one year or more. Any sign remaining after demolition of a principal structure shall be deemed
to be abandoned. Signs which are present because of being legally established nonconforming signs or
signs which have required a conditional use permit or a variance shall also be subject to the definition of
abandoned sign.
AWNING. A roof-like cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal or glass designed and intended
for protection from the weather or as a decorative embellishment, and which projects from a wall or roof
of a structure primarily over a window, walk, or the like. Any part of an awning which also projects over
a door shall be counted as an awning.
AWNING SIGN. A building sign or graphic printed on or in some fashion attached
directly to the awning material.
BALLOON SIGN. A sign consisting of a bag made of lightweight material supported by
helium, hot or pressurized air which is greater than 24 inches in diameter.
Chisholm - Land Usage
34
BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or
occupancy.
BUILDING SIGN. Any sign attached or supported by any structure used or intended for
supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
CABINET SIGN. Any wall sign that is not of channel or individually mounted letter
construction.
CANOPY. A roof-like cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal, or glass on a support, which
provides shelter over a doorway.
CANOPY SIGN. Any sign that is part of or attached to a canopy, made of fabric, plastic
or structural protective cover over a door or entrance. A CANOPY SIGN is not a marquee and is different
from service area canopy signs.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN. A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters or
illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGNS do not include signs upon which characters, letters or illustrations
change or rearrange only once in a 24-hour period.
COMMERCIAL SPEECH. Speech advertising a business, profession, commodity,
service or entertainment.
ELEVATION. The view of the side, front or rear of a given structure(s).
ELEVATION AREA. The area of all walls that face any lot line.
ERECT. Activity of constructing, building, raising, assembling, placing, affixing,
attaching, creating, painting, drawing or any other way of bringing into being or establishing.
FLAG. Any fabric or similar lightweight material attached at one end of the material,
usually to a staff or pole, so as to allow movement of the material by atmospheric changes and which
contains distinctive colors, patterns, symbols, emblems, insignia or other symbolic devices.
FLASHING SIGN. A directly or indirectly illuminated sign which exhibits changing
light or color effect by any means, so as to provide intermittent illumination which includes the illusion
of intermittent flashing light by means of animation. Also any mode of lighting which resembles
zooming, twinkling or sparkling.
FREESTANDING SIGN. Any sign which has supporting framework that is placed on,
or anchored in, the ground and which is independent from any building or other structure.
FRONTAGE. The line of contact of a property with the public right-of-way.
GRADE. The final ground elevation after construction. Earth mounding criteria for
Zoning Code/Land Use Regulations
35
landscaping and screening is not part of the final grade for sign height computation.
GROUND SIGN. Any freestanding sign with its sign face mounted on the ground or
mounted on a base at least as wide as the sign.
HEIGHT OF SIGN. The height of the sign shall be computed as the vertical distance
measured from the base of the sign at grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign.
HOTEL, MOTEL, MOTOR HOTEL. Any building or combination of buildings contain
six or more rooms used for sleeping purposes by guest on a transient basis.
ILLUMINATED SIGN. Any sign which contains an element designed to emanate
artificial light internally or externally.
INTERIOR SIGN. A sign which is located within the interior of any building, or within
an enclosed lobby or court of any building, and a sign for and located within the inner or outer body,
court or entrance of any theater.
ISSUING AUTHORITY. The Planning Commission.
LEGALLY ESTABLISHED NONCONFORMING SIGN. Any sign and its support
structure lawfully erected prior to the effective date of this section which fails to conform to the
requirements of this section. A sign which was erected in accordance with a variance granted prior to the
adoption of this section and which does not comply with this section shall be deemed to be a legal
nonconforming sign. A sign which was unlawfully erected shall be deemed to be an illegal sign.
MARQUEE. Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a theater building or
extending along and projecting beyond the wall of that building, generally designed and constructed to
provide protection from the weather.
MARQUEE SIGN. Any building sign painted, mounted, constructed or attached in any
manner, on a marquee.
MONUMENT SIGN. Any freestanding sign with its sign face mounted on the ground or
mounted on a base at least as wide as the sign and which has a height exceeding four feet.
MULTIPLE TENANT SITE. Any site which has more than one tenant and each tenant
has a separate ground level exterior public entrance.
NON-COMMERCIAL SPEECH. Dissemination of messages not classified as
commercial speech which include, but are not limited to, messages concerning political, religious, social,
ideological, public service and informational topics.
OFF-PREMISE SIGN. A commercial speech sign which directs the attention of the
public to a business, activity conducted, or product sold or offered at a location not on the same premises
where such business sign is located. For purposes of this section, easements and other appurtenances
Chisholm - Land Usage
36
shall be considered to be outside such platted parcel of land and any sign located or proposed to be
located in an easement or other appurtenance shall be considered an off-premise sign.
ON-PREMISE MESSAGES. Identify or advertise an establishment, person, activity,
goods, products or services located on the premises where the sign is installed.
PARAPET (WALL). That portion of building wall that rises above the roof level.
POLE SIGN. See PYLON SIGN.
PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign which is manifestly designed to be transported, including
by trailer or on its own wheels, even though the wheels of such sign may be removed and the remaining
chassis or support is converted to another sign or attached temporarily or permanently to the ground since
this characteristic is based on the design of such a sign.
PORTE COCHERE. A roofed structure or roof-like cover, extending from the entrance
of a building and which provides shelter over a doorway.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING. The building in which the principal primary use of the lot is
conducted. Lots with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings, but storage
buildings, garages and other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings.
PROJECTING SIGN. Any sign which is affixed to a building or wall in a manner that its
leading edge extends more than two feet beyond the surface or such building or wall face.
PROPERTY OWNER. Legal owner of property as officially recorded by the county.
PUBLIC NOTICES. Official notices posted by public officers, employees or their agents
in the performance of their duties or as directed by such officers, employees or agents.
PUBLIC STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY. The planned right-of-way for a public street.
PYLON SIGN. Any freestanding sign which has its supportive structure(s) anchored in
the ground and which has a sign face elevated above ground level by pole(s) or beam(s) and with the area
below the sign face open.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. Any district zoned for residential uses.
ROOF. The exterior surface and it supporting structure on the top of a building or
structure. The structural make-up of which conforms to the roof structures, roof construction and roof
covering sections of the Minnesota Building Code.
ROOF LINE. The upper-most edge of the roof or in the case of an extended facade or
parapet, the upper-most height of said facade.
ROOF SIGN. Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and above the roof of a
Zoning Code/Land Use Regulations
37
building, supported by the roof structure and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof.
ROOF SIGN, INTEGRAL. Any building sign erected or constructed as an integral or
essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, so that no part of the sign extends
vertically above the highest portion of the roof and so that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of
the roof by a space of more than six inches.
ROTATING SIGN. A sign or portion of a sign which turns about on an axis.
SETBACK, FRONT. The minimum horizontal distance permitted between the public
right-of-way and a structure on the premises. In instances in which a property fronts on more than one
street, front setbacks are required on all street frontages.
SETBACK, REAR. The minimum horizontal distance permitted between the property
line opposite the principal street frontage and a structure on the premises.
SETBACK, SIDE. The minimum horizontal distance permitted between the side lot line
and a structure on the premises.
SHIMMERING SIGNS. A sign which reflects an oscillating sometimes distorted visual
image.
SIGN. Any letter, word or symbol, poster, picture, statuary, reading matter or
representation in the nature of advertisement, announcement, message or visual communication, whether
painted, posted, printed, affixed or constructed, including all associated brackets, braces, supports, wires
and structures, which is displayed for informational or communicative purposes.
SIGN FACE. The surface of the sign upon, against or through which the message of the
sign is exhibited.
SIGN STRUCTURE. Any structure including the supports, uprights, bracing and
framework which supports or is capable of supporting any sign.
SITE. A plot or parcel of land, or combination of contiguous lots or parcels of land, which
are intended, designated, and/or approved to function as an integrated unit.
STRINGER. A line of string, rope, cording or an equivalent to which is attached a
number of pennants.
SUSPENDED SIGN. Any building sign that is suspended from the underside of a
horizontal plane surface and is connected to this surface.
TOTAL SITE SIGNAGE. The maximum permitted combined area of all freestanding
and wall identification signs allowed on a specific property.
VISIBLE. Capable of being seen by a person of normal visual acuity (whether legible or
Chisholm - Land Usage
38
not) without visual aid.
WALL. Any structure which defines the exterior boundaries or courts of a building or
structure and which has a slope of 60 degrees or greater with the horizontal plane.
WALL SIGN. Any building sign attached parallel to, but within two feet of a wall,
painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building
or structure, which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface.
WINDOW SIGN. Any building sign, pictures, symbol or combination thereof, designed
to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale or service, that is placed
inside a window or upon the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.
(2) Administration and enforcement.
(a) Permit required.
1. No sign shall be erected, altered, reconstructed, maintained or moved in the city
without first securing a permit from the city. The content of the sign shall not be reviewed or considered
in determining whether to approve or deny a sign permit. A city application for a permit shall be
completed, and to include the following:
A. A complete set of plans showing the necessary elevations, distances, size and
details to fully and clearly represent the construction and place of the signs;
B. Type of sign (such as, wall sign, monument sign and the like);
C. Certification by applicant indicating the application complies with all
requirements of this division; and
D. If the proposed sign is along a state trunk highway or interstate highway, the
application shall be accompanied by proof that the applicant has obtained a permit from the state for the
sign.
2. The issuing authority shall approve or deny the sign permit in an expedited
manner no more than 60 days from the receipt of the complete application, including applicable fee. All
permits not approved or denied within 60 days shall be deemed approved. If the permit is denied, the
issuing authority shall prepare a written notice of within ten days its decision, describing the applicant=s
appeal rights under state statute, and send it by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant.
(b) Exemptions. The following signs shall not require a permit. These exemptions,
however, shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign from the responsibility of its erection
and maintenance, and its compliance with the provisions of this division or any other law or ordinance
regulating the same.
1. The changing of the display surface on a painted or printed sign only. This
exemption, however, shall apply only to poster replacement and/or on-site changes involving sign
Zoning Code/Land Use Regulations
39
painting elsewhere than directly on a building.
2. Signs six square feet or less in size.
(c) Fees. Sign permit fees are set by the latest city-approved fee schedule.
(d) Repairs. Any sign located in the city which may now be or hereafter become out of
order, rotten or unsafe, and every sign which shall hereafter be erected, altered, resurfaced, reconstructed
or moved contrary to the provisions of this division, shall be removed or otherwise properly secured in
accordance with the terms of this division by the owners thereof or by the owners of the grounds on
which the sign shall stand, upon receipt of proper notice so to do, given by the issuing authority. No
rotten or other unsafe sign shall be repaired or rebuilt except in accordance with the provisions of this
division and upon a permit issued by the issuing authority.
(e) Removal. In the event of the failure of the owner or person, company or corporation
having control of any sign, or the owner of the ground on which the sign is located, to remove or repair
the sign within 60 days after the use is terminated, a notice shall be given by the city, and the sign may be
removed by the city at the expense of the owner or manager of the sign, or the owner of the ground upon
which the sign stands.
(f) Violations. Violation of this division is a misdemeanor. Each day that the violation
continues is a separate offense.
(3) Size. No sign shall exceed 250 square feet in area.
(4) Regulations.
(a) Generally. Except as hereinafter provided, no signs shall be erected or maintained at
any angle to a building or structure which sign is placed, extends or projects over the sidewalk, street or
highway easement. No sign which is erected or maintained flat against any building on Lake Street shall
extend or project more than two feet over the street easement.
(b) Exceptions. The provisions of this division do not prohibit the erection and
maintenance of signs, either illuminated or un-illuminated, which are on the sides of a marquee which is
firmly attached to and a part of a theatre or other building, providing such signs are an integral part of the
marquee and do not project above or below the marquee; or the erection and maintenance of signs, not
illuminated, which are attached to the marquee and which do not project more than 16 inches above the
marquee.
(5) Below marquee. No sign, either illuminated or non-illuminated, may project below a
marquee.
(6) Electrical signs. Electrical signs must be installed in accordance with the current
Electrical Code and a separate permit from the Building Official must be obtained prior to placement.
(7) Unauthorized signs. The following signs are unauthorized signs:
Chisholm - Land Usage
40
(a) Any sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or
resembles any official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or emergency vehicle signal, or
which attempts to direct the movement of traffic or which hides from view or interferes with the
effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal.
(b) All off-premise signs.
(c) Signs painted, attached or in any other manner affixed to trees, rocks or similar natural
surfaces, or attached to public utility poles, bridges, towers, or similar public structures.
(d) Portable signs.
(e) Changeable copy signs.
(8) Setbacks in yards. Signs shall conform to building yard regulations for the zoning district
in which the signs are located except as otherwise specified in this section.
Zoning Code/Land Use Regulations
41
Residential
RB
GB
LB
EB
I
Abutting County Road
Front yard
1'
1'
1'
1'
1'
10'
10'
Side yard
5'
5'
5'
5'
5'
10'
10'
Rear yard
5'
10'
10'
10'
10'
10'
10'
Rear yard - abutting R District 20'
(9) Area. The area within the frame shall be used to calculate the square footage except that
the width of a frame exceeding 12 inches shall constitute sign face, and if such letters or graphics be
mounted directly on a wall or fascia or in such way as to be without a frame, the dimensions for
calculating the square footage shall be the area extending six inches beyond the periphery formed around
such letters or graphics in a plane figure bounded by straight lines connecting the outermost points
thereof. Each surface utilized to display a message or to attract attention shall be measured as a separate
sign and shall be calculated in the overall square footage. Symbols, flags, pictures, wording, figures or
other forms of graphics painted on or attached to windows, walls, awnings, free-standing structures,
suspended by balloons or kites or on persons, animals or vehicles are considered a sign and are included
in calculating the overall square footage.
(10) Canopies, marquees and fixed awnings. Canopies, marquees and fixed awnings are an
integral part of the structure to which they are attached. They are allowed in the Business and Industrial
Districts if they meet following requirements and the applicable square footage requirements.
(a) An awning, canopy or marquee may not project into the street or road easement;
(b) Awnings, canopies or marquees may have no part of the structure other than supports
nearer the ground surface than eight feet;
(c) The architectural style of the awning, canopy or marquee may be consistent with the
building being served;
(d) Awnings, canopies or marquees built over the public right-of-way street or road
easement must be included in a liability insurance policy holding the city free of all responsibility.
(11) Illumination. External illumination for signs shall be so constructed and maintained that
the source of light is not visible from the public right-of-way or residential property.
(12) Height. The top of a sign, including its superstructure, if any, shall be no higher than the
roof of the building to which such sign may be attached or 35 feet above ground level, whichever height
is less; except that the height of any changeable sign which is attached to or an integral part of a
functional structure, such as a water tower, smoke stack, wireless transmitting tower, beacon or similar
structure shall be no higher than such structure. Signs, including any superstructure standing or erected
free of any building or other structure, shall not exceed an overall height of 35 feet from ground level and
shall be located on land in an area which is landscaped or if such land is part of an approved parking area,
Chisholm - Land Usage
42
it shall be surfaced or paved as required in the zoning code.
(13) Retroactive affect. This division shall apply to all sign applications applied for and/or
pending prior to its enactment.
(14) Non-commercial speech. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this division, all signs
of any size containing non-commercial speech may be posted from August 1 in any general election year
until ten days following the general election and 13 weeks prior to any special election until ten days
following the special election.
(15) Specific regulations by zoning district.
(a) Permitted signs by district.
1. Residential Districts.
A. Within Residential Zoning Districts, signs are permitted as follows: district
maximum sign area of single sign total area of all signs R-1, R-2, five square feet per surface; ten square
feet or when greater than ten feet in from the property line, shall be no greater than 12 square feet per
surface 24 square feet.
B. The following types of signs are not permitted in residential zoning districts:
awning signs, balloon signs, canopy signs, flashing signs, marquee signs, pole signs, pylon signs and
shimmering signs.
2. Retail Business Districts.
A. Within Business Zoning Districts, signs are permitted as follows: district
maximum sign area of single sign, two square feet per front foot of building abutting a public
right-of-way.
B. Sandwich board signs shall be no wider than 26 inches and no taller than 60
inches above the surface of the sidewalk, located on the building side of the sidewalk (away from parked
cars).
C. Sandwich board signs are allowed only when the sidewalk is clear of snow
and ice, and shall be taken off the sidewalk easement if it is snowing out.
D. Sandwich boards are limited to one per business.
E. Sandwich board signs are allowed on the Lake Street sidewalk only from 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Zoning Code/Land Use Regulations
43
F. The owner of a sandwich board sign must supply the city hall office personnel
with an up to date copy of liability insurance covering the sandwich board sign to be placed on the
sidewalk easement. That file shall be available to the City Administrator at any time during normal city
hall working hours.
G. Sandwich boards shall be non-illuminated.
3. Industrial Districts. Within Industrial Zoning Districts, signs are permitted as
follows: district maximum sign area of single sign, four square feet per front foot of lot plus one square
foot per foot of side yard abutting a public right-of-way. Least width of frontage shall be considered front
yard.
(b) Permitted signs: General Business District.
1. Wall signs. Each tenant other than those in multi-tenant buildings may have one
flat wall sign, not extending more than 18 inches from the face of the building, except that such signage
may extend from the face of the roof over a covered walk. Such wall signs shall not exceed 15% of the
area of the wall to which the sign is attached, to a maximum of 96 square feet.
2 Monument signs. Uses other than those in multi-tenant buildings may have a
monument sign that shall not exceed 80 square feet per surface area, and 15 feet in height, and is setback
a minimum 20 feet from the property lines.
3. Multi-tenant signs. Each tenant in a multi-tenant building may have a flat wall
sign, not extending more than 18 inches from the face of the building. The aggregate area of such signs
shall not exceed 5% of the area of the wall to which they are attached.
4. Multi-tenant monument signs. One monument sign shall be permitted for each
multi-tenant building provided the surface area of the sign does not exceed 100 square feet per side, eight
feet in height, and is setback in no case less than 20 feet from the property lines. The area may be
increased to a maximum of 150 square feet per side for developments of over 20 acres.
5. Canopies and awnings. The design of canopies shall be in keeping with the overall
building design in terms of location, size and color. No canopies with visible wall hangers shall be
permitted. Signage on canopies may be substituted for allowed building signage and shall be limited to
25% of the canopy area. Internally illuminated canopies must be compatible with the overall color
scheme of the building.
(16) Non-conforming signs; compliance. It is recognized that signs exist within the zoning
districts which were lawful before this division was enacted, which would be prohibited, regulated or
restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendments. It is the intent of this division that
nonconforming signs shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for
adding other signs or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. It is further the intent of this division
to permit legal nonconforming signs existing on the effective date of this division, or amendments
thereto, to continue as legal nonconforming signs provided such signs are safe, are maintained so as not
to be unsightly, and have not been abandoned or removed subject to the following provisions:
Chisholm - Land Usage
44
(a) No sign shall be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity.
(b) Should such sign or sign structure be destroyed by any means to an extent greater than
50% of its replacement cost and no building permit has been applied for within 180 days of when the
property was damaged, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this
division.
(c) Should the sign or sign structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatsoever,
it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zoning district in which it is located after it is moved.
(d) No existing sign devoted to a use not permitted by the Zoning Code in the zoning
district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended or moved except in changing the sign to a sign
permitted in the zoning district in which is it located.
(e) When a structure loses its nonconforming status all signs devoted to the structure shall
be removed and all signs painted directly on the structure shall be repainted in a neutral color or a color
which will harmonize with the structure.
(17) Noncommercial speech; substitution clause. The owner of any sign which is otherwise
allowed by this division may substitute noncommercial copy in lieu of any other commercial or
non-commercial copy. This substitution of copy may be made without any additional approval or
permitting. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech
over non-commercial speech, or favoring of any particular non-commercial message over any other
non-commercial message. This provision prevails over any more specific provision to the contrary.
(H) Parking.
(1) Surfacing and drainage. Off-street parking areas shall be improved with a durable and
dustless surface. The areas shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulation
within the area, following MPCA regulations. These requirements shall also apply to open sales lots for
cars, trucks and other equipment.
(2) Location. All accessory off-street parking facilities required herein shall be located as
follows:
(a) Spaces accessory to one and two-family dwellings on the same lot as the principal use
served;
(b) Spaces accessory to multiple-family dwellings on the same lot as the principal use
served, or within 400 feet of the main entrance of the principal building served;
(c) Spaces accessory to uses located in a Business or Industrial District within 800 feet of
a main entrance to the principal building served;
(d) There shall be no off-street parking space within three feet of any street right-of-way;
Zoning Code/Land Use Regulations
45
and
(e) There shall be no parking of motor vehicles or heavy equipment or trailers of any kind
upon the boulevards within the city.
(3) Access. All off-street parking spaces shall have access off driveways, and not directly off
the public street.
(4) Determination of areas. A parking space shall be not less than 300 square feet of standing
and maneuvering area. When application of those regulations results in a requirement of a fractional
space, any fraction up to and including one-half shall be disregarded. Fractions over one-half shall count
as one additional space.
(5) Truck parking in residential areas. No commercially licensed trailer or heavy equipment
shall be parked or stored in a platted residential district except when loading, unloading or rendering a
service.
(6) Other parking in residential areas. Parking on residential areas (off-street and on-street)
shall be limited to the use of the residents of those homes. The number of vehicles parked on or in front of
a residential lot shall not exceed the number of persons residing on the premises and having automobile
drivers= licenses.
(7) Sale of parking areas. Property that constitutes required off-street parking area may not be
separated, through sale or other means, from the property containing the principal use for which the
parking area is required.
(8) Off-street spaces required. (One space equals 300 square feet).
(a) One and two-family residences: one space per dwelling unit.
(b) Multiple dwellings: one space per dwelling unit.
(c) Clubs and lodging houses: one space for each two bedrooms.
(d) Churches, theaters, auditoriums, mortuaries and other places of assembly: one space
for each five seats, or for each ten feet of pew length.
(e) Hospitals: one space for each four beds and additional space for every employee.
(f) Business and professional offices (except medical and dental clinics): one space for
each 400 square feet of floor apace.
(g) Medical and dental clinics: three spaces per doctor or dentist.
(h) Retail shopping: one space for each 210 square feet of retail floor space.
(i) Motels: one space for each unit and for each employee.
Chisholm - Land Usage
46
(j) Restaurants: one space for each eight seats.
(k) Service stations: three spaces for each enclosed bay and one space for each full-time
employee.
(l) Bowling alleys: three spaces per lane.
(m) Drive-ins: at least 15 spaces for those serving food or refreshments, and at least ten
spaces for all others.
(n) Other business and industry: one space for every two employees (based upon
maximum planned employment during any work period), or one space for each 800 square feet of floor
area, whichever requirement is the greater.
(9) Joint facilities. Required parking facilities serving two or more uses may be located on the
same lot or in the same structure; provided that the total number of parking spaces furnished shall be not
less than the sum of separate requirements for each use. The Planning Commission may approve the joint
use of parking facilities by the following uses or activities under the following conditions:
(a) For the purposes of this section, the following uses are considered as daytime uses:
banks, business offices, retail stores, personal service shops, household equipment or furniture shops,
clothing or shoe repair or service shops, manufacturing wholesale and similar uses;
(b) The following are to be considered as nighttime or Sunday uses: auditoriums
incidental to a public or parochial school, churches, bowling alleys, dance halls, theaters, bars or
restaurants;
(c) Up to 50% of the parking facilities required for daytime uses may be supplied by the
off-street parking facilities provided by nighttime uses, and vice-versa; and
(d) Conditions required for joint uses:
1. The proposed joint parking space is within 500 feet of the use it will serve.
2. The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the principal
operating hours of the two buildings or uses for which joint use of off-street parking facilities is
proposed.
3. A properly drawn legal instrument executed by the parties concerned, for joint use
of off-street parking facilities shall be filed with the Building Official.
(I) Off-street loading.
(1) In connection with any structure which is to be erected or substantially altered, and which
requires the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles, there shall
be provided off-street loading spaces on the basis of the following minimum requirements:
Zoning Code/Land Use Regulations
47
Square Feet of Aggregate Gross Floor Area
Minimum Required Number of Berths
Up to 7,200
0
7,200 to 16,000
1
16,000 to 40,000
2
For each additional 40,000
1 additional
(2) The size of the berths shall depend upon the size of the trucks to be used.
(3) No loading berth of vehicles over two-ton capacity shall be closer than 100 feet to any
residential district unless completely enclosed by building walls not less than eight feet in height.
(4) Where noise from loading or unloading activity is audible in a residential district, the
activity shall terminate between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(J) Traffic control. The traffic generated by any use shall be channelized and controlled in a manner
that will avoid: congestion on the public streets; traffic hazards; and excessive traffic through residential
areas, particularly truck traffic. Internal traffic shall be so regulated as to ensure its safe and orderly flow.
Traffic into and out of business and industrial areas shall, in all cases, be forward moving with no
backing into streets.
(K) Pedestrian traffic. A sidewalk shall be provided with any new development along a street
designated as a pedestrian walkway in the City Plan.
(L) Drainage. No land shall be developed, and no use shall be permitted that results in water
run-off, flooding or erosion on adjacent properties. The run-off shall be properly channeled into a storm
drain, watercourse, ponding area or other public facility meeting those requirements set forth by the State
Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) and the State Building Code.
(M) Explosives. No activities involving the storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or
products which could decompose by detonation shall be permitted within the corporate boundary of the
city, except such as are specifically licensed by the state for use within the city by approval of the city
engineer.
(N) Chemicals, smoke and wastes. All wastes shall be disposed of in a manner that is not dangerous
to public health and safety; those regulated noise, odors, vibration, smoke, air pollution, dangerous waste
production and disposal shall meet those requirements set forth by the State Pollution Control Agency
(MPCA).
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
' 153.06 ADMINISTRATION.
Chisholm - Land Usage
48
(A) Amendments to text of this chapter. Minor amendments may be adopted by the Council upon
recommendation of the Planning Commission without prior newspaper publication. Other amendments
shall require a public hearing to be held by the Planning Commission with notice of the hearing
published, as required by state law. The Council shall determine whether any proposed amendment is
Aminor@.
(B) Rezonings. The procedure for changing zoning district boundaries (rezoning) shall be as
follows.
(1) The Planning Commission, Council or property owner may initiate a rezoning. Property
owners wishing to initiate a rezoning of their property shall fill out a Azoning form@ copies of which are
available at the City Hall. The zoning form shall be accompanied by a fee of $125, to be used for the costs
of processing the application. The zoning form shall be filed with the City Clerk.
(2) The City Clerk shall set a hearing on the application, and shall have notice of the hearing
published as required by state law. Property owners within 350 feet of the property in question shall be
notified, although failure by any property owner to receive the notification shall not invalidate the
proceedings.
(3) The hearing on the rezoning application shall be held by the Planning Commission at the
date and time specified in the notice of the hearing.
(4) The Planning Commission shall determine whether the proposed change conforms to its
general land use plan. It shall make its report to the Council on or before the next regular meeting of the
Planning Commission following the date of the hearing.
(5) The Council must take action on the application within 60 days following referral by the
Planning Commission. Four members of the Council must vote in favor of the application for its
approval. The person making the application shall be notified of the Council=s action.
(C) Special use permits. A special use is one that may or may not be compatible with other uses in
the district within which it is located. The compatibility must be judged on the basis of the particular
circumstances, and may require the imposing of conditions. The procedure for issuance of special use
permits is as follows.
(1) The person applying for a special use permit shall fill out and submit to the City Clerk a
Azoning form@, copies of which are available at the City Hall, together with a fee of $125.
(2) The City Clerk shall refer the application to the Planning Commission, and shall have
notice of the hearing published as required by state law. Property owners within 350 feet of the property
in question shall be notified, although failure of any property owner to receive the notification shall not
invalidate the proceedings.
(3) The Planning Commission shall consider the petition at its next regular meeting, but not
earlier than seven days after the referral from the City Clerk.
Zoning Code/Land Use Regulations
49
(4) The petitioner or his or her representative shall appear before the Planning Commission in
order to answer questions concerning the proposed special use.
(5) The Planning Commission will consider possible adverse effects of the proposed special
use, and what additional requirements may be necessary to prevent the adverse effects.
(6) The Planning Commission shall make its written findings of fact and decision within 30
days and notify all persons who appear in writing. The decision shall be subject to review by the Board of
Adjustments and Appeals. No building permit shall issue and no work commenced until the time for
appeal from the decision has expired.
(7) The Council must take action on the application within 60 days after receiving the report of
the Planning Commission. If it grants the special use permit, the Council may impose conditions it
considers necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Four members of the Council must
vote in favor of the application for its approval.
(D) Variances. Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of the provisions of this chapter, a variance may be granted. The difficulties
or hardships must have to do with the characteristics of the land, distances and not of the property owner.
(1) A person desiring a variance shall fill out and submit to the City Clerk a Azoning form@,
copies of which are available at the City Hall, together with a fee of $125.
(2) The City Clerk shall refer the application to the Planning Commission, and shall set the
date at which the matter shall be considered, and shall have notice of the hearing published as required by
state law. Property owners within 350 feet of the property in question shall be notified, although failure
of any property owner to receive the notification shall not invalidate the proceedings.
(3) The petitioner shall appear before the Planning Commission in order to answer questions.
(4) The Planning Commission shall make its written findings of fact and decision within 30
days and notify all persons who appear in writing. The decision shall be subject to review by the Board of
Adjustments and Appeals. No building permit shall issue and no work commenced until the time for
appeal from the decision has expired.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
' 153.07 MISCELLANEOUS.
(A) No filling station, public garage or gasoline distributing station shall be located within 300 feet
of a school, church, hospital or other public meeting place having a seating capacity of more than 50
persons. No school, church, hospital or other public meeting place, having a seating capacity of more
than 50 persons, shall be built or located within 300 feet of a filling station, public garage or gasoline
distributing station.
Chisholm - Land Usage
50
(B) Accessory buildings:
(1) No accessory buildings shall be used for residential or dwelling purposes;
(2) No accessory buildings shall be placed closer than five feet from either an alley line or an
inside property line when located in the rear portion of the lot, except as is otherwise provided in
' 153.28. Any accessory building placed in the rear of a corner lot shall have a side yard adjacent to the
street or avenue equal to that of the main building. When located upon any other portion of the lot, it shall
conform to the State Building Code and other applicable provisions of this chapter; and
(3) Before the Building Official shall issue a permit for the erection or alteration of a structure,
the Building Official shall determine that the parcel has been platted as a residential lot. If the land has
not been so platted, the Building Official shall refuse to issue a building permit until a time as the City
Planning Commission, and City Council has approved construction pursuant to motion, or the land is
currently platted for the use pursuant to state statutes.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
' 153.08 ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
The boundaries of the districts established by this chapter are delineated on the zoning map; and the
map and all notations, references and data shown thereon are hereby adopted and made a part of this
chapter and will be on permanent file, and for public inspection, in the City Hall. All amendments to the
zoning map are generally described in the chapter of the city code relating to un-coded ordinances in
effect. It shall be the responsibility of the Building Official to maintain the map, and amendments thereto
shall be recorded thereon within 30 days after official publication of amendments.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
' 153.09 ENFORCEMENT.
This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Building Official, Zoning Official and the
City Engineer. The Building Official, Zoning Official and City Engineer may institute in the name of the
city any appropriate actions or proceedings against a violator as provided by statute and this chapter.
Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
' 153.10 TREE BOARD; PROVISIONS.
The city hereby establishes the formation of a Tree Board, its powers, duties and provisions
regulating the planting, care, maintenance and removal of trees and shrubs.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Zoning Code/Land Use Regulations
51
PARK TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation growing in public parks
and all other areas owned by the city.
STREET TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation growing either side of
all streets, avenues, rights-of-way within the city.
(B) Establishment of a Tree Board.
(1) A Tree Board is hereby created and established for the city which shall consist of five
members, who shall be appointed for terms of five years by the Mayor with approval of the Council.
(a) The City Administrator or his or her representative and the Superintendent of Parks
and Recreation shall be ex-officio members of this Board. Members of the Board shall serve without
compensation. The Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and shall
keep minutes of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction
of any business.
(b) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to conflict with state statutes, respecting the
operation of a municipal park board.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the Board to develop policies for street and park tree
planting, removal and maintenance in accordance with the Master Street Tree Plan and update the plan as
necessary. The Master Street Tree Plan shall state the design and intent, such as replacement and areas of
planting. The Board shall make recommendations to the Council for variances to this section or the
Master Street Tree Plan.
(a) All action taken by the Board shall be within the budget constraints of the city. The
Board may, subject to approval by the Council, organize volunteer community efforts to raise funds for
tree planting on boulevards or for other activities and set fees to carry out the requirements of this section.
(b) The planting, maintenance and/or removal of park trees shall be determined by the
Tree Board. The Board shall report its activities to the Council semi-annually each year.
(C) Species of trees to be planted. No species may be planted on public property within the city
without the prior written permission of the Tree Board or the city, through Council action. Prior to the
Board taking action, it shall review all requests for planting to assure that the species are appropriate. The
Board shall submit written reports to the Council on those matters of special requests by the Council prior
to taking official action.
(D) Interference and review.
(1) It is unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the Tree Board or any of its
agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing
of any street trees, park trees or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this section.
(2) The Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the Tree
Chisholm - Land Usage
52
Board. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the Tree Board to the Council who may hear
the matter and make the final decision.
(E) Spacing and sizing.
(1) Definitions of trees shall be as follows: SMALL TREES shall be defined as any plant
material that will grow to a height of 30 feet; MEDIUM TREES shall be defined as any plant material
that will grow to a height of 50 feet; LARGE TREES shall be defined as any plant material that will grow
in excess of 50 feet.
(2) The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the species and size classes listed by
the Tree Board and no trees may be planted closer together than as follows: small trees 30 feet; medium
trees 40 feet; large trees 50 feet, except in special plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect
registered in the state. It is unlawful for any person to plant any tree or shrub in an area reserved for a
sidewalk as defined by the City Engineer.
(F) Distance from street corners and fire hydrants. No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet
of any intersection. No street tree shall be planted closer than 15 feet of any fire hydrant.
(G) Utilities. No street trees other than those species listed as small trees or medium trees by the
Tree Board may be planted under or within 20 lateral feet of any overhead utility service containing two
or more wires, or over or within ten lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission
line or other utility.
(H) Public tree care. The city shall have the right with appeal of the Board to plant, prune, maintain
and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, rights-of-way,
on squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the
symmetry and beauty of the public grounds. The Tree Board may cause or order to be removed, any tree
or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which, by reason of its nature, is injurious to sewers,
electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest.
This division does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners providing that the
selection and location of the trees is in accordance with this section.
(I) Tree topping, board review and permit issuance. It is unlawful for any private party or city
employee to top any street tree, park tree or other trees on city property without a permit from the Tree
Board. TOPPING is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in
diameter within the tree=s crown to a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
Any planting, pruning, removal, topping or maintenance of any public trees, park or street trees by
private or city employees will first be reviewed by the Tree Board, who shall decide upon the action to be
taken and/or issuance of a permit.
(J) Pruning, corner clearance. Every owner of any tree on private property overhanging any street
or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that the branches shall not obstruct the view on
any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the street
or sidewalk. The owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees or broken or decayed limbs
which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or
Zoning Code/Land Use Regulations
53
shrub on private property when it interferes with proper spread of light along the street from a street light
or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign.
(K) Tree removal. The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on
private property within the city, when the trees constitute a hazard to life and property or harbor insects or
disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. The City Administrator or his or
her representative will notify in writing the owners of the trees. Removal shall be done by the owners at
their own expense within 30 days after the date of service of notice. In the event of failure to comply with
the provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove the trees and charge the cost of removal on the
owner=s property tax notice.
(L) Removal of stumps. All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the
ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground.
(M) Arborist license, nursery license and bond professional services.
(1) It is unlawful for any party to engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating or
removing street or park trees within the city without first applying for and procuring a license. The
license fee shall be set by the Council, however, no license shall be required of any public service
company or city employee doing the work in the pursuit of his or her public service endeavors. Before
any license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of possession of liability insurance in
the minimum amounts of $50,000 for bodily injury and $100,000 property damage indemnifying the city
or any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of the endeavors as herein described. This
will not prevent any property owner from removing his or her own boulevard trees after obtaining a
permit from the city.
(2) Trees purchased by the city for public use shall be obtained from a licensed nursery issued
by the Department of Agriculture.
(N) Destruction of trees on public property. It is unlawful for any person to remove, alter or destroy
any street tree or park tree without the prior authorization of the Council.
(O) Right of review by the Council. Any person aggrieved by any ruling or order of the Tree Board
may appeal to the Council which shall hear the matter and make a final decision. The Council may
modify, affirm or reverse any determination to the Tree Board.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 153.11 VIOLATIONS.
Every person violates a section, division, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he or she
performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to when the failure is thereby prohibited
or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor, except as
otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Chisholm - Land Usage
54
DISTRICT PROVISIONS
' 153.25 DISTRICTS.
(A) R-1 Residence District. All lands now zoned as residential other than the lots as come under the
R-2 Residence District.
(B) R-2 Residence Districts. This district shall contain the Windy Hill Addition, Roosevelt Park
Gardens Addition and Wenton Addition together with all future subdivisions platted and accepted
hereafter.
(C) EB Existing Business Districts. Selected scattered businesses existing on the effective date of
this chapter have the opportunity to continue in business and expand, if desired. Expansion, however,
must be by special use permit to prevent harmful effects upon adjacent residential areas, and by
complying with the residential lot requirements contained in this chapter.
(D) LB Limited Business Districts. These are areas that are particularly exposed to residential
neighborhoods, and are thus suitable only to those businesses having relatively little incompatibility with
residential use.
(E) RBD Retail Business Districts. These areas contain concentrated numbers of retail shopping
outlets to serve residential neighborhoods and the general community. The central business district and
shopping centers are examples.
(F) GB General Business Districts. These areas are designed for those businesses that tend to
service other businesses and industry rather than the homeowner. They also tend to be less compatible
with residential areas than other types of business. Because of these two factors, businesses in this zoning
classification are concentrated, and are as insulated as possible from residential areas.
(G) I Industrial Districts. These are areas which, because of availability to thoroughfares and
railroads, suitable topography and isolation from housing areas, are appropriate for manufacturing,
warehousing, storage of bulk petroleum products, and similar uses generally considered as Aindustrial@.
(H) M Mining Districts. These are areas which because of their mineral content are appropriate only
for mining and the removal of the ore deposits.
(I) PU Public Use Districts. These are areas which are now presently owned by any public body or
agency or areas which have been dedicated to public use and shall include all buildings, lands and
facilities presently used or owned by any public body, including the city, the School District and the
Housing and Redevelopment Authority and any other public body now in existence or hereinafter
created.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
Zoning Code/Land Use Regulations
55
' 153.26 ZONING MAP.
(A) The properties within the above described zoning districts are described in ' 153.08.
(B) The various zoning districts are also shown on a zoning map, which is maintained in the city
offices.
(C) The zoning map is for the convenience of the public.
(D) Any error or omission in the map shall not affect the legality of the district boundaries as
described in this chapter or future amendments to this chapter.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
' 153.27 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
(A) The minimum requirements in each district are as follows:
Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit (Square Feet)
R-1 District
R-2 District
LB Districts
1-family structures
6,000
8,200
6,000
2-family structures
4,500
6,500
4,500
3-family structures
3,500
4,500
3,500
Apartment buildings with 5 families and over
Efficiency units
1,800
1,800
1,800
1-bedroom units
2,300
2,300
2,300
2-bedroom units
2,800
2,800
2,800
Floor Area Per Dwelling Unit (Square Feet)
R-1 District
R-2 District
LB Districts
1-family structures
750
960
750
2-family structures
750
750
750
Structures housing three or more families
Efficiency units
500
500
500
Chisholm - Land Usage
56
1-bedroom units 600 600 600
2-plus bedroom units
750
750
750
Nonresidential Lot Area (Square Feet)
R-1 District
R-2 District
LB Districts
-
-
6,000
Nonresidential Floor Area (Square Feet)
R-1 District
R-2 District
LB Districts
-
-
1,000
Front Yard Setback (Feet)
R-1 District
R-2 District
LB Districts
30 feet
30 feet
30 feet
Zoning Code/Land Use Regulations
57
Side Yard Setback (Feet)
R-1 District
R-2 District
LB Districts
Corner lot
5 feet
20 feet
20 feet
Residential garage from adjacent lot
2 feet
5 feet
5 feet
Rear Yard Setback (Feet)
R-1 District
R-2 District
LB Districts
Dwelling
30 feet
40 feet
30 feet
Height (feet)
35
35
35
Lot width (feet)
50
75
50
Least horizontal dimension
20 feet
20 feet
20 feet
Lot Area per Dwelling Unit (Square Feet)
RB Districts
GB Districts
I Districts
1-family structures
-
-
-
2-family structures
-
-
-
3-family structures
-
-
-
Apartment buildings with 5 families and over
Efficiency units
-
-
-
1-bedroom units
-
-
-
2-bedroom units
-
-
-
Floor area per dwelling unit (square feet)
1-family structures
-
-
-
2-family structures
-
-
-
Structures housing three or more families
Efficiency units
-
-
-
1-bedroom units
-
-
-
2-plus bedroom units
-
-
-
Nonresidential lot area (square feet)
6,000
-
15,000
Chisholm - Land Usage
58
Lot Area per Dwelling Unit (Square Feet)
RB Districts
GB Districts
I Districts
Nonresidential floor area (square feet)
3,000
-
-
Front yard setback (feet)
25 feet
25 feet
35 feet
Side yard setback (feet)
From street in case of corner lot
-
20 feet
20 feet
Residential garage from adjacent lot
-
-
Other
-
10 feet
10 feet
Rear yard setback (feet)
35 feet
35 feet
35 feet
Height (feet)
50 feet
50 feet
50 feet
Lot width (feet)
50 feet
50 feet
50 feet
(B) Exceptions.
(1) Provided, however, that the lot widths of plats already accepted by the Council are hereby
validated; and, provided further, that three or more family structures can be constructed in the R-2
Residence District only upon approval of the Planning Commission.
(2) Provided, further, however, that those areas presently zoned as Retail Business District
between Second Street North and Second Street South, shall have a front yard setback of one foot and a
rear yard setback of five feet provisions of this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
' 153.28 EXCEPTIONS AND ADDITIONS TO ABOVE MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Front setbacks. Where adjoining structures existing on the effective date of this chapter have a
different front setback from that required, the front setback of a new structure shall conform to the
prevailing setback in the immediate block. The Building Official shall determine the necessary front yard
setback in those cases; however, in no case shall a building be required to setback more than 60 feet,
except where an industrial district is adjacent to a residential district.
(B) Setbacks adjacent to residential areas. Where a business district is adjacent to or across the
street from a residential district, the minimum building setback from the lot line or street facing the
residential district shall be 30 feet. In the case of industrial districts, the minimum setback shall be 100
feet.
(C) Setbacks along thoroughfares. Along streets designated as Amajor arterial@ in the Planning
Zoning Code/Land Use Regulations
59
Commission=s Guide Plan, the minimum front setback for single family residences on lots fronting the
major arterial thoroughfares shall be not less than 30 feet from the right-of-way line and on lots fronting
streets which make the major arterial thoroughfares, the minimum side setback for single family
residences shall be 15 feet from the right-of-way line.
(D) Height. In residential districts, multiple dwellings and places of public assembly, such as
churches and schools, are exempt from height limitations, except that the setback from any residential lot
shall be at least equal to the height, and the distance between any two structures must be no less than the
sum of the heights of the two structures.
(E) Shopping centers. A shopping center must be shown in an over-all plan. Before the area is zoned
for this purpose, the following conditions must be met:
(1) Submission of a plot plan, showing structures, parking, driveways, landscaping and
screening; and
(2) Demonstration that the developers are financially able to carry out the project, and that they
will begin construction within 18 months after Council action on the proposal.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
' 153.29 PERMITTED USES.
(A) The permitted uses in each district are as follows:
(1) All districts:
(a) Agriculture uses;
(b) Public facilities; and
(c) Public utility uses.
(2) Residential Districts:
(a) Single and multi-family residence;
(b) Home occupation uses; and
(c) Accessory and special uses in Residence Districts.
(3) Existing Business Districts: any use existing on the premises on the effective date of this
chapter;
Chisholm - Land Usage
60
(4) Limited Business Districts:
(a) Office-financial uses;
(b) Health-medical uses;
(c) Residences;
(d) Churches; and
(e) Accessory and special uses in Residential and Business Districts.
(5) Retail Business Districts:
(a) Office-financial uses;
(b) Health-medical uses;
(c) Retail shopping uses; and
(d) Accessory and special uses in business districts.
(6) General Business Districts:
(a) Equipment sales and service uses;
(b) Automobile service uses;
(c) Office-financial uses;
(d) Miscellaneous business uses;
(e) Retail shopping uses;
(f) Wholesale businesses;
(g) Rental for enclosed storage; and
(h) Accessory and special uses in general service districts.
(7) Industrial Districts:
(a) Manufacturing uses;
(b) Research;
(c) Motor freight terminals;
Zoning Code/Land Use Regulations
61
(d) Railroad switching yards;
(e) Warehousing;
(f) Wholesale business;
(g) Nurseries and greenhouses;
(h) Accessory and special uses in industrial districts; and
(i) Bulk storage of petroleum products.
(8) Mining Districts:
(a) Mining; and
(b) Accessory and special uses in mining districts.
(9) Public Use Districts:
(a) Public facilities; and
(b) Public utility uses.
(B) Exceptions. Except as provided for under ' 153.02(C), no building or premise may be devoted
to uses other than those listed above. Generalized use categories listed above are defined in detail in the
following divisions.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
' 153.30 ACCESSORY AND SPECIAL USES IN RESIDENCE DISTRICTS.
(A) Accessory uses:
(1) Conservatories for plants and flowers, not including any business, trade or industry;
(2) Excavation incidental to construction on the premises;
(3) Identification signs in accordance with performance standards governing signs (see
' 153.05);
(4) Private garages and accessory buildings in R-1 and R-2 Districts shall not exceed one story
in height and shall not cover more than 18% of the principal property. On lots greater than 9,600 square
feet, the maximum footprint for private garages and accessory buildings shall not exceed 1,728 square
Chisholm - Land Usage
62
feet. Garages and accessory buildings shall not exceed a sidewall height of ten feet, or a total building
height not to exceed 1.7 times the wall height; and
(5) The renting of rooms by a resident family for lodging purposes only, and for the
accommodation of not more than two roomers in a single-family dwelling.
(B) Special uses:
(1) Boarding houses, lodging houses and tourist homes in R-1 Residence District only;
(2) Cemeteries;
(3) Churches and private schools, elementary and high, provided that any principal building
shall be located 30 feet or more from any other lot in a residential district;
(4) Electric power substation;
(5) Hospitals, sanatoriums and rest homes;
(6) Off-street parking for adjacent nonresidential uses, provided the parking is restricted to
passenger automobiles, and is used only from 8:00 a.m to 9:00 p.m.;
(7) Temporary stockpiling of materials to be used in construction;
(8) Two-family and multiple-family dwelling:
(a) Provided the structure shall not be a conversion, and shall be initially designed as a
two-family or multiple-family structure;
(b) The design is compatible with the neighborhood; and
(c) Internal driveways are not less than 20 feet wide, 28 feet if parallel parking is
permitted.
(9) Transitional use. A residential lot or lots immediately adjacent to a non-residential use (i.e.,
industry and business) and a major thoroughfare, or railroad may be used for a medical or dental clinic,
rest home, office, mortuary or home occupation, provided:
(a) Nonresidential traffic is not channeled into a minor residential street;
(b) The structure design, landscaping and screening are harmonious with adjacent
residences;
(c) There are no signs visible to adjacent residences;
(d) The Planning Commission shall find that the special use, if granted, would contribute
to the stability of the neighborhood; and
Zoning Code/Land Use Regulations
63
(e) A periodic review of the conditional use permit may be required.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
' 153.31 ACCESSORY AND SPECIAL USES IN BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
(A) Accessory uses:
(1) Business signs in accordance with performance standards governing signs (see ' 153.05);
(2) Dwelling for watchman and family; and
(3) In industrial areas: restaurants, cigar and candy counters, and similar uses, provided the
uses are primarily for the use of employees in the immediate area.
(B) Special uses in all Business Districts:
(1) Carnival or circus for a period not to exceed 21 days;
(2) Religious meeting or tent or other temporary structure for a period not to exceed 60 days;
(3) Heliports; and
(4) Expansion of uses in EB Existing Business Districts.
(C) Special uses in Limited Business Districts:
(1) Clubs and lodges, non-profit;
(2) Mortuaries; and
(3) Private colleges and institutions.
(D) Special uses in Shopping Center and Retail Business Districts:
(1) Commercial recreation, such as bowling;
(2) Fuel and ice sales offices;
(3) Restaurants with live entertainment and dancing;
(4) Service stations; and
(5) Taxi stand.
Chisholm - Land Usage
64
(E) Special uses in Industrial Districts (I):
(1) Excavation businesses (such as sand and gravel pits and black dirt operations);
(2) Directional signs;
(3) Open storage, where the storage is primary use;
(4) Heliports;
(5) Railroad storage and switching yards;
(6) Service stations;
(7) Exterior storage as a primary use; and
(8) Bulk storage for petroleum products shall be permitted in Industrial Districts only.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
' 153.32 AGRICULTURE USES.
Private fruit growing and gardening for family use only: non-commercial tree, shrub, plant or flower
nursery without building.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
' 153.33 AUTOMOBILE SERVICE USES.
Auto laundry, drive-in businesses, where people are served in automobiles; eating establishments;
motels (tourist courts); outdoor advertising; refreshment drive-ins; public garages; repair garages;
seasonal produce stands; service stations.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
' 153.34 EQUIPMENT SALES AND SERVICE USES.
Auto laundry; boat sales; building materials establishments where dimension lumber, millwork,
cabinets and other building materials are kept for sale; bicycle sales and repair; commercial parking lot;
household appliance repair; machinery sales; motor vehicle sales, including motorcycles; open sales lot;
outdoor storage and sale of major machinery and equipment; plumbing showrooms and shops; repair
garages; sign shops; trailer sales and rental; used car lots.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
' 153.35 HEALTH/MEDICAL USES.
Zoning Code/Land Use Regulations
65
Hospital for human beings; dental services; medical services or clinic; nursing; convalescent home;
orphans= home; rest home; sanitarium.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
' 153.36 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
Any occupation engaged in by the occupant of a dwelling, provided:
(A) No retail business other than that conducted by mail is conducted on the premises;
(B) There is no manufacturing or repair:
(C) No stock in trade shall be kept and sold on the premises;
(D) No person not residing on the premises shall be employed;
(E) No mechanical equipment too large to be carried and not customarily found in the home shall be
employed;
(F) No interior or exterior alterations shall be made to the structure;
(G) The entrance to the space devoted to the occupation shall be within the dwelling;
(H) There is no exterior display or sign except those normally permitted in a residence district:
(I) There shall be no exterior storage of material or equipment; and
(J) The home occupation is conducted entirely within a building.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
' 153.37 MANUFACTURING USES.
All manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, treatment or assembly of products and
materials (under performance standards as described in ' 153.05).
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
Chisholm - Land Usage
66
' 153.38 MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS USES.
Animal hospitals, but not dog kennels; building contractors (yards); carpenters, electrical, plumbing,
heating, sheet metal shop; commercial greenhouses; commercial recreation (bowling alley, dance hall,
golf driving range, pool or billiard parlor, skating rink, sports arena, tavern, theater); exterminating
shops; dry cleaning and laundry processing; live bait sales; linen, towels, draperies, and similar supply
services; mortuaries; music studios; printing shops employing not more than ten persons, exclusive of
office help.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
' 153.39 OFFICE/FINANCIAL USES.
Banks; general offices; governmental office; insurance office; personal loan agency; professional
office; real estate office; taxicab office, but not taxi stand; travel agency or transportation ticket office;
telephone exchange; utility office.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
' 153.40 PUBLIC UTILITY USES.
Electric power transmission lines, but not substation; gas pipe lines; telephone facilities; water
pumping, reservoir and distribution facilities; railroad trackage, but not including storage and switching
yards.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
' 153.41 RETAIL SHOPPING USES.
Stores and shops selling the following goods and services: antiques, art and school supplies; auto
accessories; bakeries; barber shop; beauty parlor; bicycles; books and stationery; candy; cameras and
photographical supplies; carpets and rugs; catering establishments; china and glassware; Christmas tree
sales; clothes pressing; clothing and costume rental; custom dressmaking; department stores and junior
department stores; drugs; dry goods; electric and household appliances; sales and repair; florists; food;
furniture; furrier shops; garden supplies (year-round operation only); gifts; hardware; hats; hobby shops
for retail of items to be assembled or used away from the premises; household appliances; hotels and
apartment hotels; interior decorating; jewelry, including watch repair; laboratories; medical and dental
research and testing; laundry and dry cleaning pick-up, processing to be done elsewhere; laundromat;
leather goods and luggage; locksmith shops; musical instruments; office supply equipment; optometrists;
paint and wallpaper; photography studios; restaurants, when no entertainment or dancing is provided;
shoes; sporting goods; tailoring; theater, except open air drive-in; tobacco; toys; variety stores; wearing
apparel.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
Zoning Code/Land Use Regulations
67
' 153.42 SPECIAL USES IN MINING DISTRICTS.
(A) All types of mining operations can be carried on in the mining districts; provided, however, that
no mining operations by means of stripping off the surface soil, or the building, locating or extending of
any dump shall be carried on within 500 feet of any residential or commercial area within the city;
provided further, however, that the Planning Commission may grant special permission to allow the
mining operations within a distance of less than 500 feet from any residential or commercial area subject
to restoration of the premises by the mining company if the Planning Commission deems it proper for the
general welfare of the public.
(B) The Planning Commission shall have the authority to set whatever standards and requirements
it deems necessary to ensure the performance of all terms of the special permit.
(C) No mining operations of any type shall be conducted in the residential districts without the
permission of the Planning Commission in each case, which may be granted subject to the restoration of
the premises as the Planning Commission may deem proper for the general welfare of the public.
(D) No special permit shall be granted without a hearing on the notice as the Planning Commission
may determine.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
WETLANDS REGULATIONS
' 153.55 PURPOSE.
The wetlands in the city are hereby declared to be a valuable natural resource of the city. It is hereby
recognized that the wetlands act as natural retention areas that protects against flooding and aid in the
replenishment of ground water. The wetland areas further provide a valuable wildlife habitat. The
express purpose of this subchapter is to guide the use, development and utilization of the retention
capacity and wildlife habitat provided by the wetlands. In addition, the purpose of this subchapter is to
preserve water quality within the city and to promote the general health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
' 153.56 WETLAND OVERLAY MAP.
(A) The wetlands of the city are as shown on the official wetland overlay map of the city which,
together with all explanatory matter therein and thereon, is hereby incorporated by reference and
declared to be part of this subchapter.
(B) A certified copy of the official wetland overlay map of the city and any amendments thereto
shall be filed with the County Recorder.
Chisholm - Land Usage
68
(1) In case of any conflict between the map and the provision of this subchapter with respect to
the location, size or boundary of any wetland, the map shall govern.
(2) In case of any conflict between the map and the provisions of this subchapter with respect
to any other matter, the latter shall govern.
(C) The Wetland Overlay District also includes: 300 feet either side from the normal high-water
mark of Longyear Creek, on the creek section specified on the wetland overlay map.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
' 153.57 WETLAND OVERLAY DISTRICT.
(A) The wetlands of the city are hereby designated as Wetland Overlay District. The purpose of the
Wetland Overlay District is to provide for the wise utilizations of wetland areas in order to prevent
flooding, preserve water quality and preserve local vegetation and wildlife habitat within the city.
(B) Uses:
(1) Permitted uses. All uses permitted in the zone district indicated on the official zoning map
underlying this Wetland Overlay District subject to the general provisions of this chapter;
(2) Special uses. All uses allowed with a special use permit in the zone district indicated on the
official zoning map underlying this Wetland Overlay District subject to the general provisions of this
chapter; and
(3) General provisions. The following standards shall apply to all wetlands within the city.
Where the requirements of the underlying zone district as shown on the official zoning map are more
restrictive than those set forth herein, the most restrictive standards shall apply:
(a) Unsewered areas.
R-1
R-2
Lot area (square feet)
40,000
40,000
Lot width at building line (linear feet)
100 feet
100 feet
Building setback from roads and highways (lineal feet) state/county
50 feet
50 feet
Municipal or private
20 feet
20 feet
Building setback from normal high-water mark
Principal structure
50 feet
50 feet
Accessory structure
30 feet
30 feet
Zoning Code/Land Use Regulations
69
R-1
R-2
Elevation of lowest floor above highest known water level (linear feet) 3 3
Building height limitation (linear feet)
35
35
Total lot area covered by impervious surface (%)
30
30
Sewage system elevation above highest groundwater level on bedrock (linear feet)
3
(b) Sewered areas. All provisions for unsewered areas shall apply to sewered areas, except
for the following, which shall supersede the provisions applied to unsewered areas:
R-1
R-2
Lot area (square feet)
7,500
10,000
Lot width at building line (linear feet)
75 feet
75 feet
(C) Substandard lots:
(1) Unsewered areas.
(a) Lots of record on the effective date of this subchapter which do not meet the minimum
requirements of area or lot width at the building line may be allowed as building sites, provided:
1. The lot and the use are permitted in the applicable zone district shown on the
official zoning map underlying the Wetland Official District;
2. The lot is in separate ownership from abutting lands; and
3. The sanitary and dimensional requirements of this subchapter are complied with
insofar as is practicable.
(b) In no event, however, shall a substandard lot be allowed as a building site under this
section unless it shall be:
1. Not less than 26,000 square feet in area; and
2. Be not less than 100 feet wide at the building line.
(2) Sewered areas.
(a) Lots of record on the effective date of this section which do not meet the minimum
requirements of area and lot width at the building line may be allowed as building sites, provided:
1. The lots and the use are permitted in the applicable zone district shown on the
official zoning map underlying the Wetland Overlay District;
Chisholm - Land Usage
70
2. The lot is in separate ownership from abutting lands; and
3. The sanitary and dimensional requirements of this section and other applicable
portions of this chapter are complied with insofar as is practicable.
(3) Permit required. Notwithstanding the provisions of divisions (C)(1) and (2) above, no
substandard lot meeting the requirements of divisions (C)(1) and (2) above, as the case may be, shall be
allowed as a building site unless a special use permit is granted authorizing the use of the lot as a building
site.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
' 153.58 WETLAND ALTERATIONS.
(A) Removal of natural vegetation. The removal of natural vegetation shall be restricted to prevent
erosion into public waters, to conserve nutrients in the soil, and to preserve wetland aesthetics. Removal
of natural vegetation in the Wetland Overlay District shall be subject to the following provisions.
(1) Selective removal of natural vegetation shall be allowed.
(2) Clear cutting of natural vegetation shall be prohibited.
(3) Natural vegetation shall be restored insofar as feasible after any construction project is
completed in order to retard surface runoff and soil erosion.
(4) The provisions of this division shall not apply to permitted uses which normally require the
removal of natural vegetation.
(B) Grading and filling.
(1) It is unlawful for any person to grade or fill in the wetlands unless the grading or filling is
authorized by a special use permit. It is also unlawful for any person to alter the natural topography of
any wetland unless the alteration is authorized by a special use permit. Any permit granted shall be
subject to the following conditions:
(a) That the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for as short a time as feasible;
(b) That temporary ground cover, such as mulch, is used, and permanent ground cover,
such as sod, is planted;
(c) That adequate methods to prevent erosion and trap sediment is employed;
(d) That fill is stabilized to accept engineering standards;
Zoning Code/Land Use Regulations
71
(e) That adequate methods are employed to reduce the runoff and/or flow of water on or
over the affected wetland so that the grading, filling or alteration of the natural topography does not
contribute to downstream flooding;
(f) That adequate methods are employed to preserve water quality so that the grading,
filling or alteration of the natural topography will not detrimentally affect the quality of the water in the
city;
(g) That adequate methods are employed for the preservation or establishment of local
vegetation that provides wildlife habitation and screening; and
(h) That the fill used will consist of suitable material free from toxic pollutants in other
than trace quantities.
(2) In reviewing any application for a special use permit under this division, the permit issuing
authority shall give appropriate consideration to whether the proposed activity is primarily dependent on
being located in the wetlands of the city and whether feasible alternative sites are available.
(3) The requirements of divisions (B)(1)(e), (f) and (g) above would be satisfied by the
construction of a retention basin that: is designed and engineered to meet those requirements set by the
DNR and/or the Army Corps of Engineer=s to assure that the development would have no appreciable
effect on downstream Flooding; is designed and engineered with water quality improvement features
such as filtration or skimming devices; and is designed and engineered to utilize local vegetation for
screening and to provide a wildlife habitat.
(4) Copies of all permits issued under this division shall be mailed to the St. Paul District of the
United States Army Corp of Engineers as soon as is possible after issuance.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 153.59 ROADS, PARKING AREAS AND OTHER IMPERVIOUS SURFACES.
The placement of roads, parking areas and other impervious surfaces shall be controlled in order to
retard the run-off of surface waters and excess nutrients. Water run-off shall meet those requirements set
by the DNR and/or the Army Corps of Engineers.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
' 153.60 SEWAGE DISPOSAL, COUNTY PERMIT REQUIRED; NONCONFORMING
USES.
(A) The disposal of sewage, commercial, industrial and agricultural wastes as defined in state
statutes, and amendments thereto, within the wetlands of the city shall be subject to the standards,
criteria, rules and regulations of the State Pollution Control Agency, the State Department of Health and
any applicable county or city regulations. In particular, the State Pollution Control Agency regulations
Chisholm - Land Usage
72
shall govern the installation, use and inspection of septic systems within the wetlands of the city.
(B) No building permit for construction within any unsewered portions of any wetland shall be
issued unless the applicant for the building permit has obtained from the County Health Department a
sewage disposal permit and a certificate indicating that the sewage system complies with the
requirements of the above-described regulation.
(C) Any use of a sewage, commercial, industrial and agricultural disposal system existing on the
effective date of this subchapter and lawful under the provisions of any city, county or other ordinance,
may be continued, although the use does not conform to the provisions of this section for a period of time
not to exceed five years from the effective date of this section; provided that no such nonconforming use
described in this division (C) shall be continued unless the owner shall have completed a material amount
of construction or shall otherwise have acquired a vested right with respect to the use. Any other uses of
structures or lots existing at the effective date of this subchapter that do not conform to the provisions of
this subchapter shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
' 153.61 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
GARDENS. Gardens utilized for personal or domestic use which do not exceed 15% of a total lot
area are permitted uses.
NORMAL HIGH-WATER MARK. A mark delineating the highest water level, which has been
maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence thereof upon the landscape. The NORMAL
HIGH-WATER MARK is commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from
predominantly aquatic too predominantly terrestrial.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
' 153.62 ADMINISTRATION.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, the provisions of this chapter now existing
and as hereinafter amended shall govern in all respects the administration of this subchapter, including
without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the granting of variances and the issuance of special use
permits.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
Zoning Code/Land Use Regulations
73
' 153.63 PROPERTY EXEMPT.
All real property hereinbefore delineated shall be subject to all conditions of this section, except that
restrictions provided by this section shall not apply to record owners of real estate on file at the time of
the enactment of this section where the property is on developed lots and, further, this section shall not
govern construction on these lots when the construction pertains to the construction of improvements or
additions to existing structures.
(Ord. passed 2-6-2012)
Chisholm - Land Usage
74







ORDINANCE NO. _1_ 3rd SERIES
ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 5 CHAPTER 52 OF THE
CITY CODE ENTITLED WATER SERVICE
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF CHISHOLM DO ORDAIN AS FOLLOWS:
Section 1 City Code, Title 5 Chapter 52, Section 52.04, entitled Service Pipes, is
hereby amended as follows:
Section 52.04. Every service pipe must be laid in a manner so as to prevent rupture
by settlement. The service pipe shall be placed at a depth determined by the City
Engineer, below the surface in all cases so arranged as to prevent rupture and stoppage by
freezing. Frozen service pipes between the curb stops and the building shall be the
responsibility of the owner. Service pipes must extend from the curb stops to the inside of
the building; or if not taken into a building then to the hydrant or other fixtures which
they are intended to supply. A valve, the same size as the service pipe, shall be placed
close to the inside wall of the building, ahead of the meter and well protected from
freezing. Type K copper tubing shall be used up to and including two-inch services.
Joints on copper tubing shall be flared and kept to a minimum. Not more than one joint
shall be used for a service up to 70 feet in length. All joints shall be left uncovered until
inspected. All services of more than two inches in diameter shall be composed of cast
iron mechanical joint pipe. Minimum size connection with the water mains shall be threefourths
inch in diameter for single occupancy residences and one inch in diameter for all
other establishments.
(1994 Code, ' 3.20.4)
Section 2. All other provisions shall remain in full force and effect without modification.
or amendment
Section 3. The effective date of this ordinance change shall be the date
following the last date of publication in the City of Chisholms official newspaper.
Moved by Councilperson Cook and seconded by Councilperson
Drow that the foregoing ordinance be adopted.
Voting Yes: Councilors Benson, Campbell, Cook, Drow, Scaia and Mayor
Jugovich
Voting No: None
Ordinance declared adopted this 23rd day of September, 2014.
CITY OF CHISHOLM
By: ___________________________
Michael A. Jugovich, Mayor
ATTEST:
________________________________
Mark Casey, City Clerk/Administrator
First Reading: September 9, 2014
Second Reading: September 23, 2014
Published Chisholm Tribune Press on October 1, 2014.
















Public Participation Policy
Chisholm City Council Meetings
CITY OF CHISHOLM
EFFECTIVE: FEBRUARY 14TH, 2018
City Council meetings are limited to the public participation portion of the meeting.
Individuals who wish to address the council must sign up at the podium, located in the Council Chambers, prior to the
meeting. Five (5) minutes will be allowed per speaker. If several members of the public wish to speak on the same subject,
the Mayor may assign one (1) person as spokesperson.
Individuals/groups displaying disruptive behavior such as interruption of other speakers, personal attacks, engaging in
improper comments, profanity, vulgarities, threats of violence, and /or other offensive behavior may be subject to
removal from the Council Chambers.
Using the podium as a platform for campaigning is discouraged.
The Council will take comments under advisement but are not obligated to respond in any way. The Mayor reserves the
right to modify these rules to effectively chair the meeting.
Among the rights available to the public is the right to access public data as provided by Minnesota Statutes, section 13.03, subdivision 2(b).The
City of Chisholm requires a completed data request form, prior to granting such requests. Data request forms are available at City Hall and on the
City of Chisholms website.
ORDINANCE NO. 7, 3RD SERIES
ORDINANCE AMENDING CITY CODE CHAPTER 73: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
CHISHOLM CITY CODE CHAPTER 73 IS HEREBY AMENDED AS FOLLOWS:
73.43 MINIMUM AGE OF OPERATOR.
will read as follows:
It is unlawful for any person without a valid drivers license to operate an ATV on any
public street, public land or public waterway in the city unless specifically permitted by
operation of Minnesota law and in accordance with any special requirements provided therein.
73.47 HELMET REQUIRED.
will read as follows:
A person less than 18 years of age shall not operate or ride on an ATV on public land
unless
wearing a safety helmet approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
73.49 OPERATION OF ATVS IS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN ROADS.
will read as follows:
(A) Lake Street, Third Avenue NW, and all State Highways, without prior permission.
(B) All other public ways where operation is prohibited by another public entitys laws
or
regulations.
All other provisions of Chisholm City Code Chapter 73 shall remain as currently in
existence and not amended except as specifically added herein and said amendment shall be
effective immediately upon its passage.
Moved by Councilor K. Scaia and seconded by Councilor Campbell that the foregoing
ordinance be adopted.
Voting Aye: Councilors Campbell, Rahja, K. Scaia, T. Scaia and Varda
Voting No: None
Absent: None
Ordinance declared adopted this 11th day of January, 2017.
CITY OF CHISHOLM
By:
Its Acting Mayor, Todd Scaia
Attest:
Its Acting City Administrator, Steve Cook First Reading: December 27, 2016
Second Reading: January 11, 2017
Published: Chisholm Tribune Press on January 18, 2017